\2] "If you call labour a commodity, it is not like a commodity which is first produced in order to
exchange, and then brought to market where it must exchange with other commodities according to the
respective quantities of each which there may be in the market at the time; labour is created the moment
it is brought to market; nay, it is brought to market before it is created." — "Observations on Certain
Verbal Disputes," &tc, pp. 75, 76.

[31 "Treating labour as a commodity, and capital, the produce of labour, as another, then, if the values of
these two commodities were regulated by equal quantities of labour, a given amount of labour would ...
exchange for that quantity of capital which had been produced by the same amount of labour; antecedent
labour would ... exchange for the same amount as present labour. But the value of labour in relation to
other commodities ... is determined not by equal quantities of labour." — E. G. Wakefield in his edition
of Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations," Vol. I., London, 1836, p. 231, note.

[41 "There has to be a new agreement" (a new edition of the social contract!) "that whenever there is an
exchange of work done for work to be done, the latter" (the capitalist) "is to receive a higher value than
the former" (the worker). — Simonde (de Sismondi), "De la Richesse Commerciale," Geneva, 1803, Vol
I, p. 37.

[51 "Labour the exclusive standard of value ... the creator of all wealth, no commodity." Thomas
Hodgskin, "Popul. Polit. Econ.," p. 186.

[61 On the other hand, the attempt to explain such expressions as merely poetic license only shows the
impotence of the analysis. Hence, in answer to Proudhon's phrase; "Labour is called value, not as being a
commodity itself, but in view of the values supposed to be potentially embodied in it. The value of labour
is a figurative expression," &tc. I have remarked: "In labour, commodity, which is a frightful reality, he
(Proudhon) sees nothing but a grammatical ellipsis. The whole of existing society, then, based upon
labour commodity, is henceforth based upon a poetic license, on a figurative expression. Does society
desire to eliminate all the inconveniences which trouble it, it has only to eliminate all the ill-sounding

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (5 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

terms. Let it change the language, and for that it has only to address itself to the Academy and ask it for a
new edition of its dictionary." (Karl Marx, "Misere de la Philosophie," pp. 34, 35.) It is naturally still
more convenient to understand by value nothing at all. Then one can without difficulty subsume
everything under this category. Thus, e.g., J. B. Say: "What is value?" Answer: "That which a thing is
worth"; and what is "price"? Answer: "The value of a thing expressed in money." And why has
agriculture a value? Answer: "Because one sets a price on it." Therefore value is what a thing is worth,
and the land has its "value," because its value is "expressed in money." This is, anyhow, a very simple
way of explaining the why and the wherefore of things.

\1] Cf. "Zur Kritik &tc", p. 40, where I state that, in the portion of that work that deals with Capital, this
problem will be solved: "How does production, on the basis of exchange-value determined simply by
labour-time, lead to the result that the exchange-value of labour is less than the exchange- value of its
product?"

[8] The "Morning Star", a London Free-trade organ, naif to silliness, protested again and again during the
American Civil War, with all the moral indignation of which man is capable, that the Negro in the
"Confederate States" worked absolutely for nothing. It should have compared the daily cost of such a
Negro with that of the free workman in the East-end of London.

[91 1 give in order that you may give; I give in order that you may produce; I produce so that you may
give; I produce so that you may produce.

f 101 Adam Smith only accidentally alludes to the variation of the working-day when he is referring to
piece-wages.



Transcribed by Bill McDorman
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty: Time-Wages
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (6 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VI:
Wages



CHAPTER TWENTY:
TIME-WAGES



Wages themselves again take many forms, a fact not recognizable in the ordinary economic treatises
which, exclusively interested in the material side of the question, neglect every difference of form. An
exposition of all these forms however, belongs to the special study of wage labour, not therefore to this
work. Still the two fundamental forms must be briefly worked out here.

The sale of labour-power, as will be remembered, takes place for a definite period of time. The converted
form under which the daily, weekly, &tc, value of labour-power presents itself, is hence that of time
wages, therefore day-wages, &tc.

Next it is to be noted that the laws set forth, in the 17th chapter, on the changes in the relative magnitudes
of price of labour-power and surplus-value, pass by a simple transformation of form, into laws of wages.
Similarly the distinction between the exchange-value of labour power, and the sum of the necessaries of
life into which this value is converted, now reappears as the distinction between nominal and real wages.
It would be useless to repeat here, with regard to the phenomenal form, what has been already worked
out in the substantial form. We limit ourselves therefore to a few points characteristic of time- wages.

The sum of money £1} which the labourer receives for his daily or weekly labour, forms the amount of
his nominal wages, or of his wages estimated in value. But it is clear that according to the length of the
working-day, that is, according to the amount of actual labour daily supplied, the same daily or weekly
wage may represent very different prices of labour, i.e., very different sums of money for the same
quantity of labour. [2] We must, therefore, in considering time-wages, again distinguish between the

sum-total of the daily or weekly wages, &tc, and the price of labour. How then, to find this price, i.e.,
the money- value of a given quantity of labour? The average price of labour is found, when the average
daily value of the labour-power is divided by the average number of hours in the working-day. If, e.g.,
the daily value of labour-power is 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 working-hours, and if the
working-day is 12 hours, the price of 1 working hour is 3/12 shillings = 3d. The price of the
working-hour thus found serves as the unit measure for the price of labour.

It follows, therefore, that the daily and weekly wages, &tc, may remain the same, although the price of
labour falls constantly. If, e.g., the habitual working-day is 10 hours and the daily value of the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

labour-power 3s., the price of the working-hour is 3 3/5d. It falls to 3s. as soon as the working-day rises
to 12 hours, to 2 2/5d as soon as it rises to 15 hours. Daily or weekly wages remain, despite all this,
unchanged. On the contrary, the daily or weekly wages may rise, although the price of labour remains
constant or even falls. If, e.g., the working-day is 10 hours, and the daily value of labour-power 3
shillings, the price of one working-hour is 3 3/5d. If the labourer, in consequence of increase of trade,
works 12 hours, the price of labour remaining the same, his daily wage now rises to 3 shillings 7i5/d.
without any variation in the price of labour. The same result might follow if, instead of the extensive
amount of labour, its intensive amount increased. [3] The rise of the nominal daily or weekly wages may
therefore be accompanied by a price of labour that remains stationary or falls. The same holds as to the
income of the labourer's family, as soon as the quantity of labour expended by the head of the family is
increased by the labour of the members of his family. There are, therefore, methods of lowering the price
of labour independent of the reduction of the nominal daily or weekly wages. [4]

As a general law it follows that, given the amount of daily or weekly labour, &tc, the daily or weekly
wages depend on the price of labour which itself varies either with the value of labour-power, or with the
difference between its price and its value. Given, on the other hand, the price of labour, the daily or
weekly wages depend on the quantity of the daily or weekly labour.

The unit-measure for time-wages, the price of the working-hour, is the quotient of the value of a day's
labour-power, divided by the number of hours of the average working-day. Let the latter be 12 hours, and
the daily value of labour-power 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 hours of labour. Under these
circumstances the price of a working hour is 3d.; the value produced in it is 6d. If the labourer is now
employed less than 12 hours (or less than 6 days in the week), e.g., only 6 or 8 hours, he receives, with
this price of labour, only 2s. or Is. 6d. a day. [5\ As on our hypothesis he must work on the average 6
hours daily, in order to produce a day's wage corresponding merely to the value of his labour power, as
according to the same hypothesis he works only half of every hour for himself, and half for the capitalist,
it is clear that he cannot obtain for himself the value of the product of 6 hours if he is employed less than
12 hours. In previous chapters we saw the destructive consequences of over-work; here we find the
sources of the sufferings that result to the labourer from his insufficient employment.

If the hour's wage is fixed so that the capitalist does not bind himself to pay a day's or a week's wage, but
only to pay wages for the hours during which he chooses to employ the labourer, he can employ him for
a shorter time than that which is originally the basis of the calculation of the hour-wage, or the
unit-measure of the price of labour. Since this unit is determined by the ratio

daily value of labour-power



working-day of a given number of hours'



it, of course, loses all meaning as soon as the working-day ceases to contain a definite number of hours.
The connection between the paid and the unpaid labour is destroyed. The capitalist can now wring from
the labour a certain quantity of surplus-labour without allowing him the labour-time necessary for his
own subsistence. He can annihilate all regularity of employment, and according to his own convenience,
caprice, and the interest of the moment, make the most enormous over-work alternate with relative or
absolute cessation of work. He can, under the pretense of paying "the normal price of labour,"
abnormally lengthen the working-day without any corresponding compensation to the labourer. Hence
the perfectly rational revolt in 1860 of the London labourers, employed in the building trades, against the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

attempt of the capitalists to impose on them this sort of wage by the hour. The legal limitation of the
working-day puts an end to such mischief, although not, of course, to the diminution of employment
caused by the competition of machinery, by changes in the quality of the labourers employed, and by
crises partial or general.

With an increasing daily or weekly wage the price of labour may remain nominally constant, and yet may
fall below its normal level. This occurs every time that, the price of labour (reckoned per working-hour)
remaining constant, the working-day is prolonged beyond its customary length. If in the fraction:

daily value of labour power

working-day

the denominator increases, the numerator increases yet more rapidly. The value of labour-power, as
dependent on its wear and tear, increases with the duration of its functioning, and in more rapid
proportion than the increase of that duration. In many branches of industry where time-wage is the
general rule without legal limits to the working-time, the habit has, therefore, spontaneously grown up of
regarding the working day as normal only up to a certain point, e.g., up to the expiration of the tenth hour
("normal working-day," "the day's work," "the regular hours of work"). Beyond this limit the
working-time is over-time, and is, taking the hour as unit-measure, paid better ("extra pay"), although
often in a proportion ridiculously small. £61 The normal working-day exists here as a fraction of the
actual working-day, and the latter, often during the whole year, lasts longer than the former. £71 The
increase in the price of labour with the extension of the working-day beyond a certain normal limit, takes
such a shape in various British industries that the low price of labour during the so-called normal time
compels the labourer to work during the better paid over-time, if he wishes to obtain a sufficient wage at
all. £8£ Legal limitation of the working-day puts an end to these amenities. £91

It is a fact generally known that, the longer the working-days, in any branch of industry, the lower are the
wages, f 101 A- Redgrave, factory inspector, illustrates this by a comparative review of the 20 years from
1839-1859, according to which wages rose in the factories under the 10 Hours Law, whilst they fell in
the factories in which the work lasted 14 to 15 hours daily, fill

From the law, "the price of labour being given, the daily or weekly wage depends on the quantity of
labour expended," it follows, first of all, that the lower the price of labour, the greater must be the
quantity of labour, or the longer must be the working-day for the labourer to secure even a miserable
average wage. The lowness of the price of labour acts here as a stimulus to the extension of the
labour- time. f!21

On the other hand, the extension of the working-time produces, in its turn, a fall in the price of labour,
and with this a fall in the day's or week's wages.

The determination of the price of labour by:

daily value of labour power



working day of a given number of hours

shows that a mere prolongation of the working-day lowers the price of labour, if no compensation steps

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

in. But the same circumstances which allow the capitalist in the long run to prolong the working-day,
also allow him first, and compel him finally, to nominally lower the price of labour until the total price of
the increased number of hours is lowered, and, therefore, the daily or weekly wage. Reference to two
circumstances is sufficient here. If one man does the work of 1 1/2 or 2 men, the supply of labour
increases, although the supply of labour-power on the market remains constant. The competition thus
created between the labourers allows the capitalist to beat down the price of labour, whilst the falling
price of labour allows him, on the other hand, to screw up still further the working-time, f 131 Soon,
however, this command over abnormal quantities of unpaid labour, i.e., quantities in excess of the
average social amount, becomes a source of competition amongst the capitalists themselves. A part of the
price of the commodity consists of the price of labour. The unpaid part of the labour-price need not be
reckoned in the price of the commodity. It may be presented to the buyer. This is the first step to which
competition leads. The second step to which it drives is to exclude also from the selling price of the
commodity at least a part of the abnormal surplus-value created by the extension of the working-day. In
this way, an abnormally low selling price of the commodity arises, at first sporadically, and becomes
fixed by degrees; a lower selling price which henceforward becomes the constant basis of a miserable
wage for an excessive working-time, as originally it was the product of these very circumstances. This
movement is simply indicated here, as the analysis of competition does not belong to this part of our
subject. Nevertheless, the capitalist may, for a moment, speak for himself. "In Birmingham there is so
much competition of masters one against another that many are obliged to do things as employers that
they would otherwise be ashamed of; and yet no more money is made, but only the public gets the
benefit." |T41 The reader will remember the two sorts of London bakers, of whom one sold the bread at
its full price (the "full-priced" bakers), the other below its normal price ("the under-priced," "the
undersellers"). The "full-priced" denounced their rivals before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry:
"They only exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for
12 hours' wages.... The unpaid labour of the men was made ... the source whereby the competition was
carried on, and continues so to this day.... The competition among the master bakers is the cause of the
difficulty in getting rid of night-work. An underseller, who sells his bread below the cost-price according
to the price of flour, must make it up by getting more out of the labour of the men.... If I got only 12
hours' work out of my men, and my neighbor got 18 or 20, he must beat me in the selling price. If the
men could insist on payment for over-work, this would be set right.... A large number of those employed
by the undersellers are foreigners and youths, who are obliged to accept almost any wages they can
obtain." J151

This jeremiad is also interesting because it shows how the appearance only of the relations of production
mirrors itself in the brain of the capitalist. The capitalist does not know that the normal price of labour
also includes a definite quantity of unpaid labour, and that this very unpaid labour is the normal source of
his gain. The category of surplus labour-time does not exist at all for him, since it is included in the
normal working-day, which he thinks he has paid for in the day's wages. But over- time does exist for
him, the prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits corresponding with the usual price of labour.
Face to face with his underselling competitor, he even insists upon extra pay for this over-time. He again
does not know that this extra pay includes unpaid labour, just as well as does the price of the customary
hour of labour. For example, the price of one hour of the 12 hours' working-day is 3d., say the
value-product of half a working-hour, whilst the price of the over-time working-hour is 4d., or the
value-product of 2/3 of a working hour. In the first case the capitalist appropriates to himself one-half, in
the second, one-third of the working-hour without paying for it.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty



Footnotes

T 1 1 The value of money itself is here always supposed constant.

[21 "The price of labour is the sum paid for a given quantity of labour." (Sir Edward West, "Price of Corn
and Wages of Labour," London, 1836, p. 67.) West is the author of the anonymous "Essay on the
Application of Capital to Land." by a Fellow of the University College of Oxford, London, 1815. An
epoch-making work in the history of Political Economy.

\3] "The wages of labour depend upon the price of labour and the quantity of labour performed.... An
increase in the wages of labour does not necessarily imply an enhancement of the price of labour. From
fuller employment, and greater exertions, the wages of labour may be considerably increased, while the
price of labour may continue the same." (West, op. cit., pp. 67, 68, 112.) The main question: "How is the
price of labour determined?" West, however, dismisses with mere banalities.

[41 This is perceived by the fanatical representative of the industrial bourgeoisie of the 18th century, the
author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" often quoted by us, although he puts the matter in a
confused way: "It is the quantity of labour and not the price of it" (he means by this the nominal daily or
weekly wages) "that is determined by the price of provisions and other necessaries: reduce the price of
necessaries very low, and of course you reduce the quantity of labour in proportion. Master
manufacturers know that there are various ways of raising and felling the price of labour, besides that of
altering its nominal amount." (op. cit., pp. 48, 61.) In his "Three Lectures on the Rate of Wages,"
London, 1830, in which N. W. Senior uses West's work without mentioning it, he says: "The labourer is
principally interested in the amount of wages" (p. 14), that is to say, the labourer is principally interested
in what he receives, the nominal sum of his wages, not in that which he gives, the amount of labour!

[51 The effect of such an abnormal lessening of employment is quite different from that of a general
reduction of the working-day, enforced by law. The former has nothing to do with the absolute length of
the working-day, and may occur just as well in a working-day of 15, as of 6 hours. The normal price of
labour is in the first case calculated on the labourer working 15 hours, in the second case on his working

6 hours a day on the average. The result is therefore the same, if he in the one case is employed only for

7 1/2, in the other only for 3 hours.

[61 "The rate of payment for overtime (in lace-making) is so small, from 1/2 d. and 3/4 d. to 2d. per hour,
that it stands in painful contrast to the amount of injury produced to the health and stamina of the
workpeople.... The small amount thus earned is also often obliged to be spent in extra nourishment."
("Child.Empl.Com., II. Rep.," p. xvi., n. 1 17.)

[71 E.g., in paper- staining before the recent introduction into this trade of the Factory Act. "We work on
with no stoppage for meals, so that the day's work of 10 1/2 hours is finished by 4:30 p.m., and all after
that is over-time, and we seldom leave off working before 6 p.m., so that we are really working over-time
the whole year round." (Mr. Smith's "Evidence in Child. Empl. Com., 1. Rep.," p. 125.)

[81 E.g., in the Scotch bleaching- works. "In some parts of Scotland this trade" (before the introduction of
the Factory Act in 1862) "was carried on by a system of over-time, i.e., ten hours a day were the regular

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

hours of work, for which a nominal wage of Is. 2d. per day was paid to a man, there being every day
over-time for three or four hours, paid at the rate of 3d. per hour. The effect of this system ... a man could
not earn more than 8s. per week when working the ordinary hours ... without over-time they could not
earn a fair day's wages." ("Rept. of Insp. of Factories," April 30th, 1863, p. 10.) "The higher wages, for
getting adult males to work longer hours, are a temptation too strong to be resisted." ("Rept. of Insp. of
Fact.," April 30th, 1848, p. 5.) The book-binding trade in the city of London employs very many young
girls from 14 to 15 years old, and that under indentures which prescribe certain definite hours of labour.
Nevertheless, they work in the last week of each month until 10, 11, 12, or 1 o'clock at night, along with
the older labourers, in a very mixed company. "The masters tempt them by extra pay and supper," which
they eat in neighboring public houses. The great debauchery thus produced among these "young
immortals" ("Children's Employment Comm., V. Rept.," p. 44, n. 191) is compensated by the fact that
among the rest many Bibles and religious books are bound by them.

[9J See "Reports of Insp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1863, p. 10. With very accurate appreciation of the state of
things, the London labourers employed in the building trades declared, during the great strike and
lock-out of 1860, that they would only accept wages by the hour under two conditions: (1), that, with the
price of the working-hour, a normal working day of 9 and 10 hours respectively should be fixed, and that
the price of the hour for the 10 hours, working-day should be higher than that for the hour of the 9 hours
working-day; (2), that every hour beyond the normal working-day should be reckoned as over-time and
proportionally more highly paid.

f 101 "It is a very notable thing, too, that where long hours are the rule, small wages are also so." ("Report
of Insp. of Fact.," 31st. Oct., 1863, p. 9.) "The work which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is, for the
most part, excessively prolonged." ("Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, p. 15.)

rill "Report of Inspectors of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, pp. 31, 32.

fl21 The hand nail-makers in England, e.g., have, on account of the low price of labour, to work 15 hours
a day in order to hammer out their miserable weekly wage. "It's a great many hours in a day (6 a.m. to 8
p.m.), and he has to work hard all the time to get II d. or Is., and there is the wear of the tools, the cost of
firing, and something for waste iron to go out of this, which takes off altogether 2 l/2d. or 3d."
("Children's Employment Com., III. Report," p. 136, n. 671.) The women earn by the same working-time
a week's wage of only 5 shillings. (1. c, p. 137, n. 674.)

f 131 If a factory-hand, e.g., refused to work the customary long hours, "he would very shortly be replaced
by somebody who would work any length of time, and thus be thrown out of employment." ("Reports of
Inspectors of Factories," 30th April, 1848. Evidence, p. 39, n. 58.) "If one man performs the work of
two... the rate of profits will generally be raised ... in consequence of the additional supply of labour
having diminished its price." (Senior, 1. c, p. 15.)

f 141 "Children's Employment Com., Ill Rep.," Evidence, p. 66, n. 22.

f 151 "Report, &tc, Relative to the Grievances Complained of by the Journeymen Bakers." London, 1862,
p. 411, and ib. Evidence, notes 479, 359, 27. Anyhow the full-priced bakers, as was mentioned above,
and as their spokesman, Bennett, himself admits, make their men "generally begin work at 1 1 p.m. ... up
to 8 o'clock the next morning.... They are then engaged all day long ... as late as 7 o'clock in the
evening." (1. c, p. 22.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty



Transcribed by Bill McDorman
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-One: Piece-Wages
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VI:
Wages



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE:
PIECE-WAGES



Wages by the piece are nothing else than a converted form of wages by time, just as wages by time are a
converted form of the value or price of labour-power.

In piece-wages it seems at first sight as if the use-value bought from the labourer was, not the function of
his labour-power, living labour, but labour already realized in the product, and as if the price of this
labour was determined, not as with time-wages, by the fraction



daily value of labour-power



the working day of a given number of hours
but by the capacity for work of producer. JJJ



The confidence that trusts in this appearance ought to receive a first severe shock from the fact that both
forms of wages exist side by side, simultaneously, in the same branches of industry; e.g., "the
compositors of London, as a general rule, work by the piece, time-work being the exception, while those
in the country work by the day, the exception being work by the piece. The shipwrights of the port of
London work by the job or piece, while those of all other parts work by the day." [2]

In the same saddlery shops of London, often for the same work, piece-wages are paid to the French,
time-wages to the English. In the regular factories in which throughout piece-wages predominate,
particular kinds of work are unsuitable to this form of wage, and are therefore paid by time. J3] But it is,
moreover, self-evident that the difference of form in the payment of wages alters in no way their essential
nature, although the one form may be more favorable to the development of capitalist production than the
other.

Let the ordinary working-day contain 12 hours of which 6 are paid, 6 unpaid. Let its value-product be 6
shillings, that of one hour's labour therefore 6d. Let us suppose that, as the result of experience, a
labourer who works with the average amount of intensity and skill, who, therefore, gives in fact only the
time socially necessary to the production of an article, supplies in 12 hours 24 pieces, either distinct



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

products or measurable parts of a continuous whole. Then the value of these 24 pieces, after, subtraction
of the portion of constant capital contained in them, is 6 shillings, and the value of a single piece 3d. The
labourer receives 1 l/2d. per piece, and thus earns in 12 hours 3 shillings. Just as, with time-wages, it
does not matter whether we assume that the labourer works 6 hours for himself and 6 hours for the
capitalist, or half of every hour for himself, and the other half for the capitalist, so here it does not matter
whether we say that each individual piece is half paid, and half unpaid for, or that the price of 12 pieces
is the equivalent only of the value of the labour-power, whilst in the other 12 pieces surplus-value is
incorporated.

The form of piece-wages is just as irrational as that of time-wages. Whilst in our example two pieces of a
commodity, after subtraction of the value of the means of production consumed in them, are worth 6d. as
being the product of one hour, the labourer receives for them a price of 3d. Piece-wages do not, in fact,
distinctly express any relation of value. It is not, therefore, a question of measuring the value of the piece
by the working-time incorporated in it, but on the contrary, of measuring the working-time the labourer
has expended by the number of pieces he has produced. In time-wages, the labour is measured by its
immediate duration; in piece-wages, by the quantity of products in which the labour has embodied itself
during a given time. [4J The price of labour time itself is finally determined by the equation: value of a
day's labour = daily value of labour-power. Piece-wage is, therefore, only a modified form of time-wage.

Let us now consider a little more closely the characteristic peculiarities of piece- wages.

The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work itself, which must be of average perfection if the
piece-price is to be paid in full. Piece-wages become, from this point of view, the most fruitful source of
reductions of wages and capitalistic cheating.

They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the intensity of labour. Only the working-time which
is embodied in a quantum of commodities determined beforehand, and experimentally fixed, counts as
socially necessary working-time, and is paid as such. In the larger workshops of the London tailors,
therefore, a certain piece of work, a waistcoat, e.g., is called an hour, or half an hour, the hour at 6d. By
practice it is known how much is the average product of one hour. With new fashions, repairs, &tc, a
contest arises between master and labourer as to whether a particular piece of work is one hour, and so
on, until here also experience decides. Similarly in the London furniture workshops, &tc. If the labourer
does not possess the average capacity, if he cannot in consequence supply a certain minimum of work per
day, he is dismissed. [51

Since the quality and intensity of the work are here controlled by the form of wage itself,
superintendence of labour becomes in great part superfluous. Piece- wages therefore lay the foundation of
the modern "domestic labour," described above, as well as of a hierarchically organized system of
exploitation and oppression. The latter has two fundamental forms. On the one hand, piece-wages
facilitate the interposition of parasites between the capitalist and the wage-labourer, the "sub-letting of
labour. " The gain of these middlemen comes entirely from the difference between the labour-price which
the capitalist pays, and the part of that price which they actually allow to reach the labourer. [6\ In
England this system is characteristically called the "sweating system." On the other hand, piece-wage
allows the capitalist to make a contract for so much per piece with the head labourer-in manufactures
with the chief of some group, in mines with the extractor of the coal, in the factory with the actual
machine-worker — at a price for which the head labourer himself undertakes the enlisting and payment
of his assistant work people. The exploitation of the labourer by capital is here effected through the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

exploitation of the labourer by the labourer. [71

Given piece-wage, it is naturally the personal interest of the labourer to strain his labour-power as
intensely as possible; this enables the capitalist to raise more easily the normal degree of intensity of
labour. [81 It is moreover now the personal interest of the labourer to lengthen the working-day, since
with it his daily or weekly wages rise. [91 This gradually brings on a reaction like that already described
in time-wages, without reckoning that the prolongation of the working-day, even if the piece wage
remains constant, includes of necessity a fall in the price of the labour.

In time-wages, with few exceptions, the same wage holds for the same kind of work, whilst in
piece-wages, though the price of the working time is measured by a certain quantity of product, the day's
or week's wage will vary with the individual differences of the labourers, of whom one supplies in a
given time the minimum of product only, another the average, a third more than the average. With regard
to actual receipts there is, therefore, great variety according to the different skill, strength, energy,
staying-power, &tc, of the individual labourers. flQl Of course this does not alter the general relations
between capital and wage-labour. First, the individual differences balance one another in the workshop as
a whole, which thus supplies in a given working-time the average product, and the total wages paid will
be the average wages of that particular branch of industry. Second, the proportion between wages and
surplus-value remains unaltered, since the mass of surplus labour supplied by each particular labourer
corresponds with the wage received by him. But the wider scope that piece-wage gives to individuality
tends to develop on the one hand that individuality, and with it the sense of liberty, independence, and
self-control of the labourers, and on the other, their competition one with another. Piece-work has,
therefore, a tendency, while raising individual wages above the average, to lower this average itself. But
where a particular rate of piece-wage has for a long time been fixed by tradition, and its lowering,
therefore, presented especial difficulties, the masters, in such exceptional cases, sometimes had recourse
to its compulsory transformation into time-wages. Hence, e.g., in 1860 a great strike among the
ribbon-weavers of Coventry, fill Piece-wage is finally one of the chief supports of the hour-system
described in the preceding chapter. fl21

From what has been shown so far, it follows that piece-wage is the form of wages most in harmony with
the capitalist mode of production. Although by no means new — it figures side by side with time-wages
officially in the French and English labour statutes of the 14th century — it only conquers a larger field
for action during the period of manufacture, properly so-called. In the stormy youth of modern industry,
especially from 1797 to 1815, it served as a lever for the lengthening of the working-day, and the
lowering of wages. Very important materials for the fluctuation of wages during that period are to be
found in the Blue books: "Report and Evidence from the Select Committee on Petitions respecting the
Corn Laws" (Parliamentary Session of 1813-14), and "Report from the Lords' Committee, on the State of
the Growth, Commerce, and Consumption of Grain, and all Laws relating thereto" (Session of 1814-15).
Here we find documentary evidence of the constant lowering of the price of labour from the beginning of
the anti-Jacobin War. In the weaving industry, e.g., piece-wages had fallen so low that, in spite of the
very great lengthening of the working-day, the daily wages were then lower than before. "The real
earnings of the cotton weaver are now far less than they were; his superiority over the common labourer,
which at first was very great, has now almost entirely ceased. Indeed... the difference in the wages of
skillful and common labour is far less now than at any former period." fl31 How little the increased
intensity and extension of labour through piece-wages benefited the agricultural proletariat, the following
passage borrowed from a work on the side of the landlords and farmers shows: "By far the greater part of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

agricultural operations is done by people who are hired for the day or on piece-work. Their weekly wages
are about 12s., and although it may be assumed that a man earns on piece-work under the greater
stimulus to labour, Is. or perhaps 2s. more than on weekly wages, yet it is found, on calculating his total
income, that his loss of employment, during the year, outweighs this gain... Further, it will generally be
found that the wages of these men bear a certain proportion to the price of the necessary means of
subsistence, so that a man with two children is able to bring up his family without recourse to parish
relief." f!41 Malthus at that time remarked with reference to the facts published by Parliament: "I confess
that I see, with misgiving, the great extension of the practice of piece-wage. Really hard work during 12
or 14 hours of the day, or for any longer time, is too much for any human being." fl51

In the workshops under the Factory Acts, piece-wages become the general rule, because capital can there
only increase the efficacy of the working-day by intensifying labour. fl61

With the changing productiveness of labour the same quantum of product represents a varying
working-time. Therefore, piece-wage also varies, for it is the money expression of a determined
working-time. In our example above, 24 pieces were produced in 12 hours, whilst the value of the
product of the 12 hours was 6s., the daily value of the labour-power 3s., the price of the labour-hour 3d.,
and the wage for one piece l/2d. In one piece half-an-hour's labour was absorbed. If the same
working-day now supplies, in consequence of the doubled productiveness of labour, 48 pieces instead of
24, and all other circumstances remain unchanged, then the piece-wage falls from 1 l/2d. to 3/4d., as
every piece now only represents 1/4, instead of 1/2 of a working-hour. 24 by 1 l/2d. = 3s., and in like
manner 48 by 3/4d. = 3s. In other words, piece-wage is lowered in the same proportion as the number of
the pieces produced in the same time rises, |171 and, therefore, as the working time spent on the same
piece falls. This change in piece-wage, so far purely nominal, leads to constant battles between capitalist
and labour. Either because the capitalist uses it as a pretext for actually lowering the price of labour, or
because increased productive power of labour is accompanied by an increased intensity of the same. Or
because the labourer takes seriously the appearance of piece-wages (viz., that his product is paid for, and
not his labour-power) and therefore revolts against a lowering of wages, unaccompanied by a lowering in
the selling price of the commodity. "The operatives. ..carefully watch the price of the raw material and the
price of manufactured goods, and are thus enabled to form an accurate estimate of their master's profits."
£181

The capitalist rightly knocks on the head such pretensions as gross errors as to the nature of wage-labour.
fl91 He cries out against this usurping attempt to lay taxes on the advance of industry, and declares
roundly that the productiveness of labour does not concern the labourer at all. r201



Footnotes

T 1 1 "The system of piece-work illustrates an epoch in the history of the working-man; it is halfway
between the position of the mere day-labourer depending upon the will of the capitalist and the
co-operative artisan, who in the not distant future promises to combine the artisan and the capitalist in his
own person. Piece-workers are in fact their own masters, even whilst working upon the capital of the
employer." (John Watts: "Trade Societies and Strikes, Machinery and Co-operative Societies."
Manchester, 1865, pp. 52, 53.) I quote this little work because it is a very sink of all long-ago-rotten,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

apologetic commonplaces. This same Mr. Watts earlier traded in Owenism and published in 1842
another pamphlet: "Facts and Fictions of Political Economists," in which among other things he declares
that "property is robbery." That was long ago.

\2] T. J. Dunning: "Trades' Unions and Strikes," Lond., 1860, p. 22.

[31 How the existence, side by side and simultaneously, of these two forms of wage favors the masters'
cheating: "A factory employs 400 people, the half of which work by the piece, and have a direct interest
in working longer hours. The other 200 are paid by the day, work equally long with the others, and get no
more money for their over-time.... The work of these 200 people for half an hour a day is equal to one
person's work for 50 hours, or 5/6's of one person's labour in a week, and is a positive gain to the
employer." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1860," p. 9.) "Over-working to a very considerable
extent still prevails; and, in most instances, with that security against detection and punishment which the
law itself affords. I have in many former reports shown ... the injury to workpeople who are not
employed on piece-work, but receive weekly wages." (Leonard Horner in "Reports of Insp. of Fact.,"
30th April, 1859, pp. 8, 9.)

\4] "Wages can be measured in two ways: either by the duration of the labour, or by its product."
("Abrege elementaire des principes de l'economie politique." Paris, 1796, p. 32.) The author of this
anonymous work: G. Gamier.

\5] "So much weight of cotton is delivered to him" (the spinner), "and he has to return by a certain time,
in lieu of it, a given weight of twist or yarn, of a certain degree of fineness, and he is paid so much per
pound for all that he so returns. If his work is defective in quality, the penalty falls on him, if less in
quantity than the minimum fixed for a given time, he is dismissed and an abler operative procured." (Ure,
I.e., p. 317.)

[6] "It is when work passes through several hands, each of which is to take its share of profits, while only
the last does the work, that the pay which reaches the workwoman is miserably disproportioned."
("Child. Emp. Comm. II Report," p. lxx., n. 424.)

[71 Even Watts, the apologetic, remarks: "It would be a great improvement to the system of piece-work,
if all the men employed on a job were partners in the contract, each according to his abilities, instead of
one man being interested in over-working his fellows for his own benefit." (1. c, p. 53.) On the vileness
of this system, cf. "Child. Emp. Comm., Rep. III.," p. 66, n. 22, p. 11, n. 124, p. xi, n. 13, 53, 59, &tc.

[81 This spontaneous result is often artificially helped along, e.g., in the Engineering Trade of London, a
customary trick is "the selecting of a man who possesses superior physical strength and quickness, as the
principal of several workmen, and paying him an additional rate, by the quarter or otherwise, with the
understanding that he is to exert himself to the utmost to induce the others, who are only paid the
ordinary wages, to keep up to him ... without any comment this will go far to explain many of the
complaints of stinting the action, superior skill, and working-power, made by the employers against the
men" (in Trades-Unions. Dunning, 1. c, pp. 22, 23). As the author is himself a labourer and secretary of a
Trades' Union, this might be taken for exaggeration. But the reader may compare the "highly
respectable" "Cyclopedia of Agriculture" of J. C. Morton, Art., the article "Labourer," where this method
is recommended to the farmers as an approved one.

[91 "All those who are paid by piece-work ... profit by the transgression of the legal limits of work. This

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

observation as to the willingness to work over-time is especially applicable to the women employed as
weavers and reelers." ("Rept. of Insp. of Fact., 30th April, 1858," p. 9.) "This system" (piece-work), "so
advantageous to the employer ... tends directly to encourage the young potter greatly to over- work
himself during the four or five years during which he is employed in the piece-work system, but at low
wages.... This is ... another great cause to which the bad constitutions of the potters are to be attributed."
("Child. Empl. Comm. 1. Rept.," p. xiii.)

f 101 "Where the work in any trade is paid for by the piece at so much per job ... wages may very
materially differ in amount.... But in work by the day there is generally an uniform rate ... recognized by
both employer and employed as the standard of wages for the general run of workmen in the trade."
(Dunning, 1. c, p. 17.)

fill "The work of the journeyman-artisans will be ruled by the day or by the piece. These master-artisans
know about how much work a journeyman-artisan can do per day in each craft, and often pay them in
proportion to the work wich they do; the journey men, therefore, work as much as they can, in their own
interest, without any further inspection." (Cantillon, "Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en general,"
Amst. Ed., 1756, pp. 185 and 202. The first edition appeared in 1755.) Cantillon, from whom Quesnay,
Sir James Steuart & A. Smith have largely drawn, already here represents piece-wage as simply a
modified form of time-wage. The French edition of Cantillon professes in its title to be a translation from
the English, but the English edition: "The Analysis of Trade, Commerce, &tc," by Philip Cantillon, late
of the city of London, Merchant, is not only of later date (1759), but proves by its contents that it is a
later and revised edition: e.g., in the French edition, Hume is not yet mentioned, whilst in the English, on
the other hand, Petty hardly figures any longer. The English edition is theoretically less important, but it
contains numerous details referring specifically to English commerce, bullion trade, &tc, that are
wanting in the French text. The words on the title-page of the English edition, according to which the
work is "taken chiefly from the manuscript of a very ingenious gentleman, deceased, and adapted, &tc,"
seem, therefore, a pure fiction, very customary at that time.

fl21 "How often have we seen, in some workshops, many more workers recruited than the work actually
called for? On many occasions, workers are recruited in anticipation of future work, which may never
materialize. Because they are paid by piece-wages, it is said that no risk is incurred, since any loss of
time will be charged against the unemployed." (H. Gregoir: "Les Typographes devant le Tribunal
correctionnel de Bruxelles," Brusseles, 1865, p. 9.)

f 131 "Remarks on the Commercial Policy of Great Britain," London, 1815.

f 141 "A Defense of the Landowners and Farmers of Great Britain," 1814, pp. 4, 5.

f 151 Malthus, "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815.

f 161 "Those who are paid by piece-work ... constitute probably four-fifths of the workers in the
factories." "Report of Insp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1858.

f 171 "The productive power of his spinning-machine is accurately measured, and the rate of pay for work
done with it decreases with, though not as, the increase of its productive power." (Ure, 1. c, p. 317.) This
last apologetic phrase Ure himself again cancels. The lengthening of the mule causes some increase of
labour, he admits. The labour does therefore not diminish in the same ratio as its productivity increases.
Further: "By this increase the productive power of the machine will be augmented one-fifth. When this

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

event happens the spinner will not be paid at the same rate for work done as he was before, but as that
rate will not be diminished in the ratio of one-fifth, the improvement will augment his money earnings
for any given number of hours' work," but "the foregoing statement requires a certain modification.... The
spinner has to pay something additional for juvenile aid out of his additional sixpence, accompanied by
displacing a portion of adults" (1. c, p. 321), which has in no way a tendency to raise wages.

f 181 H. Fawcett: "The Economic Position of the British labourer." Cambridge and London, 1865, p. 178.

f 191 In the "London Standard" of October 26, 1861, there is a report of proceedings of the firm of John
Bright & Co., before the Rochdale magistrates "to prosecute for intimidation the agents of the Carpet
Weavers Trades' Union. Bright's partners had introduced new machinery which would turn out 240 yards
of carpet in the time and with the labour (!) previously required to produce 160 yards. The workmen had
no claim whatever to share in the profits made by the investment of their employer's capital in
mechanical improvements. Accordingly, Messrs. Bright proposed to lower the rate of pay from 1 l/2d.
per yard to Id., leaving the earnings of the men exactly the same as before for the same labour. But there
was a nominal reduction, of which the operatives, it is asserted, had not fair warning beforehand."

r201 "Trades' Unions, in their desire to maintain wages, endeavor to share in the benefits of improved
machinery." (Quelle horreur!) "... the demanding higher wages, because labour is abbreviated, is in other
words the endeavor to establish a duty on mechanical improvements." ("On Combination of Trades,"
new ed., London, 1834, p. 42.)



Transcribed by Bill McDorman
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Two: National Differences of Wages
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VI:
Wages



CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO:
NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES



In the 17th chapter we were occupied with the manifold combinations which may bring about a change
in magnitude of the value of labour-power — this magnitude being considered either absolutely or
relatively, i.e., as compared with surplus-value; whilst on the other hand, the quantum of the means of
subsistence in which the price of labour is realized might again undergo fluctuations independent of, or
different from, the changes of this price. £1J As has been already said, the simple translation of the value,
or respectively of the price, of labour-power into the exoteric form of wages transforms all these laws
into laws of the fluctuations of wages. That which appears in these fluctuations of wages within a single
country as a series of varying combinations, may appear in different countries as contemporaneous
difference of national wages. In the comparison of the wages in different nations, we must therefore take
into account all the factors that determine changes in the amount of the value of labour-power; the price
and the extent of the prime necessaries of life as naturally and historically developed, the cost of training
the labourers, the part played by the labour of women and children, the productiveness of labour, its
extensive and intensive magnitude. Even the most superficial comparison requires the reduction first of
the average day-wage for the same trades, in different countries, to a uniform working-day. After this
reduction to the same terms of the day-wages, time-wage must again be translated into piece-wage, as the
latter only can be a measure both of the productivity and the intensity of labour.

In every country there is a certain average intensity of labour below which the labour for the production
of a commodity requires more than the socially necessary time, and therefore does not reckon as labour
of normal quality. Only a degree of intensity above the national average affects, in a given country, the
measure of value by the mere duration of the working-time. This is not the case on the universal market,
whose integral parts are the individual countries. The average intensity of labour changes from country to
country; here it is greater, there less. These national averages form a scale, whose unit of measure is the
average unit of universal labour. The more intense national labour, therefore, as compared with the less
intense, produces in the same time more value, which expresses itself in more money.

But the law of value in its international application is yet more modified by the fact that on the
world-market the more productive national labour reckons also as the more intense, so long as the more
productive nation is not compelled by competition to lower the selling price of its commodities to the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (1 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two

level of their value.

In proportion as capitalist production is developed in a country, in the same proportion do the national
intensity and productivity of labour there rise above the international level. £2£ The different quantities of
commodities of the same kind, produced in different countries in the same working-time, have, therefore,
unequal international values, which are expressed in different prices, i.e., in sums of money varying
according to international values. The relative value of money will, therefore, be less in the nation with
more developed capitalist mode of production than in the nation with less developed. It follows, then,
that the nominal wages, the equivalent of labour-power expressed in money, will also be higher in the
first nation than in the second; which does not at all prove that this holds also for the real wages, i.e., for
the means of subsistence placed at the disposal of the labourer.

But even apart from these relative differences of the value of money in different countries, it will be
found, frequently, that the daily or weekly, &tc, wage in the first nation is higher than in the second,
whilst the relative price of labour, i.e., the price of labour as compared both with surplus-value and with
the value of the product, stands higher in the second than in the first. £31

J. W. Cowell, member of the Factory Commission of 1833, after careful investigation of the spinning
trade, came to the conclusion that "in England wages are virtually lower to the capitalist, though higher
to the operative than on the Continent of Europe." £41 The English Factory Inspector, Alexander
Redgrave, in his report of Oct. 31st, 1866, proves by comparative statistics with continental states, that in
spite of lower wages and much longer working-time, continental labour is, in proportion to the product,
dearer than English. An English manager of a cotton factory in Oldenburg declares that the working time
there lasted from 5:30 a.m. to 8 p.m., Saturdays included, and that the workpeople there, when under
English overlookers, did not supply during this time quite so much product as the English in 10 hours,
but under German overlookers much less. Wages are much lower than in England, in many cases 50%,
but the number of hands in proportion to the machinery was much greater, in certain departments in the
proportion of 5:3.

Mr. Redgrave gives very full details as to the Russian cotton factories. The data were given him by an
English manager until recently employed there. On this Russian soil, so fruitful of all infamies, the old
horrors of the early days of English factories are in full swing. The managers are, of course, English, as
the native Russian capitalist is of no use in factory business. Despite all over-work, continued day and
night, despite the most shameful under-payment of the workpeople, Russian manufacture manages to
vegetate only by prohibition of foreign competition.

I give, in conclusion, a comparative table of Mr. Redgrave's, on the average number of spindles per
factory and per spinner in the different countries of Europe. He himself remarks that he had collected
these figures a few years ago, and that since that time the size of the factories and the number of spindles
per labourer in England has increased. He supposes, however, an approximately equal progress in the
continental countries mentioned, so that the numbers given would still have their value for purposes of
comparison.



AVERAGE NUMBER OF
SPINDLES PER FACTORY



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (2 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two



England, average of spindles per factory


12,600


France, average of spindles per factory


1,500


Prussia, average of spindles per factory


1,500


Belgium, average of spindles per factory


4,000


Saxony, average of spindles per factory


4,500


Austria, average of spindles per factory


7,000


Switzerland, average of spindles per factory


8,000


AVERAGE NUMBER OF
PERSONS EMPLOYED TO SPINDLES


France


one person to 14 spindles


Russia


one person to 28 spindles


Prussia


one person to 37 spindles


Bavaria


one person to 46 spindles


Austria


one person to 49 spindles


Belgium


one person to 50 spindles


Saxony


one person to 50 spindles


Switzerland


one person to 55 spindles


Smaller States of Germany


one person to 55 spindles


Great Britain


one person to 74 spindles



"This comparison," says Mr. Redgrave, "is yet more unfavorable to Great Britain, inasmuch as there is so
large a number of factories in which weaving by power is carried on in conjunction with spinning"
(whilst in the table the weavers are not deducted), "and the factories abroad are chiefly spinning
factories; if it were possible to compare like with like, strictly, I could find many cotton spinning
factories in my district in which mules containing 2,200 spindles are minded by one man (the minder)
and two assistants only, turning off daily 220 lbs. of yarn, measuring 400 miles in length." [5\

It is well known that in Eastern Europe, as well as in Asia, English companies have undertaken the
construction of railways, and have, in making them, employed side by side with the native labourers, a
certain number of English working-men. Compelled by practical necessity, they thus have had to take
into account the national difference in the intensity of labour, but this has brought them no loss. Their
experience shows that even if the height of wages corresponds more or less with the average intensity of
labour, the relative price of labour varies generally in the inverse direction.

In an "Essay on the Rate of Wages," [6\ one of his first economic writings, H. Carey tries to prove that
the wages of the different nations are directly proportional to the degree of productiveness of the national
working-days, in order to draw from this international relation the conclusion that wages everywhere rise
and fall in proportion to the productiveness of labour. The whole of our analysis of the production of
surplus-value shows the absurdity of this conclusion, even if Carey himself had proved his premises
instead of, after his usual uncritical and superficial fashion, shuffling to and fro a confused mass of
statistical materials. The best of it is that he does not assert that things actually are as they ought to be
according to his theory. For State intervention has falsified the natural economic relations. The different



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (3 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two

national wages must be reckoned, therefore, as if that part of each that goes to the State in the form of
taxes, came to the labourer himself. Ought not Mr. Carey to consider further whether those "State
expenses" are not the "natural" fruits of capitalistic development? The reasoning is quite worthy of the
man who first declared the relations of capitalist production to be eternal laws of nature and reason,
whose free, harmonious working is only disturbed by the intervention of the State, in order afterwards to
discover that the diabolical influence of England on the world-market (an influence which, it appears,
does not spring from the natural laws of capitalist production) necessitates State intervention, i.e., the
protection of those laws of nature and reason by the State, alias the System of Protection. He discovered
further that the theorems of Ricardo and others, in which existing social antagonisms and contradictions
are formulated, are not the ideal product of the real economic movement, but on the contrary, that the
real antagonisms of capitalist production in England and elsewhere are the result of the theories of
Ricardo and others! Finally he discovered that it is, in the last resort, commerce that destroys the inborn
beauties and harmonies of the capitalist mode of production. A step further and he will, perhaps, discover
that the one evil in capitalist production is capital itself. Only a man with such atrocious want of the
critical faculty and such spurious erudition deserved, in spite of his Protectionist heresy, to become the
secret source of the harmonious wisdom of a Bastiat, and of all the other Free-trade optimists of today.



Footnotes

fJJ "It is not accurate to say that wages" (he deals here with their money expression) "are increased,
because they purchase more of a cheaper article." (David Buchanan in his edition of Adam Smith's
"Wealth of Nations," 1814, Vol. 1, p. 417, note.)

\2] We shall inquire, in another place, what circumstances in relation to productivity may modify this law
for individual branches of industry.

£31 James Anderson remarks in his polemic against Adam Smith: "It deserves, likewise, to be remarked,
that although the apparent price of Labour is usually lower in poor countries, where the produce of the
soil, and grain in general, is cheap; yet it is in fact for the most part really higher than in other countries.
For it is not the wages that is given to the labourer per day that constitutes the real price of labour,
although it is its apparent price. The real price is that which a certain quantity of work performed actually
costs the employer; and considered in this light, labour is in almost all cases cheaper in rich countries
than in those that are poorer, although the price of grain and other provisions is usually much lower in the
last than in the first.... Labour estimated by the day is much lower in Scotland than in England.... Labour
by the piece is generally cheaper in England." (James Anderson, "Observations on the Means of Exciting
a Spirit of National Industry," &tc, Edin. 1777, pp. 350, 351.) On the contrary, lowness of wages
produces, in its turn, dearness of labour. "Labour being dearer in Ireland than it is in England ... because
the wages are so much lower." (N. 2079 in "Royal Commission on Railways, Minutes," 1867.)

[4_l(Ure, op. cit., p. 314.)

[51 ("Reports of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1866, pp. 31-37, passim.)

\6] "Essay on the Rate of Wages, with an Examination of the Causes of the Differences in the Condition
of the Labouring Population throughout the World," Philadelphia, 1835.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (4 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two



Transcribed by Bill McDorman
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-Three: Simple Reproduction
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (5 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VII:

The Accumulation of Capital



CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE:
SIMPLE REPRODUCTION



The conversion of a sum of money into means of production and labour-power, is the first step taken by
the quantum of value that is going to function as capital. This conversion takes place in the market,
within the sphere of circulation. The second step, the process of production, is complete so soon as the
means of production have been converted into commodities whose value exceeds that of their component
parts, and, therefore, contains the capital originally advanced, plus a surplus-value. These commodities
must then be thrown into circulation. They must be sold, their value realised in money, this money afresh
converted into capital, and so over and over again. This circular movement, in which the same phases are
continually gone through in succession, forms the circulation of capital.

The first condition of accumulation is that the capitalist must have contrived to sell his commodities, and
to reconvert into capital the greater part of the money so received. In the following pages we shall
assume that capital circulates in its normal way. The detailed analysis of the process will be found in
Book II.

The capitalist who produces surplus-value — i.e., who extracts unpaid labour directly from the labourers,
and fixes it in commodities, is, indeed, the first appropriator, but by no means the ultimate owner, of this
surplus-value. He has to share it with capitalists, with landowners, &c, who fulfil other functions in the
complex of social production. Surplus-value, therefore, splits up into various parts. Its fragments fall to
various categories of persons, and take various forms, independent the one of the other, such as profit,
interest, merchants' profit, rent, &c. It is only in Book III. that we can take in hand these modified forms
of surplus-value.

On the one hand, then, we assume that the capitalist sells at their value the commodities he has produced,
without concerning ourselves either about the new forms that capital assumes while in the sphere of
circulation, or about the concrete conditions of reproduction hidden under these forms. On the other
hand, we treat the capitalist producer as owner of the entire surplus-value, or, better perhaps, as the
representative of all the sharers with him in the booty. We, therefore, first of all consider accumulation
from an abstract point of view — i.e., as a mere phase in the actual process of production.

So far as accumulation takes place, the capitalist must have succeeded in selling his commodities, and in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (1 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

reconverting the sale-money into capital. Moreover, the breaking-up of surplus-value into fragments
neither alters its nature nor the conditions under which it becomes an element of accumulation. Whatever
be the proportion of surplus-value which the industrial capitalist retains for himself, or yields up to
others, he is the one who, in the first instance, appropriates it. We, therefore, assume no more than what
actually takes place. On the other hand, the simple fundamental form of the process of accumulation is
obscured by the incident of the circulation which brings it about, and by the splitting up of surplus-value.
An exact analysis of the process, therefore, demands that we should, for a time, disregard all phenomena
that hide the pity of its inner mechanism.

Whatever the form of the process of production in a society, it must be a continuous process, must
continue to go periodically through the same phases. A society can no more cease to produce than it can
cease to consumer When viewed, therefore, as a connected whole, and as flowing on with incessant
renewal, every social process of production is, at the same time, a process of reproduction.

The conditions of production are also those of reproduction. No society can go on producing, in other
words, no society can reproduce, unless it constantly reconverts a part of its products into means of
production, or elements of fresh products. All other circumstances remaining the same, the only mode by
which it can reproduce its wealth, and maintain it at one level, is by replacing the means of production —
i.e., the instruments of labour, the raw material, and the auxiliary substances consumed in the course of
the year-by an equal quantity of the same kind of articles; these must be separated from the mass of the
yearly products, and thrown afresh into the process of production. Hence, a definite portion of each year's
product belongs to the domain of production. Destined for productive consumption from the very first,
this portion exists, for the most part, in the shape of articles totally unfitted for individual consumption.

If production be capitalistic in form, so, too, will be reproduction. Just as in the former the labour-process
figures but as a means towards the self-expansion of capital, so in the latter it figures but as a means of
reproducing as capital — i.e., as self-expanding value — the value advanced. It is only because his
money constantly functions as capital that the economic guise of a capitalist attaches to a man. If, for
instance, a sum of £100 has this year been converted into capital, and produced a surplus-value of £20, it
must continue during next year, and subsequent years, to repeat the same operation. As a periodic
increment of the capital advanced, or periodic fruit of capital in process, surplus-value acquires the form
of a revenue flowing out of capital. £1}

If this revenue serve the capitalist only as a fund to provide for his consumption, and be spent as
periodically as it is gained, then, caeteris paribus, simple reproduction will take place. And although this
reproduction is a mere repetition of the process of production on the old scale, yet this mere repetition, or
continuity, gives a new character to the process, or, rather, causes the disappearance of some apparent
characteristics which it possessed as an isolated discontinuous process.

The purchase of labour-power for a fixed period is the prelude to the process of production; and this
prelude is constantly repeated when the stipulated term comes to an end, when a definite period of
production, such as a week or a month, has elapsed. But the labourer is not paid until after he has
expended his labour-power, and realised in commodities not only its value, but surplus- value. He has,
therefore, produced not only surplus-value, which we for the present regard as a fund to meet the private
consumption of the capitalist, but he has also produced, before it flows back to him in the shape of
wages, the fund out of which he himself is paid, the variable capital; and his employment lasts only so
long as he continues to reproduce this fund. Hence, that formula of the economists, referred to in Chapter



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (2 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

XVIII,, which represents wages as a share in the product itself. [2J What flows back to the labourer in the
shape of wages is a portion of the product that is continuously reproduced by him. The capitalist, it is
true, pays him in money, but this money is merely the transmuted form of the product of his labour.
While he is converting a-portion of the means of production into products, a portion of his former
product is being turned into money. It is his labour of last week, or of last year, that pays for his
labour-power this week or this year. The illusion begotten by the intervention of money vanishes
immediately, if, instead of taking a single capitalist and a single labourer, we take the class of capitalists
and the class of labourers as a whole. The capitalist class is constantly giving to the labouring class
order-notes, in the form of money, on a portion of the commodities produced by the latter and
appropriated by the former. The labourers give these order-notes back just as constantly to the capitalist
class, and in this way get their share of their own product. The transaction is veiled by the
commodity-form of the product and the money-form of the commodity.

Variable capital is therefore only a particular historical form of appearance of the fund for providing the
necessaries of life, or the labour-fund which the labourer requires for the maintenance of himself and
family, and which, whatever be the system of social production, he must himself produce and reproduce.
If the labour-fund constantly flows to him in the form of money that pays for his labour, it is because the
product he has created moves constantly away from him in the form of capital. But all this does not alter
the fact, that it is the labourer's own labour, realised in a product, which is advanced to him by the
capitalist. [3] Let us take a peasant liable to do compulsory service for his lord. He works on his own
land, with his own means of production, for, say, 3 days a week. The 3 other days he does forced work
on the lord's domain. He constantly reproduces his own labour-fund, which never, in his case, takes the
form of a money payment for his labour, advanced by another person. But in return, his unpaid forced
labour for the lord, on its side, never acquires the character of voluntary paid labour. If one fine morning
the lord appropriates to himself the land, the cattle, the seed, in a word, the, means of production of this
peasant, the latter will thenceforth be obliged to sell his labour-power to the lord. He will, ceteris
paribus, labour 6 days a week as before, 3 for himself, 3 for his lord, who thenceforth becomes a
wages-paying capitalist. As before, he will use up the means of production as means of production, and
transfer their value to the product. As before, a definite portion of the product will be devoted to
reproduction. But from the moment that the forced labour is changed into wage-labour, from that
moment the labour-fund, which the peasant himself continues as before to produce and reproduce, takes
the form of a capital advanced in the form of wages by the lord. The bourgeois economist whose narrow
mind is unable to separate the form of appearance from the thing that appears, shuts his eyes to the fact,
that it is but here and there on the face of the earth, that even now-a-days the labour-fund crops up in the
form of capital. [41

Variable capital, it is true, only then loses its character of a value advanced out of the capitalist's funds,
\5] when we view the process of capitalist production in the flow of its constant renewal. But that process
must have had a beginning of some kind. From our present standpoint it therefore seems likely that the
capitalist, once upon a time, became possessed of money, by some accumulation that took place
independently of the unpaid labour of others, and that this was, therefore, how he was enabled to frequent
the market as a buyer of labour-power. However this may be, the mere continuity of the process, the
simple reproduction, brings about some other wonderful changes, which affect not only the variable, but
the total capital.

If a capital of £1,000 beget yearly a surplus-value of £200, and if this surplus-value be consumed every



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (3 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

year, it is clear that at the end of 5 years the surplus-value consumed will amount to 5 x £200 or the
£1,000 originally advanced. If only a part, say one half, were consumed, the same result would follow at
the end of 10 years, since 10 x £100= £1,000. General Rule: The value of the capital advanced divided by
the surplus-value annually consumed, gives the number of years, or reproduction periods, at the
expiration of which the capital originally advanced has been consumed by the capitalist and has
disappeared. The capitalist thinks, that he is consuming the produce of the unpaid labour of others, i.e.,
the surplus-value, and is keeping intact his original capital; but what he thinks cannot alter facts. After
the lapse of a certain number of years, the capital value he then possesses is equal to the sum total of the
surplus-value appropriated by him during those years, and the total value he has consumed is equal to
that of his original capital. It is true, he has in hand a capital whose amount has not changed, and of
which a part, viz., the buildings, machinery, &c, were already there when the work of his business
began. But what we have to do with here, is not the material elements, but the value, of that capital.
When a person gets through all his property, by taking upon himself debts equal to the value of that
property, it is clear that his property represents nothing but the sum total of his debts. And so it is with
the capitalist; when he has consumed the equivalent of his original capital, the value of his present capital
represents nothing but the total amount of the surplus-value appropriated by him without payment. Not a
single atom of the value of his old capital continues to exist.

Apart then from all accumulation, the mere continuity of the process of production, in other words simple
reproduction, sooner or later, and of necessity, converts every capital into accumulated capital, or
capitalised surplus-value. Even if that capital was originally acquired by the personal labour of its
employer, it sooner or later becomes value appropriated without an equivalent, the unpaid labour of
others materialised either in money or in some other object. We saw in Chapt. IV.-VI. that in order to
convert money into capital something more is required than the production and circulation of
commodities. We saw that on the one side the possessor of value or money, on the other, the possessor of
the value-creating substance; on the one side, the possessor of the means of production and subsistence,
on the other, the possessor of nothing but labour-power, must confront one another as buyer and seller.
The separation of labour from its product, of subjective labour-power from the objective conditions of
labour, was therefore the real foundation in fact, and the starting-point of capitalist production.

But that which at first was but a starting-point, becomes, by the mere continuity of the process, by simple
reproduction, the peculiar result, constantly renewed and perpetuated, of capitalist production. On the
one hand, the process of production incessantly converts material wealth into capital, into means of
creating more wealth and means of enjoyment for the capitalist. On the other hand, the labourer, on
quitting the process, is what he was on entering it, a source of wealth, but devoid of all means of making
that wealth his own. Since, before entering on the process, his own labour has already been alienated
from himself by the sale of his labour-power, has been appropriated by the capitalist and incorporated
with capital, it must, during the process, be realised in a product that does not belong to him. Since the
process of production is also the process by which the capitalist consumes labour-power, the product of
the labourer is incessantly converted, not only into commodities, but into capital, into value that sucks up
the value-creating power, into means of subsistence that buy the person of the labourer, into means of
production that command the producers. [61 The labourer therefore constantly produces material,
objective wealth, but in the form of capital, of an alien power that dominates and exploits him: and the
capitalist as constantly produces labour-power, but in the form of a subjective source of wealth, separated
from the objects in and by which it can alone be realised; in short he produces the labourer, but as a
wage-labourer. [7J This incessant reproduction, this perpetuation of the labourer, is the sine qua non of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (4 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

capitalist production.

The labourer consumes in a two-told way. While producing he consumes by his labour the means of
production, and converts them into products with a higher value than that of the capital advanced This is
his productive consumption. It is at the same time consumption of his labour-power by the capitalist who
bought it. On the other hand, the labourer turns the money paid to him for his labour-power, into means
of subsistence: this is his individual consumption. The labourer's productive consumption, and his
individual consumption, are therefore totally distinct. In the former, he acts as the motive power of
capital, and belongs to the capitalist. In the latter, he belongs to himself, and performs his necessary vital
functions outside the process of production. The result of the one is, that the capitalist lives; of the other,
that the labourer lives.

When treating of the working-day, we saw that the labourer is often compelled to make his individual
consumption a mere incident of production. In such a case, he supplies himself with necessaries in order
to maintain his labour-power, just as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine and oil to the wheel.
His means of consumption, in that case, are the mere means of consumption required by a means of
production; his individual consumption is directly productive consumption. This, however, appears to be
an abuse not essentially appertaining to capitalist production. [81

The matter takes quite another aspect, when we contemplate, not the single capitalist, and the single
labourer, but the capitalist class and the labouring class, not an isolated process of production, but
capitalist production in full swing, and on its actual social scale. By converting part of his capital into
labour-power, the capitalist augments the value of his entire capital. He kills two birds with one stone. He
profits, not only by what he receives from but by what be gives to, the labourer. The capital given in
exchange for labour-power is converted into necessaries, by the consumption of which the muscles,
nerves, bones, and brains of existing labourers are reproduced, and new labourers are begotten. Within
the limits of what is strictly necessary, the individual consumption of the working-class is, therefore, the
reconversion of the means of subsistence given by capital in exchange for labour-power, into fresh
labour-power at the disposal of capital for exploitation. It is the production and reproduction of that
means of production so indispensable to the capitalist: the labourer himself. The individual consumption
of the labourer, whether it proceed within the workshop or outside it, whether it be part of the process of
production or not, forms therefore a factor of the production and reproduction of capital; just as cleaning
machinery does, whether it be done while the machinery is working or while it is standing. The fact that
the labourer consumes his means of subsistence for his own purposes, and not to please the capitalist, has
no bearing on the matter. The consumption of food by a beast of burden is none the less a necessary
factor in the process of production, because the beast enjoys what it eats. The maintenance and
reproduction of the working-class is, and must ever be, a necessary condition to the reproduction of
capital. But the capitalist may safely leave its fulfilment to the labourer's instincts of self-preservation
and of propagation. All the capitalist cares for, is to reduce the labourer's individual consumption as far
as possible to what is strictly necessary, and he is far away from imitating those brutal South Americans,
who force their labourers to take the more substantial, rather than the less substantial, kind of food. [91

Hence both the capitalist and his ideological representative, the political economist, consider that part
alone of the labourer's individual consumption to be productive, which is requisite for the perpetuation of
the class, and which therefore must take place in order that the capitalist may have labour-power to
consume; what the labourer consumes for his own pleasure beyond that part, is unproductive
consumption. flOl If the accumulation of capital were to cause a rise of wages and an increase in the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (5 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

labourer's consumption, unaccompanied by increase in the consumption of labour-power by capital, the
additional capital would be consumed unproductively. fill In reality, the individual consumption of the
labourer is unproductive as regards himself, for it reproduces nothing but the needy individual; it is
productive to the capitalist and to the State, since it is the production of the power that creates their
wealth. [12]

From a social point of view, therefore, the working-class, even when not directly engaged in the
labour-process, is just as much an appendage of capital as the ordinary instruments of labour. Even its
individual consumption is, within certain limits, a mere factor in the process of production. That process,
however, takes good care to prevent these self-conscious instruments from leaving it in the lurch, for it
removes their product, as fast as it is made, from their pole to the opposite pole of capital. Individual
consumption provides, on the one hand, the means for their maintenance and reproduction: on the other
hand, it secures by the annihilation of the necessaries of life, the continued re-appearance of the workman
in the labour-market. The Roman slave was held by fetters: the wage-labourer is bound to his owner by
invisible threads. The appearance of independence is kept up by means of a constant change of
employers, and by the fictio juris of a contract.

In former times, capital resorted to legislation, whenever necessary, to enforce its proprietary rights over
the free labourer. For instance, down to 1815, the emigration of mechanics employed in machine making
was, in England, forbidden, under grievous pains and penalties.

The reproduction of the working-class carries with it the accumulation of skill, that is handed down from
one generation to another. f!31 To what extent the capitalist reckons the existence of such a skilled class
among the factors of production that belong to him by right, and to what extent he actually regards it as
the reality of his variable capital, is seen so soon as a crisis threatens him with its loss. In consequence of
the civil war in the United States and of the accompanying cotton famine, the majority of the cotton
operatives in Lancashire were, as is well known, thrown out of work. Both from the working-class itself,
and from other ranks of society, there arose a cry for State aid, or for voluntary national subscriptions, in
order to enable the "superfluous" hands to emigrate to the colonies or to the United States. Thereupon,
The Times published on the 24th March, 1863, a letter from Edmund Potter, a former president of the
Manchester Chamber of Commerce. This letter was rightly called in the House of Commons, the
manufacturers' manifesto, f 141 We cull here a few characteristic passages, in which the proprietary rights
of capital over labour-power are unblushingly asserted.

"He" (the man out of work) "may be told the supply of cotton-workers is too large ... and ... must ... in
fact be reduced by a third, perhaps, and that then there will be a healthy demand for the remaining
two-thirds.... Public opinion... urges emigration.... The master cannot willingly see his labour supply
being removed; he may think, and perhaps justly, that it is both wrong and unsound.... But if the public
funds are to be devoted to assist emigration, he bas a right to be heard, and perhaps to protest." Mr. Potter
then shows how useful the cotton trade is, how the "trade has undoubtedly drawn the surplus-population
from Ireland and from the agricultural districts," how immense is its extent, how in the year 1860 it
yielded 5/13 ths of the total English exports, how, after a few years, it will again expand by the extension
of the market, particularly of the Indian market, and by calling forth a plentiful supply of cotton at 6d. per
lb. He then continues: "Some time ...,one, two, or three years, it may be, will produce the quantity.... The
question I would put then is this — Is the trade worth retaining? Is it worth while to keep the machinery
(he means the living labour machines) in order, and is it not the greatest folly to think of parting with
that? I think it is. I allow that the workers are not a property, not the property of Lancashire and the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (6 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

masters; but they are the strength of both; they are the mental and trained power which cannot be.
replaced for a generation; the mere machinery which they work might much of it be beneficially
replaced, nay improved, in a twelvemonth fl51 Encourage or allow (!) the working-power to emigrate,
and what of the capitalist?... Take away the cream of the workers, and fixed capital will depreciate in a
great degree, and the floating will not subject itself to a struggle with the short supply of inferior
labour.... We are told the workers wish it" (emigration). "Very natural it is that they should do so....
Reduce, compress the cotton trade by taking away its working power and reducing their wages
expenditure, say one-fifth, or five millions, and what then would happen to the class above, the small
shopkeepers; and what of the rents, the cottage rents.... Trace out the effects upwards to the small farmer,
the better householder, and ... the landowner, and say if there could be any suggestion more suicidal to all
classes of the country than by enfeebling a nation by exporting the best of its manufacturing population,
and destroying the value of some of its most productive capital and enrichment .... I advise a loan (of five
or six millions sterling), ... extending it may be over two or three years, administered by special
commissioners added to the Boards of Guardians in the cotton districts, under special legislative
regulations, enforcing some occupation or labour, as a means of keeping up at least the moral standard of
the recipients of the loan... can anything be worse for landowners or masters than parting with the best of
the workers, and demoralising and disappointing the rest by an extended depletive emigration, a
depletion of capital and value in an entire province?"

Potter, the chosen mouthpiece of the manufacturers, distinguishes two sorts of "machinery," each of
which belongs to the capitalist, and of which one stands in his factory, the other at night-time and on
Sundays is housed outside the factory, in cottages. The one is inanimate, the other living. The inanimate
machinery not only wears out and depreciates from day to day, but a great part of it becomes so quickly
superannuated, by constant technical progress, that it can be replaced with advantage by new machinery
after a few months. The living machinery, on the contrary gets better the longer it lasts, and in proportion
as the skill, handed from one generation to another, accumulates. The Times answered the cotton lord as
follows:

"Mr. Edmund Potter is so impressed with the exceptional and supreme importance of the cotton masters
that, in order to preserve this class and perpetuate their profession, he would keep half a million of the
labouring class confined in a great moral workhouse against their' will. Is the trade worth retaining?' asks
Mr. Potter. 'Certainly by all honest means it is,' we answer. 'Is it worth while keeping the machinery in
order?' again asks Mr. Potter. Here we hesitate. By the 'machinery' Mr. Potter means the human
machinery, for he goes on to protest that he does not mean to use them as an absolute property. We must
confess that we do not think it 'worth while,' or even possible, to keep the human machinery in order-that
is to shut it up and keep it oiled till it is wanted. Human machinery will rust under inaction, oil and rub it
as you may. Moreover, the human machinery will, as we have just seen, get the steam up of its own
accord, and burst or run amuck in our great towns, it might, as Mr. Potter says, require some time to
reproduce the workers, but, having machinists and capitalists at hand, we could always find thrifty, hard,
industrious men wherewith to improvise more master-manufacturers than we can ever want. Mr. Potter
talks of the trade reviving 'in one, two, or three years,' and he asks us not 'to encourage or allow (!) the
working power to emigrate.' \16\ He says that it is very natural the workers should wish to emigrate; but
he thinks that in spite of their desire, the nation ought to keep this half million of workers with their
700,000 dependents, shut up in the cotton districts; and as a necessary consequence, he must of course
think that the nation ought to keep down their discontent by force, and sustain them by alms — and upon
the chance that the cotton masters may some day want them.... The time is come when the great public



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (7 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

opinion of these islands must operate to save this 'working power' from those who would deal with it as
they would deal with iron, and coal, and cotton."

The Times ' article was only a jeu d'esprit. The "great public opinion" was, in fact, of Mr. Potter's opinion,
that the factory operatives are part of the movable fittings of a factory. Their emigration was prevented.
They were locked up in that "moral workhouse," the cotton districts, and they form, as before, "the
strength" of the cotton manufacturers of Lancashire.

Capitalist production, therefore, of itself reproduces the separation between labour-power and the means
of labour. It thereby reproduces and perpetuates the condition for exploiting the labourer. It incessantly
forces him to sell his labour-power in order to live, and enables the capitalist to purchase labour-power in
order that he may enrich himself. [171 It is no longer a mere accident, that capitalist and labourer
confront each other in the market as buyer and seller. It is the process itself that incessantly hurls back
the labourer on to the market as a vendor of his labour-power, and that incessantly converts his own
product into a means by which another man can purchase him. In reality, the labourer belongs to capital
before he has sold himself to capital. His economic bondage fl 81 is both brought about and concealed by
the periodic sale of himself, by his change of masters, and by the oscillations in the market-price of
labour-power. [191

Capitalist production, therefore, under its aspect of a continuous connected process, of a process of
reproduction, produces not only commodities, not only surplus-value, but it also produces and reproduces
the capitalist relation; on the one side the capitalist, on the other the wage-labourer. [201



Footnotes

£11 "Mais ces riches, qui consomment les produits du travail des autres, ne peuvent les obtenir que par
des echanges [purchases of commodities] . S'ils donnent cependant leur richesse acquise et accumulee en
retour contre ces produits nouveaux qui sont l'objet de leur fantaisie, ils semblent exposes a epuiser
bientot leur fonds de reserve; ils ne travaillent point, avor s-nous dit, et ils ne peuvent meme travailler; on
croirait done que chaque jour doit voir diminuer leurs vieilles richesses, et que lorsqu'il ne leur en restera
plus, rien ne sera offert en echange aux ouvriers qui travaillent exclusivement pour eux.... Mais dans
l'ordre social, la richesse a acquis la propriete de se reproduire par le travail d'autrui, et sans que son
proprietaire y concoure. La richesse, comme le travail, et par le travail, donne un fruit annuel qui peut
etre detruit chaque annee sans que le riche en devienne plus pauvre. Ce fruit est le revenu qui net du
capital" (Sismondi: "Nouv. Princ. d'Econ. Pol." Paris, 1819, 1. 1, pp. 81-82.)

[21 "Wages as well as profits are to be considered, each of them, as really a portion of the finished
product." (Ramsay, 1. c, p. 142.) "The share of the product which comes to the labourer in the form of
wages." (J. Mill, "Elements, &c." Translated by Parissot. Paris, 1823, p. 34.)

[31 "When capital is employed in advancing to the workman his wages, it adds nothing to the funds for
the maintenance of labour." (Cazenove in note to his edition of Malthus' "Definitions in Pol. Econ."
London, 1853, p. 22.)

[41 "The wages of labour are advanced by capitalists in the case of less than one fourth of the labourers of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (8 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

the earth." (Rich. Jones: "Textbook of Lectures on the Pol. Econ. of Nations." Hertford, 1852, p. 36.)

[51 "Though the manufacturer" (i.e., the labourer) "has his wages advanced to him by his master, he in
reality costs him no expense, the value of these wages being generally reserved, together with a profit, in
the improved value of the subject upon which his labour is bestowed." (A. Smith, 1. c, Book II.. ch. Ill,
p. 311.)

[61 "This is a remarkably peculiar property of productive labour. Whatever is productively consumed is
capital and it becomes capital by consumption." (James Mill, 1. c, p. 242.) James Mill, however, never
got on the track of this "remarkably peculiar property."

[71 "It is true indeed, that the first introducing a manufacture employs many poor, but they cease not to
be so, and the continuance of it makes many." ("Reasons for a Limited Exportation of Wool." London,
1677, p. 19.) "The farmer now absurdly asserts, that he keeps the poor. They are indeed kept in misery."
("Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor Rates: or a Comparative View of the Prices of labour and
Provisions." London, 1777, p. 31.)

[81 Rossi would not declaim so emphatically against this, had lie really penetrated the secret of
"productive consumption."

[9J "The labourers in the mines of S. America, whose daily task (the heaviest perhaps in the world)
consists in bringing to the surface on their shoulders a load of metal weighing from 180 to 200 pounds,
from a depth of 450 feet, live on broad and beans only; they themselves would prefer the bread alone for
food, but their masters, who have found out that the men cannot work so hard on bread, treat them like
horses, and compel them to eat beans; beans, however, are relatively much richer in bone-earth
(phosphate of lime) than is bread." (Liebig, 1. c, vol. 1., p. 194, note.)

riOl James Mill, I.e., p. 238.

fill "If the price of labour should rise so high that, notwithstanding the increase of capital, no more
could be employed, I should say that such increase of capital would be still unproductively consumed."
(Ricardo, 1. c, p. 163.)

fl21 "The only productive consumption, properly so called, is the consumption or destruction of wealth"
(he alludes to the means of production) "by capitalists with a view to reproduction.... The workman ... is
a productive consumer to the person who employs him, and to the State, but not, strictly speaking, to
himself." (Malthus'"Definitions, &c", p. 30.)

f 131 "The only thing, of which one can say, that it is stored up and prepared beforehand, is the skill of the
labourer.... The accumulation and storage of skilled labour, that most important operation, is, as regards
the great mass of labourers, accomplished without any capital whatever." (Th. Hodgskin: "Labour
Defended, &c," p. 13.)

f 141 "That letter might be looked upon as the manifesto of the manufacturers." (Ferrand: "Motion on the
Cotton Famine." H.o.C, 27th April, 1863.)

f 151 It will not be forgotten that this same capital sings quite another song, under ordinary circumstances,
when there is a question of reducing wages. Then the masters exclaim with one voice: "The factory



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (9 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low species of skilled
labour, and that there is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or
which, by a short training of the least expert, can be more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired ... The
master's machinery" (which we now learn can be replaced with advantage in 12 months,) "really plays a
far more important part in the business of production than the labour and skill of the operative" (who
cannot now be replaced under 30 years), "which six months' education can reach, and a common labourer
can learn." (See ante, p. 423.)

fl61 Parliament did not vote a single farthing in aid of emigration, but simply passed some Acts
empowering the municipal corporations to keep the operatives in a half-starved state, i.e., to exploit them
at less than the normal wages. On the other hand, when 3 years later, the cattle disease broke out,
Parliament broke wildly through its usages and voted, straight off, millions for indemnifying the
millionaire landlords, whose farmers in any event came off without loss, owing to the rise in the price of
meat. The bull-like bellow of the landed proprietors at the opening of Parliament, in 1866, showed that a
man can worship the cow Sabala without being a Hindu, and can change himself into an ox without
being a Jupiter.

f 171 "L'ouvrier demandait de la subsistence pour vivre, le chef demandait du travail pour gagner."
(Sismondi, 1. c, p. 91.)

f 181 A boorishly clumsy form of this bondage exists in the county of Durham. This Is one of the few
counties, in which circumstances do not secure to the farmer undisputed proprietary rights over the
agricultural labourer. The mining industry allows the latter some choice. In this county, the farmer,
contrary to the custom elsewhere, rents only such farms as have on them labourers' cottages. The rent of
the cottage is a part of the wages. These cottages are known as "hinds' houses." They are let to the
labourers in consideration of certain feudal services, under a contract called "bondage," which, amongst
other things, binds the labourer, during the time he is employed elsewhere, to leave some one, say his
daughter, &c, to supply his place. The labourer himself is called a "bondsman." The relationship here set
up also shows how individual consumption by the labourer becomes consumption on behalf of capital-or
productive consumption-from quite a new point of view: "It is curious to observe that the very dung of
the hind and bondsman is the perquisite of the calculating lord ... and the lord will allow no privy but his
own to exist in the neighbourhood, and will rather give a bit of manure here and there for a garden than
bate any part of his seigneurial right." ("Public Health, Report VII., 1864," p. 188.)

f 191 It will not be forgotten, that, with respect to the labour of children, &c, even the formality of a
voluntary sale disappears.

f201 "Capital pre-supposes wage-labour, and wage-labour pre-supposes capital. One is a necessary
condition to the existence of the other; they mutually call each other into existence. Does an operative in
a cotton-factory produce nothing but cotton goods? No, he produces capital. He produces values that give
fresh command over his labour, and that, by means of such command, create fresh values." (Karl Marx:
"Lohnarbeit und Kapital," in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung: No. 266, 7th April, 1849.) The articles
published under the above title in the N. Rh. Z. are parts of some lectures given by me on that subject, in
1847, in the German "Arheiter-Verein" at Brussels, the publication of which was interrupted by the
revolution of February.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (10 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-Four: Conversion of Surplus- Value into Capital
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (11 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VII:

The Accumulation of Capital



CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR:

CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL



Contents

Section 1 - Capitalist Production on a Progressively Increasing Scale. Transition of the Laws of Property

that Characterise Production of Commodities into Laws of Capitalist Appropriation

Section 2 - Erroneous Conception, by Political Economy, of Reproduction on a Progressively Increasing

Scale

Section 3 - Separation of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue. The Abstinence Theory

Section 4 - Circumstances that, Independently of the Proportional Division of Surplus-Value into Capital

and Revenue, Determine the Amount of Accumulation. Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power.

Productivity of Labour. Growing Difference in Amount Between Capital Employed and Capital

Consumed. Magnitude of Capital Advanced

Section 5 - The So-Called Labour-Fund



SECTION 1.

CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE. TRANSITION
OF THE LAWS OF PROPERTY THAT CHARACTERISE PRODUCTION OF COMMODITIES
INTO LAWS OF CAPITALIST APPROPRIATION



Hitherto we have investigated how surplus-value emanates from capital; we have now to see how capital
arises from surplus-value. Employing surplus-value as capital, reconverting it into capital, is called
accumulation of capital. \l]

First let us consider this transaction from the standpoint of the individual capitalist. Suppose a spinner to
have advanced a capital of £10,000, of which four-fifths (£8,000) are laid out in cotton, machinery, &c,
and one-fifth (£2,000) in wages. Let him produce 240,000 lbs. of yam annually, having a value of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (1 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

£2,000. The rate of surplus-value being 100%, the surplus-value lies in the surplus or net product of
40,000 lbs. of yarn, one-sixth of the gross product, with a value of £2,000 which will be realised by a
sale. £2,000 is £2,000. We can neither see nor smell in this sum of money a trace of surplus-value. When
we know that a given value is surplus-value, we know how its owner came by it; but that does not alter
the nature either of value or of money.

In order to convert this additional sum of £2,000 into capital, the master-spinner will, all circumstances
remaining as before, advance four-fifths of it (£1,600) in the purchase of cotton, &c, and one-fifth
(£400) in the purchase of additional spinners, who will find in the market the necessaries of life whose
value the master has advanced to them.

Then the new capital of £2,000 functions in the spinning-mill, and brings in, in its turn, a surplus-value of
£400.

The capital-value was originally advanced in the money-form. The surplus-value on the contrary is,
originally, the value of a definite portion of the gross product. If this gross product be sold, converted
into money, the capital- value regains its original form. From this moment the capital-value and the
surplus-value are both of them sums of money, and their reconversion into capital takes place in
precisely the same way. The one, as well as the other, is laid out by the capitalist in the purchase of
commodities that place him in a position to begin afresh the fabrication of his goods, and this time, on an
extended scale. But in order to be able to buy those commodities, he must find them ready in the market.

His own yams circulate, only because he brings his annual product to market, as all other capitalists
likewise do with their commodities. But these commodities, before coming to market, were part of the
general annual product, part of the total mass of objects of every kind, into which the sum of the
individual capitals, i.e., the total capital of society, had been converted in the course of the year, and of
which each capitalist had in hand only an aliquot part. The transactions in the market effectuate only the
interchange of the individual components of this annual product, transfer them from one hand to another,
but can neither augment the total annual production, nor alter the nature of the objects produced. Hence
the use that can be made of the total annual product, depends entirely upon its own composition, but in
no way upon circulation.

The annual production, must in the first place furnish all those objects (use- values) from which the
material components of capital, used up in the course of the year, have to be replaced. Deducting these
there remains the net or surplus-product, in which the surplus- value lies. And of what does this
surplus-product consist? Only of things destined to satisfy the wants and desires of the capitalist class,
things which, consequently, enter into the consumption-fund of the capitalists? Were that the case, the
cup of surplus-value would be drained to the very dregs, and nothing but simple reproduction would ever
take place.

To accumulate it is necessary to convert a portion of the surplus-product into capital. But we cannot,
except by a miracle, convert into capital anything but such articles as can be employed in the
labour-process (i.e., means of production), and such further articles as are suitable for the sustenance of
the labourer (i.e., means of subsistence). Consequently, a part of the annual surplus-labour must have
been applied to the production of additional means of production and subsistence, over and above the
quantity of these things required to replace the capital advanced. In one word, surplus-value is
convertible into capital solely because the surplus-product, whose value it is, already comprises the
material elements of new capital. \2]

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (2 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

Now in order to allow of these elements actually functioning as capital, the capitalist class requires
additional labour. If the exploitation of the labourers already employed do not increase, either extensively
or intensively, then additional labour-power must be found. For this the mechanism of capitalist
production provides beforehand, by converting the working-class into a class dependent on wages, a
class whose ordinary wages suffice, not only for its maintenance, but for its increase, it is only necessary
for capital to incorporate this additional labour-power, annually supplied by the working-class in the
shape of labourers of all ages, with the surplus means of production comprised in the annual produce,
and the conversion of surplus-value into capital is complete. From a concrete point of view,
accumulation resolves itself into the reproduction of capital on a progressively increasing scale. The
circle in which simple reproduction moves, alters its form, and, to use Sismondi's expression, changes
into a spiral. [3}

Let us now return to our illustration. It is the old story: Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, and so
on. The original capital of £10,000 brings in a surplus-value of £2,000, which is capitalised. The new
capital of £2,000 brings in a surplus-value of £400, and this, too, is capitalised, converted into a second
additional capital, which, in its turn, produces a further surplus-value of £80. And so the ball rolls on.

We here leave out of consideration the portion of the surplus-value consumed by the capitalist. Just as
little does it concern us, for the moment, whether the additional capital is joined on to the original capital,
or is separated from it to function independently; whether the same capitalist, who accumulated it,
employs it, or whether he hands it over to another. This only we must not forget, that by the side of the
newly-formed capital, the original capital continues to reproduce itself, and to produce surplus-value, and
that this is also true of all accumulated capital, and the additional capital engendered by it.

The original capital was formed by the advance of £10,000. How did the owner become possessed of it?
"By his own labour and that of his forefathers," answer unanimously the spokesmen of Political
Economy. [4] And, in fact, their supposition appears the only one consonant with the laws of the
production of commodities.

But it is quite otherwise with regard to the additional capital of £2,000. How that originated we know
perfectly well. There is not one single atom of its value that does not owe its existence to unpaid labour.
The means of production, with which the additional labour-power is incorporated, as well as the
necessaries with which the labourers are sustained, are nothing but component parts of the
surplus-product, of the tribute annually exacted from the working-class by the capitalist class. Though
the latter with a portion of that tribute purchases the additional labour-power even at its full price, so that
equivalent is exchanged for equivalent, yet the transaction is for all that only the old dodge of every
conqueror who buys commodities from the conquered with the money he has robbed them of.

If the additional capital employs the person who produced it, this producer must not only continue to
augment the value of the original capital, but must buy back the fruits of his previous labour with more
labour than they cost. When viewed as a transaction between the capitalist class and the working-class, it
makes no difference that additional labourers are employed by means of the unpaid labour of the
previously employed labourers. The capitalist may even convert the additional capital into a machine that
throws the producers of that capital out of work, and that replaces them by a few children. In every case
the working-class creates by the surplus-labour of one year the capital destined to employ additional
labour in the following year. [5} And this is what is called: creating capital out of capital.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (3 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

The accumulation of the first additional capital of £2,000 pre-supposes a value of £10,000 belonging to
the capitalist by virtue of his "primitive labour," and advanced by him. The second additional capital of
£400 pre-supposes, on the contrary, only the previous accumulation of the £2,000, of which the £400 is
the surplus-value capitalised. The ownership of past unpaid labour is thenceforth the sole condition for
the appropriation of living unpaid labour on a constantly increasing scale. The more the capitalist has
accumulated, the more is he able to accumulate.

In so far as the surplus-value, of which the additional capital, No. 1, consists, is the result of the purchase
of labour-power with part of the original capital, a purchase that conformed to the laws of the exchange
of commodities, and that, from a legal standpoint, pre-supposes nothing beyond the free disposal, on the
part of the labourer, of his own capacities, and on the part of the owner of money or commodities, of the
values that belong to him; in so far as the additional capital, No. 2, &c, is the mere result of No. 1, and,
therefore, a consequence of the above conditions; in so far as each single transaction invariably conforms
to the laws of the exchange of commodities, the capitalist buying labour-power, the labourer selling it,
and we will assume at its real value; in so far as all this is true, it is evident that the laws of appropriation
or of private property, laws that are based on the production and circulation of commodities, become by
their own inner and inexorable dialectic changed into their very opposite. The exchange of equivalents,
the original operation with which we started, has now become turned round in such a way that there is
only an apparent exchange. This is owing to the fact, first, that the capital which is exchanged for
labour-power is itself but a portion of the product of others' labour appropriated without an equivalent;
and, secondly, that this capital must not only be replaced by its producer, but replaced together with an
added surplus. The relation of exchange subsisting between capitalist and labourer becomes a mere
semblance appertaining to the process of circulation, a mere form, foreign to the real nature of the
transaction, and only mystifying it. The ever repeated purchase and sale of labour-power is now the mere
form; what really takes place is this — the capitalist again and again appropriates, without equivalent, a
portion of the previously materialised labour of others, and exchanges it for a greater quantity of living
labour. At first the rights of property seemed to us to be based on a man's own labour. At least, some
such assumption was necessary since only commodity-owners with equal rights confronted each other,
and the sole means by which a man could become possessed of the commodities of others, was by
alienating his own commodities; and these could be replaced by labour alone. Now, however, property
turns out to be the right, on the part of the capitalist, to appropriate the unpaid labour of others or its
product, and to be the impossibility, on the part of the labourer, of appropriating his own product. The
separation of property from labour has become the necessary consequence of a law that apparently
originated in their identity. [61

Therefore, [71 however much the capitalist mode of appropriation may seem to fly in the face of the
original laws of commodity production, it nevertheless arises, not from a violation, but, on the contrary,
from the application of these laws. Let us make this clear once more by briefly reviewing the consecutive
phases of motion whose culminating point is capitalist accumulation.

We saw, in the first place, that the original conversion of a sum of values into capital was achieved in
complete accordance with the laws of exchange. One party to the contract sells his labour-power, the
other buys it. The former receives the value of his commodity, whose use-value — labour — is thereby
alienated to the buyer. Means of production which already belong to the latter are then transformed by
him, with the aid of labour equally belonging to him, into a new product which is likewise lawfully his.

The value of this product includes: first, the value of the used-up means of production. Useful labour

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (4 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

cannot consume these means of production without transferring their value to the new product, but, to be
saleable, labour-power must be capable of supplying useful labour in the branch of industry in which it is
to be employed.

The value of the new product further includes: the equivalent of the value of the labour-power together
with a surplus- value. This is so because the value of the labour-power — sold for a definite length of
time, say a day, a week, etc. — is less than the value created by its use during that time. But the worker
has received payment for the exchange-value of his labour-power and by so doing has alienated its
use-value — this being the case in every sale and purchase.

The fact that this particular commodity, labour-power, possesses the peculiar use- value of supplying
labour, and therefore of creating value, cannot affect the general law of commodity production. If,
therefore, the magnitude of value advanced in wages is not merely found again in the product, but is
found there augmented by a surplus-value, this is not because the seller has been defrauded, for he has
really received the value of his commodity; it is due solely to the fact that this commodity has been used
up by the buyer.

The law of exchange requires equality only between the exchange-values of the commodities given in
exchange for one another. From the very outset it pre-supposes even a difference between their
use-values and it has nothing whatever to do with their consumption, which only begins after the deal is
closed and executed.

Thus the original conversion of money into capital is achieved in the most exact accordance with the
economic laws of commodity production and with the right of property derived from them. Nevertheless,
its result is:

(1) that the product belongs to the capitalist and not to the worker;

(2) that the value of this product includes, besides the value of the capital advanced, a surplus-value
which costs the worker labour but the capitalist nothing, and which none the less becomes the legitimate
property of the capitalist;

(3) that the worker has retained his labour-power and can sell it anew if he can find a buyer.

Simple reproduction is only the periodical repetition of this first operation; each time money is converted
afresh into capital. Thus the law is not broken; on the contrary, it is merely enabled to operate
continuously. "Several successive acts of exchange have only made the last represent the first"
(Sismondi, "Nouveaux Principes, etc.," p. 70).

And yet we have seen that simple reproduction suffices to stamp this first operation, in so far as it is
conceived as an isolated process, with a totally changed character. "Of those who share the national
income among themselves, the one side (the workers) acquire every year a fresh right to their share by
fresh work; the others (the capitalists) have already acquired, by work done originally, a permanent right
to their share" (Sismondi, 1. c, pp. 110, 11 1). It is indeed notorious that the sphere of labour is not the
only one in which primogeniture works miracles.

Nor does it matter if simple reproduction is replaced by reproduction on an extended scale, by
accumulation. In the former case the capitalist squanders the whole surplus-value in dissipation, in the
latter he demonstrates his bourgeois virtue by consuming only a portion of it and converting the rest into



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (5 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

money.

The surplus-value is his property; it, has never belonged to anyone else. If he advances it for the purposes
of production, the advances made come from his own funds, exactly as on the day when he first entered
the market. The fact that on this occasion the funds are derived from the unpaid labour of his workers
makes absolutely no difference. If worker B is paid out of the surplus-value which worker A produced,
then, in the first place, A furnished that surplus-value without having the just price of his commodity cut
by a half-penny, and, in the second place, the transaction is no concern of B's whatever. What B claims,
and has a right to claim, is that the capitalist should pay him the value of his labour-power. "Both were
still gainers: the worker because he was advanced the fruits of his labour" (should read: of the unpaid
labour of other workers) "before the work was done" (should read: before his own labour had borne
fruit); "the employer (le maitre), because the labour of this worker was worth more than his wages"
(should read: produced more value than the value of his wages). (Sismondi, 1. c, p. 135.)

To be sure, the matter looks quite different if we consider capitalist production in the uninterrupted flow
of its renewal, and if, in place of the individual capitalist and the individual worker, we view in their
totality, the capitalist class and the working-class confronting each other. But in so doing we should be
applying standards entirely foreign to commodity production.

Only buyer and seller, mutually independent, face each other in commodity production. The relations
between them cease on the day when the term stipulated in the contract they concluded expires. If the
transaction is repeated, it is repeated as the -result of a new agreement which has nothing to do with the
previous one and which only by chance brings the same seller together again with the same buyer.

If, therefore, commodity production, or one of its associated processes, is to be judged according to its
own economic laws, we must consider each act of exchange by itself, apart from any connexion with the
act of exchange preceding it and that following it. And since sales and purchases are negotiated solely
between particular individuals, it is not admissible to seek here for relations between whole social
classes.

However long a series of periodical reproductions and preceding accumulations the capital functioning
to-day may have passed through, it always preserves its original virginity. So long as the laws of
exchange are observed in every single act of exchange the mode of appropriation can be completely
revolutionised without in any way affecting the property rights which correspond to commodity
production. These same rights remain in force both at the outset, when the product belongs to its
producer, who, exchanging equivalent for equivalent, can enrich himself only by his own labour, and
also in the period of capitalism, when social wealth becomes to an ever-increasing degree the property of
those who are in a position to appropriate continually and ever afresh the unpaid labour of others.

This result becomes inevitable from the moment there is a free sale, by the labourer himself, of
labour-power as a commodity. But it is also only from then onwards that commodity production is
generalised and becomes the typical form of production; it is only from then onwards that, from the first,
every product is produced for sale and all wealth produced goes through the sphere of circulation. Only
when and where wage-labour is its basis does commodity production impose itself upon society as a
whole; but only then and there also does it unfold all its hidden potentialities. To say that the
supervention of wage-labour adulterates commodity production is to say that commodity production
must not develop if it is to remain unadulterated. To the extent that commodity production, in accordance
with its own inherent laws, develops further, into capitalist production, the property laws of commodity

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (6 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

production change into the laws of capitalist appropriation. [8]



We have seen that even in the case of simple reproduction, all capital, whatever its original source,
becomes converted into accumulated capital, capitalised surplus- value. But in the flood of production all
the capital originally advanced becomes a vanishing quantity (magnitudo evanescens, in the
mathematical sense), compared with the directly accumulated capital, i.e., with the surplus-value or
surplus-product that is reconverted into capital, whether it functions in the hands of its accumulator, or in
those of others. Hence, Political Economy describes capital in general as "accumulated wealth"
(converted surplus-value or revenue), "that is employed over again in the production of surplus-value,"
[91 and the capitalist as "the owner of surplus-value." flQl It is merely another way of expressing the
same thing to say that all existing capital is accumulated or capitalised interest, for interest is a mere
fragment of surplus-value, fill



SECTION 2.

ERRONEOUS CONCEPTION, BY POLITICAL ECONOMY, OF REPRODUCTION ON A
PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE



Before we further investigate accumulation or the reconversion of surplus-value into capital, we must
brush on one side an ambiguity introduced by the classical economists.

Just as little as the commodities that the capitalist buys with a part of the surplus-value for his own
consumption, serve the purpose of production and of creation of value, so little is the labour that he buys
for the satisfaction of his natural and social requirements, productive labour. Instead of converting
surplus-value into capital, he, on the contrary, by the purchase of those commodities and that labour,
consumes or expends it as revenue. In the face of the habitual mode of life of the old feudal nobility,
which, as Hegel rightly says, "consists in consuming what is in hand," and more especially displays itself
in the luxury of personal retainers, it was extremely important for bourgeois economy to promulgate the
doctrine that accumulation of capital is the first duty of every citizen, and to preach without ceasing, that
a man cannot accumulate, if he eats up all his revenue, instead of spending a good part of it in the
acquisition of additional productive labourers, who bring in more than they cost. On the other hand the
economists had to contend against the popular prejudice, that confuses capitalist production with
hoarding, \ 121 and fancies that accumulated wealth is either wealth that is rescued from being destroyed
in its existing form, i.e., from being consumed, or wealth that is withdrawn from circulation. Exclusion of
money from circulation would also exclude absolutely its self-expansion as capital, while accumulation
of a hoard in the shape of commodities would be sheer tomfoolery. fl31 The accumulation of
commodities in great masses is the result either of over-production or of a stoppage of circulation. £14]_It
is true that the popular mind is impressed by the sight, on the one hand, of the mass of goods that are
stored up for gradual consumption by the rich, fl51 and on the other hand, by the formation of reserve
stocks; the latter, a phenomenon that is common to all modes of production, and on which we shall dwell



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (7 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

for a moment, when we come to analyse circulation. Classical economy is therefore quite right, when it
maintains that the consumption of surplus-products by productive, instead of by unproductive labourers,
is a characteristic feature of the process of accumulation. But at this point the mistakes also begin. Adam
Smith has made it the fashion, to represent accumulation as nothing more than consumption of
surplus-products by productive labourers, which amounts to saying, that the capitalising of surplus-value
consists in merely turning surplus-value into labour-power. Let us see what Ricardo, e.g., says: "It must
be understood that all the productions of a country are consumed; but it makes the greatest difference
imaginable whether they are consumed by those who reproduce, or by those who do not reproduce
another value. When we say that revenue is saved, and added to capital, what we mean is, that the portion
of revenue, so said to be added to capital, is consumed by productive instead of unproductive labourers.
There can be no greater error than in supposing that capital is increased by non-consumption. " fl61 There
can be no greater error than that which Ricardo and all subsequent economists repeat after A. Smith, viz.,
that "the part of revenue, of which it is said, it has been added to capital, is consumed by productive
labourers." According to this, all surplus-value that is changed into capital becomes variable capital. So
far from this being the case, the surplus-value, like the original capital, divides itself into constant capital
and variable capital, into means of production and labour-power, labour-power is the form under which
variable capital exists during the process of production. In this process the labour-power is itself
consumed by the capitalist while the means of production are consumed by the labour-power in the
exercise of its function, labour. At the same time, the money paid for the purchase of the labour-power, is
converted into necessaries, that are consumed, not by "productive labour," but by the "productive
labourer." Adam Smith, by a fundamentally perverted analysis, arrives at the absurd conclusion, that
even though each individual capital is divided into a constant and a variable part, the capital of society
resolves itself only into variable capital, i.e, is laid out exclusively in payment of wages. For instance,
suppose a cloth manufacturer converts £2,000 into capital. One portion he lays out in buying weavers,
the other in woollen yam, machinery, &c. But the people, from whom he buys the yarn and the
machinery, pay for labour with a part of the purchase money, and so on until the whole £2,000 are spent
in the payment of wages, i.e, until the entire product represented by the £2,000 has been consumed by
productive labourers. It is evident that the whole gist of this argument lies in the words "and so on,"
which send us from pillar to post. In truth, Adam Smith breaks his investigation off, just where its
difficulties begin. ri71

The annual process of reproduction is easily understood, so long as we keep in view merely the sum total
of the year's production. But every single component of this product must be brought into the market as a
commodity, and there the difficulty begins. The movements of the individual capitals, and of the personal
revenues, cross and intermingle and are lost in the general change of places, in the circulation of the
wealth of society; this dazes the sight, and propounds very complicated problems for solution. In the
third part of Book II. I shall give the analysis of the real bearings of the facts. It is one of the great merits
of the Physiocrats, that in their Tableau economique they were the first to attempt to depict the annual
production in the shape in which it is presented to us after passing through the process of circulation. |T81

For the rest, it is a matter of course, that Political Economy, acting in the interests of the capitalist class,
has not failed to exploit the doctrine of Adam. Smith, viz., that the whole of that part of the
surplus-product which is converted into capital, is consumed by the working-class.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (8 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

SECTION 3.

SEPARATION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE. THE ABSTINENCE
THEORY



In the last preceding chapter, we treated surplus-value (or the surplus-product) solely as a fund for
supplying the individual consumption of the capitalist. In this chapter we have, so far, treated it solely as
a fund for accumulation. It is, however, neither the one nor the other, but is both together. One portion is
consumed by the capitalist as revenue, f!91 the other is employed as capital, is accumulated.

Given the mass of surplus-value, then, the larger the one of these parts, the smaller is the other. Caeteris
paribus, the ratio of these parts determines the magnitude of the accumulation. But it is by the owner of
the surplus-value, by the capitalist alone, that the division is made, it is his deliberate act. That part of the
tribute exacted by him which he accumulates, is said to be saved by him, because he does not eat it, i.e,
because he performs the function of a capitalist, and enriches himself.

Except as personified capital, the capitalist has no historical value, and no right to that historical
existence, which, to use an expression of the witty Lichnowsky, "hasn't got no date." And so far only is
the necessity for his own transitory existence implied in the transitory necessity for the capitalist mode of
production. But, so far as he is personified capital, it is not values in use and the enjoyment of them, but
exchange- value and its augmentation, that spur him into action. Fanatically bent on making value expand
itself, he ruthlessly forces the human race to produce for production's sake; he thus forces the
development of the productive powers of society, and creates those material conditions, which alone can
form the real basis of a higher form of society, a society in which the full and free development of every
individual forms the ruling principle. Only as personified capital is the capitalist respectable. As such, he
shares with the miser the passion for wealth as wealth. But that which in the miser is a mere
idiosyncrasy, is, in the capitalist, the effect of the social mechanism, of which he is but one of the wheels.
Moreover, the development of capitalist production makes it constantly necessary to keep increasing the
amount of the capital laid out in a given industrial undertaking, and competition makes the immanent
laws of capitalist production to be felt by each individual capitalist, as external coercive laws. It compels
him to keep constantly extending his capital, in order to preserve it, but extend it he cannot, except by
means of progressive accumulation.

So far, therefore, as his actions are a mere function of capital — endowed as capital is, in his person, with
consciousness and a will — his own private consumption is a robbery perpetrated on accumulation, just
as in book-keeping by double entry, the private expenditure of the capitalist is placed on the debtor side
of his account against his capital. To accumulate, is to conquer the world of social wealth, to increase the
mass of human beings exploited by him, and thus to extend both the direct and the indirect sway of the
capitalist. [201

But original sin is at work everywhere. As capitalist production, accumulation, and wealth, become
developed, the capitalist ceases to be the mere incarnation of capital. He has a fellow-feeling for his own
Adam, and his education gradually enables him to smile at the rage for asceticism, as a mere prejudice of
the old-fashioned miser. While the capitalist of the classical type brands individual consumption as a sin

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (9 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

against his function, and as "abstinence" from accumulating, the modernised capitalist is capable of
looking upon accumulation as "abstinence" from pleasure.

"Two souls, alas, do dwell with in his breast;
The one is ever parting from the other." f211

At the historical dawn of capitalist production, — and every capitalist upstart has personally to go
through this historical stage — avarice, and desire to get rich, are the ruling passions. But the progress of
capitalist production not only creates a world of delights; it lays open, in speculation and the credit
system, a thousand sources of sudden enrichment. When a certain stage of development has been
reached, a conventional degree of prodigality, which is also an exhibition of wealth, and consequently a
source of credit, becomes a business necessity to the "unfortunate" capitalist. Luxury enters into capital's
expenses of representation. Moreover, the capitalist gets rich, not like the miser, in proportion to his
personal labour and restricted consumption, but at the same rate as he squeezes out the labour-power of
others, and enforces on the labourer abstinence from all life's enjoyments. Although, therefore, the
prodigality of the capitalist never possesses the bona-fide character of the open-handed feudal lord's
prodigality, but, on the contrary, has always lurking behind it the most sordid avarice and the most
anxious calculation, yet his expenditure grows with his accumulation, without the one necessarily
restricting the other. But along with this growth, there is at the same time developed in his breast, a
Faustian conflict between the passion for accumulation, and the desire for enjoyment.

Dr. Aikin says in a work published in 1795: "The trade of Manchester may be divided into four periods.
First, when manufacturers were obliged to work hard for their livelihood." They enriched themselves
chiefly by robbing the parents, whose children were bound as apprentices to them; the parents paid a high
premium, while the apprentices were starved. On the other hand, the average profits were low, and to
accumulate, extreme parsimony was requisite. They lived like misers and were far from consuming even
the interest on their capital. "The second period, when they had begun to acquire little fortunes, but
worked as hard as before," — for direct exploitation of labour costs labour, as every slave-driver knows
— "and lived in as plain a manner as before.... The third, when luxury began, and the trade was pushed
by sending out riders for orders into every market town in the Kingdom.... It is probable that few or no
capitals of £3,000 to £4,000 acquired by trade existed here before 1690. However, about that time, or a
little later, the traders had got money beforehand, and began to build modem brick houses, instead of
those of wood and plaster." Even in the early part of the 18th century, a Manchester manufacturer, who
placed a pint of foreign wine before his guests, exposed himself to the remarks and headshakings of all
his neighbours. Before the rise of machinery, a manufacturer's evening expenditure at the public house
where they all met, never exceeded sixpence for a glass of punch, and a penny for a screw of tobacco. It
was not till 1758, and this marks an epoch, that a person actually engaged in business was seen with an
equipage of his own. "The fourth period," the last 30 years of the 18th century, "is that in which expense
and luxury have made great progress, and was supported by a trade extended by means of riders and
factors through every part of Europe." f221 What would the good Dr. Aikin say if he could rise from his
grave and see the Manchester of to-day?

Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets! "Industry furnishes the material which saving
accumulates." f231 Therefore, save, save, i.e, reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus-value, or
surplus-product into capital! Accumulation for accumulation's sake, production for production's sake: by
this formula classical economy expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie, and did not for a
single instant deceive itself over the birth-throes of wealth. f241 But what avails lamentation in the face

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (10 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

of historical necessity? If to classical economy, the proletarian is but a machine for the production of
surplus-value; on the other hand, the capitalist is in its eyes only a machine for the conversion of this
surplus-value into additional capital. Political Economy takes the historical function of the capitalist in
bitter earnest. In order to charm out of his bosom the awful conflict between the desire for enjoyment and
the chase after riches, Malthus, about the year 1820, advocated a division of labour, which assigns to the
capitalist actually engaged in production, the business of accumulating, and to the other sharers in
surplus-value, to the landlords, the place-men, the beneficed clergy, &c, the business of spending. It is of
the highest importance, he says, "to keep separate the passion for expenditure and the passion for
accumulation." f251 The capitalists having long been good livers and men of the world, uttered loud
cries. What, exclaimed one of their spokesmen, a disciple of Ricardo, Mr. Malthus preaches high rents,
heavy taxes, &c, so that the pressure of the spur may constantly be kept on the industrious by
unproductive consumers! By all means, production, production on a constantly increasing scale, runs the
shibboleth; but "production will, by such a process, be far more curbed in than spurred on. Nor is it quite
fair thus to maintain in idleness a number of persons, only to pinch others, who are likely, from their
characters, if you can force them to work, to work with success." [261 Unfair as he finds it to spur on the
industrial capitalist, by depriving his bread of its butter, yet he thinks it necessary to reduce the labourer's
wages to a minimum "to keep him industrious." Nor does he for a moment conceal the fact, that the
appropriation of unpaid labour is the secret of surplus-value. "Increased demand on the part of the
labourers means nothing more than their willingness to take less of their own product for themselves, and
leave a greater part of it to their employers; and if it be said, that this begets glut, by lessening
consumption" (on the part of the labourers), "I can only reply that glut is synonymous with large profits."
[271

The learned disputation, how the booty pumped out of the labourer may be divided, with most advantage
to accumulation, between the industrial capitalist and the rich idler, was hushed in face of the revolution
of July. Shortly afterwards, the town proletariat at Lyons sounded the tocsin of revolution, and the
country proletariat in England began to, set fire to farm-yards and corn-stacks. On this side of the
Channel Owenism began to spread; on the other side, St. Simonism and Fourierism. The hour of vulgar
economy had struck. Exactly a year before Nassau W. Senior discovered at Manchester, that the profit
(including interest) of capital is the product of the last hour of the twelve, he had announced to the world
another discovery. "I substitute," he proudly says, "for the word capital, considered as an instrument of
production, the word abstinence.'" An unparalleled sample this, of the discoveries of vulgar economy! It
substitutes for an economic category, a sycophantic phrase — voila tout. "When the savage," says Senior,
"makes bows, he exercises an industry, but he does not practise abstinence." \2S] This explains how and
why, in the earlier states of society, the implements of labour were fabricated without abstinence on the
part of the capitalist. "The more society progresses, the more abstinence is demanded," f291 namely, from
those who ply the industry of appropriating the fruits of others' industry. All the conditions for carrying
on the labour-process are suddenly converted into so many acts of abstinence on the part of the capitalist.
If the corn is not all eaten, but part of it also sown — abstinence of the capitalist. If the wine gets time to
mature — abstinence of the capitalist. POI The capitalist robs his own self, whenever he "lends (!) the
instruments of production to the labourer," that is, whenever by incorporating labour-power with them,
he uses them to extract surplus-value out of that labour-power, instead of eating them up, steam-engines,
cotton, railways, manure, horses, and all; or as the vulgar economist childishly puts it, instead of
dissipating "their value" in luxuries and other articles of consumption. f311 How the capitalists as a class
are to perform that feat, is a secret that vulgar economy has hitherto obstinately refused to divulge.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (11 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

Enough, that the world still jogs on, solely through the self-chastisement of this modern penitent of
Vishnu, the capitalist. Not only accumulation, but the simple "conservation of a capital requires a
constant effort to resist the temptation of consuming it." f32] The simple dictates of humanity therefore
plainly enjoin the release of the capitalist from this martyrdom and temptation, in the same way that the
Georgian slave-owner was lately delivered, by the abolition of slavery, from the painful dilemma,
whether to squander the surplus-product, lashed out of his niggers, entirely in champagne, or whether to
reconvert a part of it into more niggers and more land.

In economic forms of society of the most different kinds, there occurs, not only simple reproduction, but,
in varying degrees, reproduction on a progressively increasing scale. By degrees more is produced and
more consumed, and consequently more products have to be converted into means of production. This
process, however, does not present itself as accumulation of capital, nor as the function of a capitalist, so
long as the labourer's means of production, and with them, his product and means of subsistence, do not
confront him in the shape of capital. f331 Richard Jones, who died a few years ago, and was the successor
of Malthus in the chair of Political Economy at Haileybury College, discusses this point well in the light
of two important facts. Since the great mass of the Hindu population are peasants cultivating their land
themselves, their products, their instruments of labour and means of subsistence never take "the shape of
a fund saved from revenue, which fund has, therefore, gone through a previous process of accumulation."
f341 On the other hand, the non-agricultural labourers in those provinces where the English rule has least
disturbed the old system, are directly employed by the magnates, to whom a portion of the agricultural
surplus-product is rendered in the shape of tribute or rent. One portion of this product is consumed by the
magnates in kind, another is converted, for their use, by the labourers, into articles of luxury and such
like things, while the rest forms the wages of the labourers, who own their implements of labour. Here,
production and reproduction on a progressively increasing scale, go on their way without any
intervention from that queer saint, that knight of the woeful countenance, the capitalist "abstainer."



SECTION 4.

CIRCUMSTANCES THAT, INDEPENDENTLY OF THE PROPORTIONAL DIVISION OF
SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE, DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF
ACCUMULATION. DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER. PRODUCTIVITY OF
LABOUR. GROWING DIFFERENCE IN AMOUNT BETWEEN CAPITAL EMPLOYED AND
CAPITAL CONSUMED. MAGNITUDE OF CAPITAL ADVANCED



The proportion in which surplus-value breaks up into capital and revenue being given, the magnitude of
the capital accumulated clearly depends on the absolute magnitude of the surplus-value. Suppose that 80
per cent, were capitalised and 20 per cent, eaten up, the accumulated capital will be £2,400 or £200,
according as the total surplus value has amounted to £3,000 or £500. Hence all the circumstances that
determine the mass of surplus-value, operate to determine the magnitude of the accumulation. We sum
them up once again, but only in so far as they afford new points of view in regard to accumulation.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (12 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

It will be remembered that the rate of surplus-value depends, in the first place, on the degree of
exploitation of labour-power. Political Economy values this fact so highly, that it occasionally identifies
the acceleration of accumulation due to increased productiveness of labour, with its acceleration due to
increased exploitation of the labourer. f351 In the chapters on the production of surplus-value it was
constantly pre-supposed that wages are at least equal to the value of labour-power. Forcible reduction of
wages below this value plays, however, in practice too important a part, for us not to pause upon it for a
moment. It, in fact, transforms, within certain limits, the labourer's necessary consumption-fund into a
fund for the accumulation of capital.

"Wages," says John Stuart Mill, "have no productive power; they are the price of a productive power.
Wages do not contribute, along with labour, to the production of commodities, no more than the price of
tools contributes along with the tools themselves. If labour could be had without purchase, wages might
be dispensed with." f361 But if the labourers could live on air they could not be bought at any price. The
zero of their cost is therefore a limit in a mathematical sense, always beyond reach, although we can
always approximate more and more nearly to it. The constant tendency of capital is to force the cost of
labour back towards this zero. A writer of the 18th century, often quoted already, the author of the "Essay
on Trade and Commerce," only betrays the innermost secret soul of English capitalism, when he declares
the historic mission of England to be the forcing down of English wages to the level of the French and
the Dutch. \31] With other things he says naively: "But if our poor" (technical term for labourers) "will
live luxuriously ... then labour must, of course, be dear.... When it is considered what luxuries the
manufacturing populace consume, such as brandy, gin, tea, sugar, foreign fruit, strong beer, printed
linens, snuff, tobacco, &C." f381 He quotes the work of a Northamptonshire manufacturer, who, with
eyes squinting heavenward moans: "Labour is one-third cheaper in France than in England; for their poor
work hard, and fare hard, as to their food and clothing. Their chief diet is bread, fruit, herbs, roots, and
dried fish; for they very seldom eat flesh; and when wheat is dear, they eat very little bread." f391 "To
which may be added," our essayist goes on, "that their drink is either water or other small liquors, so that
they spend very little money.... These things are very difficult to be brought about; but they are not
impracticable, since they have been effected both in France and in Holland. " KOI Twenty years later, an
American humbug, the baronised Yankee, Benjamin Thompson (alias Count Rumford) followed the
same line of philanthropy to the great satisfaction of God and man. His "Essays" are a cookery book with
receipts of all kinds for replacing by some succedaneum the ordinary dear food of the labourer. The
following is a particularly successful receipt of this wonderful philosopher: "5 lbs. of barleymeal, 7 1/2
d.; 5 lbs. of Indian corn, 6 1/4 d.; 3d. worth of red herring, Id. salt, Id. vinegar, 2d. pepper and sweet
herbs, in all 20 3/4.; make a soup for 64 men, and at the medium price of barley and of Indian corn ... this
soup may be provided at 1/4 d., the portion of 20 ounces. f411 With the advance of capitalistic
production, the adulteration of food rendered Thompson's ideal superfluous. f421 At the end of the 18th
and during the first ten years of the 19th century, the English farmers and landlords enforced the absolute
minimum of wage, by paying the agricultural labourers less than the minimum in the form of wages, and
the remainder in the shape of parochial relief. An example of the waggish way in which the English
Dogberries acted in their "legal" fixing of a wages tariff: "The squires of Norfolk had dined, says Mr.
Burke, when they fixed the rate of wages; the squires of Berks evidently thought the labourers ought not
to do so, when they fixed the rate of wages at Speenhamland, 1795.... There they decide that 'income
(weekly) should be 3s. for a man,' when the gallon or half-peck loaf of 8 lbs. 1 1 oz. is at Is., and increase
regularly till bread is Is. 5d.; when it is above that sum decrease regularly till it be at 2s., and then his
food should be 1/5 th less." f431 Before the Committee of Inquiry of the House of Lords, 1814, a certain

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (13 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

A. Bennett, a large farmer, magistrate, poor-law guardian, and wage-regulator, was asked: "Has any
proportion of the value of daily labour been made up to the labourers out of the poors' rate?" Answer:
"Yes, it has; the weekly income of every family is made up to the gallon loaf (8 lbs. 1 1 oz.), and 3d. per
head!... The gallon loaf per week is what we suppose sufficient for the maintenance of every person in
the family for the week; and the 3d. is for clothes, and if the parish think proper to find clothes; the 3d. is
deducted. This practice goes through all the western part of Wiltshire, and, I believe, throughout the
country." f441 "For years," exclaims a bourgeois author of that time, "they (the farmers) have degraded a
respectable class of their countrymen, by forcing them to have recourse to the workhouse ... the farmer,
while increasing his own gains, has prevented any accumulation on the part of his labouring dependents."
f451 The part played in our days by the direct robbery from the labourer's necessary consumption-fund in
the formation of surplus-value, and, therefore, of the accumulation-fund of capital, the so-called domestic
industry has served to show. (Ch. xv., sect. 8, c.) Further facts on this subject will be given later.

Although in all branches of industry that part of the constant capital consisting of instruments of labour
must be sufficient for a certain number of labourers (determined by the magnitude of the undertaking), it
by no means always necessarily increases in the same proportion as the quantity of labour employed. In a
factory, suppose that 100 labourers working 8 hours a day yield 800 working-hours. If the capitalist
wishes to raise this sum by one half, he can employ 50 more workers; but then he must also advance
more capital, not merely for wages, but for instruments of labour. But he might also let the 100 labourers
work 12 hours instead of 8, and then the instruments of labour already to hand would be enough. These
would then simply be more rapidly consumed. Thus additional labour, begotten of the greater tension of
labour-power, can augment surplus-product and surplus-value (i.e., the subject-matter of accumulation),
without corresponding augmentation in the constant part of capital.

In the extractive industries, mines, &c, the raw materials form no part of the capital advanced. The
subject of labour is in this case not a product of previous labour, but is furnished by Nature gratis, as in
the case of metals, minerals, coal, stone, &c. In these cases the constant capital consists almost
exclusively of instruments of labour, which can very well absorb an increased quantity of labour (day
and night shifts of labourers, e.g.). All other things being equal, the mass and value of the product will
rise in direct proportion to the labour expended. As on the first day of production,, the original
produce-formers, now turned into the creators of the material elements of capital — man and Nature —
still work together. Thanks to the elasticity of labour-power, the domain of accumulation has extended
without any previous enlargement of constant capital.

In agriculture the land under cultivation cannot be increased without the advance of more seed and
manure. But this advance once made, the purely mechanical working of the soil itself produces a
marvellous effect on the amount of the product. A greater quantity of labour, done by the same number
of labourers as before, thus increases the fertility, without requiring any new advance in the instruments
of labour. It is once again the direct action of man on Nature which becomes an immediate source of
greater accumulation, without the intervention of any new capital.

Finally, in what is called manufacturing industry, every additional expenditure of labour pre-supposes a
corresponding additional expenditure of raw materials, but not necessarily of instruments of labour. And
as extractive industry and agriculture supply manufacturing industry with its raw materials and those of
its instruments of labour, the additional product the former have created without additional advance of
capital, tells also in favour of the latter.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (14 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

General result: by incorporating with itself the two primary creators of wealth, labour-power and the
land, capital acquires a power of expansion that permits it to augment the elements of its accumulation
beyond the limits apparently fixed by its own magnitude, or by the value and the mass of the means of
production, already produced, in which it has its being.

Another important factor in the accumulation of capital is the degree of productivity of social labour.

With the productive power of labour increases the mass of the products, in which a certain value, and,
therefore, a surplus-value of a given magnitude, is embodied. The rate of surplus-value remaining the
same or even falling, so long as it only falls more slowly, than the productive power of labour rises, the
mass of the surplus-product increases. The division of this product into revenue and additional capital
remaining the same, the consumption of the capitalist may, therefore, increase without any decrease in
the fund of accumulation. The relative magnitude of the accumulation-fund may even increase at the
expense of the consumption-fund, whilst the cheapening of commodities places at the disposal of the
capitalist as many means of enjoyment as formerly, or even more than formerly. But hand-in-hand with
the increasing productivity of labour, goes, as we have seen, the cheapening of the labourer, therefore a
higher rate of surplus-value, even when the real wages are rising. The latter never rise proportionally to
the productive power of labour. The same value in variable capital therefore sets in movement more
labour-power, and, therefore, more labour. The same value in constant capital is embodied in more
means of production, i.e., in more instruments of labour, materials of labour and auxiliary materials; it
therefore also supplies more elements for the production both of use-value and of value, and with these
more absorbers of labour. The value of the additional capital, therefore, remaining the same or even
diminishing, accelerated accumulation still takes place. Not only does the scale of reproduction
materially extend, but the production of surplus-value increases more rapidly than the value of the
additional capital.

The development of the productive power of labour reacts also on the original capital already engaged in
the process of production. A part of the functioning constant capital consists of instruments of labour,
such as machinery, &c, which are not consumed, and therefore not reproduced, or replaced by new ones
of the same kind, until after long periods of time. But every year a part of these instruments of labour
-perishes or reaches t ' he limit of its productive function. It reaches, therefore, in that year, the time for
its periodical reproduction, for its replacement by new ones of the same kind. If the productiveness
of labour has, during the using up of these instruments of labour, increased (and it develops continually
with the uninterrupted advance of science and technology), more efficient and (considering their
increased efficiency), cheaper machines, tools, apparatus, &c, replace the old. The old capital is
reproduced in a more productive form, apart from the constant detail improvements in the instruments of
labour already in use. The other part of the constant capital, raw material and auxiliary substances, is
constantly reproduced in less than a year; those produced by agriculture, for the most part annually.
Every introduction of improved methods, therefore, works almost simultaneously on the new capital and
on that already in action. Every advance in Chemistry not only multiplies the number of useful materials
and the useful applications of those already known, thus extending with the growth of capital its sphere
of investment. It teaches at the same time how to throw the -excrements of the processes of production
and consumption back again into the circle of the process of reproduction, and thus, without any previous
outlay of capital, creates new matter for capital. Like the increased exploitation of natural wealth by the
mere increase in the tension of labour-power, science and technology give capital a power of expansion
independent of the given magnitude of the capital actually functioning. They react at the same time on
that part of the original capital which has entered upon its stage of renewal. This, in passing into its new

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (15 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

shape, incorporates gratis the social advance made while its old shape was being used up. Of course, this
development of productive power is accompanied by a partial depreciation of functioning capital. So far
as this depreciation makes itself acutely felt in competition, the burden falls on the labourer, in the
increased exploitation of whom the capitalist looks for his indemnification.

Labour transmits to its product the value of the means of production consumed by it. On the other hand,
the value and mass of the means of production set in motion by a given quantity of labour increase as the
labour becomes more productive. Though the same quantity of labour adds always to its products only
the same sum of new value, still the old capital- value, transmitted by the labour to the products, increases
with the growing productivity of labour.

An English and a Chinese spinner, e.g., may work the same number of hours with the same intensity;
then they will both in a week create equal values. But in spite of this equality, an immense difference will
obtain between the value of the week's product of the Englishman, who works with a mighty automaton,
and that of the Chinaman, who has but a spinning-wheel. In the same time as the Chinaman spins one
pound of cotton, the Englishman spins several hundreds of pounds. A sum, many hundred times as great,
of old values swells the value of his product, in which those re-appear in a new, useful form, and can thus
function anew as capital. "In 1782," as Frederick Engels teaches us, "all the wool crop in England of the
three preceding years, lay untouched for want of labourers, and so it must have lain, if newly invented
machinery had not come to its aid and spun it." f461 labour embodied in the form of machinery of course
did not directly force into life a single man, but it made it possible for a smaller number of labourers,
with the addition of relatively less living labour, not only to consume the wool productively, and put into
it new value, but to preserve in the form of yarn, &c, its old value. At the same time, it caused and
stimulated increased reproduction of wool. It is the natural property of living labour, to transmit old
value, whilst it creates new. Hence, with the increase in efficacy, extent and value of its means of
production, consequently with the accumulation that accompanies the development of its productive
power, labour keeps up and eternises an always increasing capital-value in a form ever new." [471 This
natural power of labour takes the appearance of an intrinsic property of capital, in which it is
incorporated, just as the productive forces of social labour take the appearance of inherent properties of
capital, and as the constant appropriation of surplus-labour by the capitalists, takes that of a constant
self-expansion of capital.

With the increase of capital, the difference between the capital employed and the capital consumed
increases, in other words, there is increase in the value and the material mass of the instruments of
labour, such as buildings, machinery, drain-pipes, working-cattle, apparatus of every kind that function
for a longer or shorter time in processes of production constantly repeated, or that serve for the
attainment of particular useful effects, whilst they themselves only gradually wear out, therefore only
lose their value piecemeal, therefore transfer that value to the product only bit by bit. In the same
proportion as these instruments of labour serve as product-formers without adding value to the product,
i.e., in the same proportion as they are wholly employed but only partly consumed, they perform, as we
saw earlier, the same gratuitous service as the natural forces, water, steam, air, electricity, etc. This
gratuitous service of past labour, when seized and filled with a soul by living labour, increases with the
advancing stages of accumulation.

Since past labour always disguises itself as capital, i.e, since the passive of the labour of A, B, C, etc.,
takes the form of the active of the non-labourer X, bourgeois and political economists are full of praises
of the services of dead and gone labour, which, according to the Scotch genius MacCulloch, ought to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (16 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

receive a special remuneration in the shape of interest, profit, etc. \48] The powerful and ever-increasing
assistance given by past labour to the living labour-process under the form of means of production is,
therefore, attributed to that form of past labour in which it is alienated, as unpaid labour, from the worker
himself, i.e, to its capitalistic form. The practical agents of capitalistic production and their pettifogging
ideologists are as unable to think of the means of production as separate from the antagonistic social
mask they wear to-day, as a slave-owner to think of the worker himself as distinct from his character as a
slave.

With a given degree of exploitation of labour-power, the mass of the surplus-value produced is
determined by the number of workers simultaneously exploited; and this corresponds, although in
varying proportions, with the magnitude of the capital. The more, therefore, capital increases by means
of successive accumulations, the more does the sum of the value increase that is divided into
consumption-fund and accumulation-fund. The capitalist can, therefore, live a more jolly life, and at the
same time show more "abstinence." And, finally, all the springs of production act with greater elasticity,
the more its scale extends with the mass of the capital advanced.



SECTION 5.

THE SO-CALLED LABOUR-FUND



It has been shown in the course of this inquiry that capital is not a fixed magnitude, but is a part of social
wealth, elastic and constantly fluctuating with the division of fresh surplus-value into revenue and
additional capital. It has been seen further that, even with a given magnitude of functioning capital, the
labour-power, the science, and the land (by which are to be understood, economically, all conditions of
labour furnished by Nature independently of man), embodied in it, form elastic powers of capital,
allowing it, within certain limits, a field of action independent of its own magnitude. In this inquiry we
have neglected all effects of the process of circulation, effects which may produce very different degrees
of efficiency in the same mass of capital. And as we pre-supposed the limits set by capitalist production,
that is to say, pre-supposed the process of social production in a form developed by purely spontaneous
growth, we neglected any more rational combination, directly and systematically practicable with the
means of production, and the mass of labour-power at present disposable. Classical economy always
loved to conceive social capital as a fixed magnitude of a fixed degree of efficiency. But this prejudice
was first established as a dogma by the arch-Philistine, Jeremy Bentham, that insipid, pedantic,
leather-tongued oracle of the ordinary bourgeois intelligence of the 19th century. f491 Bentham is among
philosophers what Martin Tupper is among poets. Both could only have been manufactured in England.
[501 In the light of his dogma the commonest phenomena of the process of production, as, e.g., its sudden
expansions and contractions, nay, even accumulation itself, become perfectly inconceivable. f511 The
dogma was used by Bentham himself, as well as by Malthus, James Mill, MacCulloch, etc., for an
apologetic purpose, and especially in order to represent one part of capital, namely, variable capital, or
that part convertible into labour-power, as a fixed magnitude. The material of variable capital, i.e, the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (17 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

mass of the means of subsistence it represents for the labourer, or the so-called labour-fund, was fabled
as a separate part of social wealth, fixed by natural laws and unchangeable. To set in motion the part of
social wealth which is to function as constant capital, or, to express it in a material form, as means of
production, a definite mass of living labour is required. This mass is given technologically. But neither is
the number of labourers required to render fluid this mass of labour-power given (it changes with the
degree of exploitation of the individual labour-power), nor is the price of this labour-power given, but
only its minimum limit, which is moreover very variable. The facts that lie at the bottom of this dogma
are these: on the one hand, the labourer has no right to interfere in the division of social wealth into
means of enjoyment for the non-labourer and means of production. f521 On the other hand, only in
favourable and exceptional cases, has he the power to enlarge the so-called labour-fund at the expense of
the "revenue" of the wealthy.

What silly tautology results from the attempt to represent the capitalistic limits of the labour-fund as its
natural and social limits may be seen, e.g., in Professor Fawcett. f531 "The circulating capital of a
country," he says, "is its wage-fund. Hence, if we desire to calculate the average money wages received
by each labourer, we have simply to divide the amount of this capital by the number of the labouring
population." f541 That is to say, we first add together the individual wages actually paid, and then we
affirm that the sum thus obtained, forms the total value of the "labour-fund" determined and vouchsafed
to us by God and Nature. Lastly, we divide the sum thus obtained by the number of labourers to find out
again how much may come to each on the average. An uncommonly knowing dodge this. It did not
prevent Mr. Fawcett saying in the same breath: "The aggregate wealth which is annually saved in
England, is divided into two portions; one portion is employed as capital to maintain our industry, and
the other portion is exported to foreign countries... Only a portion, and perhaps, not a large portion of the
wealth which is annually saved in this country, is invested in our own industry. f551

The greater part of the yearly accruing surplus-product, embezzled, because abstracted without return of
an equivalent, from the English labourer, is thus used as capital, not in England, but in foreign countries.
But with the additional capital thus exported, a part of the labour-fund" invented by God and Bentham is
also exported. f561



Footnotes

£11 "Accumulation of capital; the employment of a portion of revenue as capital." (Malthus: "Definitions,
&c," ed. Cazenove, p. 11.) "Conversion of revenue into capital," (Malthus: "Princ. of Pol. Econ " 2nd
Ed., Lond.. 1836, p. 320.)

\2] We here take no account of export trade, by means of which a nation can change articles of luxury
either into means of production or means of subsistence, and vice versa. In order to examine the object of
our investigation in its integrity, free from all disturbing subsidiary circumstances, we must treat the
whole world as one nation, and assume that capitalist production is everywhere established and has
possessed itself of every branch of industry.

\3] Sismondi's analysis of accumulation suffers from the great defect, that he contents himself, to too
great an extent, with the phrase "conversion of revenue into capital," without fathoming the material



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (18 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

conditions of this operation.

[41 "Le travail primitif auquelson capital a dii sa naissance." Sismondi, 1. c, ed. Paris, 1. 1., p. 109.

\5] "Labour creates capital before capital employs labour." E. G. Wakefield, "England and America,"
Lond., 1833, Vol. II, p. 110.

[61 The property of the capitalist in the product of the tabour of others "is a strict consequence of the law
of appropriation, the fundamental principle of which was, on the contrary, the exclusive title of every
labourer to the product of his own labour." (Cherbuliez, "Richesse ou Pauvreti," Paris, 1841, p. 58,
where, however, the dialectical reversal is not properly developed.)

[71 NOTE: The following passage (to p. 551 "laws of capitalist appropriation.") has been added to the
English text in conformity with the 4th German edition.

[81 We may well, therefore, feel astonished at the cleverness Of Proudhon, who would abolish
capitalistic property by enforcing the eternal laws of property that are based on commodity production!

[9J "Capital, viz., accumulated wealth employed with a view to profit." (Malthus, 1. c.) "Capital ...
consists of wealth saved from revenue, and used with a view to profit." (R. Jones: "An Introductory
Lecture on Polit. Econ.," Lond., 1833, p. 16.)

f 101 "The possessors of surplus-produce or capital." ("The Source and Remedy of the National
Difficulties. A Letter to Lord John Russell." Lond., 1821.)

fill "Capital, with compound interest on every portion of capital saved, is so all engrossing that all the
wealth in the world from which income is derived, has long ago become the interest on capital."
(London, Economist, 19th July, 1851.)

fl21 "No political economist of the present day can by saving mean.mere hoarding: and beyond this
contracted and insufficient proceeding, no use of the term in reference to the national wealth can well be
imagined,, but that which must arise from a different application of what is saved, founded upon a real
distinction between the different kinds of labour maintained by it." (Malthus, 1. c, pp. 38, 39.)

f 131 Thus for instance, Balzac, who so thoroughly studied every shade of avarice, represents the old
usurer Gobseck as in his second childhood when he begins to heap up a hoard of commodities.

f 141 "Accumulation of stocks ... upon-exchange ... over-production." (Th. Corbet. 1. c, p. 104.)

f 151 In this sense Necker speaks of the "objets de faste et de somptuosit6," of which "le temps a grossi
I'accuinulation," and which "les lois de propriata ont rassemblas dans une seule classe de la sociata."
(Oeuvres de M. Necker, Paris and Lausanne, 1789, t. ii., p. 291.)

[161 Ricardo, 1. C-, P- 163, note.

f 171 In spite of his "Logic," John St. Mill never detects even such faulty analysis as this when made by
his predecessors, an analysis which, even from the bourgeois standpoint of the science, cries out for
rectification. In every case he registers with the dogmatism of a disciple, the confusion of his master's
thoughts. So here: "The capital itself in the longrun becomes entirely wages, and when replaced by the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (19 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

sale of produce becomes wages again."

f 181 In his description of the process of reproduction, and of accumulation, Adam Smith, in many ways,
not only made no advance, but even lost considerable ground, compared with his predecessors, especially
by the Physiocrats. Connected with the illusion mentioned in the text, is the really wonderful dogma, left
by him as an inheritance to Political Economy, the dogma, that the price of commodities is made up of
wages, profit (interest) and rent, i.e., of wages and surplus- value. Starting from this basis, Storch naively
confesses, "II est impossible de rasoudre le prix n6cessaire dans ses alaments les plus simples." (Storch,
1. c, Petersb. Edit., 1815, t. ii., p. 141, note.) A fine science of economy this, which declares it impossible
to resolve the price of a commodity into its simplest elements ! This point will be further investigated in
the seventh part of Book iii.

fl91 The reader will notice, that the word revenue is used in a double sense: first, to designate
surplus-value so far as it is the fruit periodically yielded by capital; secondly, to designate the part of that
fruit which is periodically consumed by the capitalist, or added to the fund that supplies his private
consumption. I have retained this double meaning because it harmonises with the language of the English
and French economists.

r201 Taking the usurer, that old-fashioned but ever renewed specimen of the capitalist for his text, Luther
shows very aptly that the love of power is an element in the desire to get rich. "The heathen were able, by
the light of reason, to conclude that a usurer is a double-dyed thief and murderer. We Christians,
however, hold them in such honour, that we fairly worship them for the sake of their money.... Whoever
eats up, robs, and steals the nourishment of another, that man commits as great a murder (so far as in him
lies) as he who starves a man or utterly undoes him. Such does a usurer, and sits the while safe on his
stool, when he ought rather to be hanging on the gallows, and be eaten by as many ravens as he has
stolen guilders, if only there were so much flesh on him, that so many ravens could stick their beaks in
and share it. Meanwhile, we hang the small thieves.... Little thieves are put in the stocks, great thieves go
flaunting in gold and silk.... Therefore is there, on this earth, no greater enemy of man (after the devil)
than a gripe-money, and usurer, for he wants to be God over all men.Turks, soldiers, and tyrants are also
bad men, yet must they let the people live, and Confess that they are bad, and enemies, and do, nay,
must, now and then show pity to some. But a usurer and money-glutton, such a one would iiave the
whole world perish of hunger and thirst, misery and want, so far as in him lies, so that he may have all to
himself, and every one may receive from him as from a God, and be his serf for ever. To wear fine
cloaks, golden chains, Tings, to wipe his mouth, to be deemed and taken for a worthy, pious man ....
Usury is a great huge monster, like a werewolf, wbo lays waste all, more than any Cacus, Gerion or
Antus. And yet decks himself out, and would be thought pious, so that people may not see where the
oxen have gone, that he drags backwards into his den. But Hercules shall hear the cry of the oxen and of
his prisoners, and shall seek Cacus even in cliffs and among rocks, and shall set the oxen loose again
from the villain. For Cacus means the villain that is a pious usurer, and steals, robs, eats everything. And
will not own that he has done it, and thinks no one will find him out, because the oxen, drawn backwards
into his den, make it seem, from their foot-prints, that they have been let out. So the usurer would
deceive the world, as though he were of use and gave the world oxen,- which he, however, rends, and
eats all alone... And since we break on the wheel, and behead highwaymen, murderers and
housebreakers, how much more ought we to break on the wheel and kill.... hunt down, curse and behead
all usurers." (Martin Luther, 1. c.)

T211 See Goethe's "Faust."

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (20 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

f221 Dr. Aikin: "Description of the Country from 30 to 40 miles round Manchester." Lond., 1795, p. 182,
sq.

f231 A. Smith, 1. c, bk. iii., ch. iii.

f241 Even J. B. Say says: "Les apargnes des riches se font aux dapens des pauvres." "The Roman
proletarian lived almost entirely at the expense of society.... It can almost be said that modern society
lives at the expense of the proletarians, on what it keeps out of the remuneration of labour." (Sismondi:
"ttudes, &c," t. i., p. 24.)

[251 Malthus, 1. c, pp. 319, 320.

f261 "An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, &c," p. 67.

I27J 1. c, p. 59.

f281 (Senior, "Principes fondamentaux del'Econ. Pol." trad. Arrivabene. Paris, 1836, p. 308.) This was
rather too much for the adherents of the old classical school. "Mr. Senior has substituted for it" (the
expression, labour and,profit) "the expression labour and Abstinence. He who converts his revenue
abstains from the enjoyment which its expenditure would afford him. It is not the capital, but the use of
the capital productively, which is the cause of profits." (John Cazenove, 1. c, p. 130, Note.) John St. Mill,
on the contrary, accepts on the one hand Ricardo's theory of profit, and annexes on the other hand
Senior's "remuneration of abstinence." He is as much at home in absurd contradictions, as he feels at sea
in the Hegelian contradiction, the source of all dialectic. It has never occurred to the vulgar economist to
make the simple reftexion, that every human action may be viewed, as "abstinence" from its opposite.
Eating is abstinence from fasting, walking, abstinence from standing still, working, abstinence from
idling, idling, abstinence from working, &C. These gentlemen would do well, to ponder, once in a way,
over Spinoza's: "Determinatio est Negatio."

[29J Senior, 1. c, p. 342.

r301 "No one ... will sow his wheat, for instance, and allow it to remain a twelvle month in the ground, or
leave his wine in a cellar for years, instead of consuming these things or their equivalent at once ... unless
he expects to acquire additional value, &c." (Scrope, "Polit. Econ.," edit, by A. Potter, New York, 1841,
pp. 133-134.)

f3 11 "La privation que s'impose le capitalists, en pr6tant (this euphemism used, for the purpose of
identifying, according to the approved method of vulgar economy, the labourer who is exploited, with the
industrial capitalist who exploits, and to whom other capitalists lend money) ses instruments de
production au travailleur, au lieu d'en consacrer la valeur i son propre usage, en la transforment en objets
d'utilite ou d'agriment." (G. de Molinari, 1. c, p. 36.)

f321 "La conservation d'un capital exige ... un effort constant pour rasister a la tentation de le
consommer." (Courcelle-Seneuil, 1. c, p. 57.)

f331 "The particular classes of income which yield the most abundantly to the progress of national
capital, change at different stages of their progress, and are, therefore, entirely different in nations
occupying different positions in that progress.... Profits ... unimportant source of accumulation, compared



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (21 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

with wages and rents, in the earlier stages of society.... When a considerable advance in the powers of
national industry has actually taken place, profits rise into comparative importance as a source of
accumulation." (Richard Jones, "Textbook, &c," pp. 16, 21.)

[341 1. c, p. 36, sq.

f351 "Ricardo says: 'In different stages of society the accumulation of capital or of the means of
employing' (i.e., exploiting) labour is more or less rapid, and must in all cases depend on the productive
powers of labour. The productive powers of labour are generally greatest where there is an abundance of
fertile land.' If, in the first sentence, the productive powers of labour mean the smallness of that aliquot
part of any produce that goes to those whose manual labour produced it, the sentence is nearly identical,
because the remaining aliquot part is the fund whence capital can, if the owner pleases, be accumulated.
But then this does not generally happen, where there is most fertile land." ("Observations on Certain
Verbal Disputes, &c." pp. 74, 75.)

f361 J. Stuart Mill: "Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy," Lond., 1844, p. 90.

f371 "An Essay on Trade and Commerce," Lond., 1770, P. 44. The Times of December, 1866, and
January, 1867, in like manner published certain outpourings of the heart of the English mine-owner, in
which the happy lot of the Belgian miners was pictured, who asked and received no more than was
strictly necessary for them to live for their "masters." The Belgian labourers have to suffer much, but to
figure in The Times as model labourers! In the beginning of February, 1867, came the answer: strike of
the Belgian miners at Marchienne, put down by powder and lead.

[381 I.e., pp. 44,46.

f391 The Northamptonshire manufacturer commits a pious fraud, pardonable in one whose heart is so
full. He nominally compares the life of the English and French manufacturing labourer, but in the words
just quoted he is painting, as he himself confesses in his confused way, the French agricultural labourers.

KOI 1. c, pp. 70, 71. Note in the 3rd German edition: To-day, thanks to the competition on the
world-market, established since then, we have advanced much further. "If China," says Mr. Stapleton,
M.P., to his constituents, "should become a great manufacturing country, I do not see how the
manufacturing population of Europe could sustain the contest without descending to the level of their
competitors." {Times, Sept. 3, 1873, p. 8.) The wished-for goal of English capital is no longer Continental
wages but Chinese.

f411 Benjamin Thompson: "Essays, Political, Economical, and Philosophical, &c," 3 vols., Lond,
1796-1802, vol. i., p. 294. In his "The State of the Poor, or an History of the labouring Classes in
England, &c," Sir F. M. Eden strongly recommends the Rumfordian beggar-soup to workhouse
overseers, and reproachfully warns the English labourers that "many poor people, particularly in
Scotland, live, and that very comfortably, for months together, upon oat-meal and barley-meal, mixed
with only water and salt." (1. c, vol. i, book i., ch. 2, p. 503.) The same sort of hints in the 19th century.
"The most wholesome mixtures of flour having been refused (by the English agricultural labouTer)... in
Scotland, where education is better, this prejudice is, probably, unknown." (Charles H. Parry, M. D.,
"The Question of the Necessecity of the Existing Corn Laws Considered." London, 1816,, p. 69.) This
same Parry, however, complains that the English labourer is now (1815) in a much worse condition than
in Eden's time (1797.)

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (22 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

f421 From the reports of the last Parliamentary Commission on adulteration of means of subsistence, it
will be seen that the adulteration even of medicines is the rule, not the exception in England. E.g., the
examination of 34 specimens of opium, purchased of as many different chemists in London, showed that
31 were adulterated with poppy heads, wheat-flour, gum, clay, sand, &c. Several did not contain an atom
of morphia.

f431 G. B. Newnham (barrister- at-law): "A Review of the Evidence before the Committee of the two
Houses of Parliament on the Com Laws." Lond., 1815, p. 20, note.

[44J I.e., pp. 19,20.

f451 C. H. Parry, 1. c, pp. 77, 69. The landlords, on their side, not only "indemnified" themselves for the
Anti-Jacobin War, which they waged in the name of England, but enriched themselves enormously.
Their rents doubled, trebled, quadrupled, "and in one instance, increased sixfold in eighteen years." (I. c,
pp. 100, 101.)

f461 Friedrich Engels, "Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," p. 20.

f471 Classic economy has, on account of a deficient analysis of the labour-process, and of the process of
creating value-, never properly grasped this weighty element of reproduction, as may be seen in Ricardo;
he says, e.g., whatever the change in productive power, "a million men always produce in manufactures
the same value." This is accurate, if the extension and degree of Intensity of their labour are given. But it
does not prevent (this Ricardo overlooks in certain conclusions he draws) a million men with different
powers of productivity in their labour, turning into products very different masses of the means of
production, and therefore preserving in their products very different masses of value; in consequence of
which the values of the products yielded may vary considerably. Ricardo has, it may be noted in passing,
tried in vain to make clear to J. B. Say, by that very example, the difference between use-value (which he
here calls wealth or material riches) and exchange- value. Say answers: "Quant a la difficulte qu'eleve Mr.
Ricardo en disant que, par des precedes mieux entendus un million de personnes peuvent produire deux
fois, trois fois autant de richesses, sans produire plus de valeurs, cette difficulte n'est pas une lorsque Ton
considere, ainsi qu'on le doit, la production comme un echange dans lequel on donne les services
productifs de son travail, de sa terre, et de ses capitaux, pour obtenir des produits. C'est par le moyen de
ces services productifs, que nous acquerons tous les produits qui sont au monde. Or... nous sommes
d'autant plus riches, nos services productifs ont d'autant plus de valeur qu'ils obtiennent dans l'echange
appele production une plus grande quantite de choses utiles." (J. B. Say, "Lettres a M. Malthus," Paris,
1820, pp. 168, 169.) The "difficulte" — it exists for him, not for Ricardo — that Say means to clear up is
this: Why does not the exchange-value of the use- values increase, when their quantity increases in
consequence of increased productive power of labour? Answer: the difficulty is met by calling use-value,
exchange- value, if you please. Exchange-value is a thing that is connected one way or another with
exchange. If therefore production is called an exchange of labour and means of production against the
product, it is clear as day that you obtain more exchange-value in proportion as the production yields
more use-value. In other words, the more use-values, e.g., stockings, a working-day yields to the
stocking-manufacturer, the richer is he in stockings. Suddenly, however, Say recollects that "with a
greater quantity" of stockings their "price" (which of course has nothing to do with their
exchange-value!) falls "parce que la concurrence les (les producteurs) oblige a donner les produits pour
ce qu'its leur content... But whence does the profit come, if the capitalist sells the commodities at
cost-price? Never mind! Say declares that, in consequence of increased productivity, every one now

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (23 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

receives in return for a given equivalent two pairs of stockings instead of one as before. The result he
arrives at, is precisely that proposition of Ricardo that he aimed at disproving. After this mighty effort of
thought, he triumphantly apostrophises Malthus in the words: "Telle est, monsieur, la doctrine bien liee,
sates laquelle il est impossible, je le declare, d'expliquer les plus grandes difficultes de l'economie
politique, et notamment, comment il se peut qu'une nation soit plus riche lorsque ses produits diminuent
de valeur, quoique la richesse soit,de la valeur." (I. c, p. 170.) An English economist remarks upon the
conjuring tricks of the same nature that appear in Say's "Lettres": "Those affected ways of talking make
up in general that which M. Say is pleased to call his doctrine and which he earnestly urges Malthus to
teach at Hertford, as it is already taught 'dans plusieurs parties de I'Europe.' He says, 'Si vous trbuvez une
physionomie de paradoxe a toutes ces propositions, voyez les choses qu'elles expriment, et j'ose croire
queues vous paraitront fort simples et fort raisonnables.' Doubtless, and in consequence of the same
process, they will appear everything else, except original." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting
the Nature of Demand, &c," pp. 116, 110.)

f481 MacCulloch took out a patent for "wages of past labour," long before Senior did for "wages of
abstinence."

f491 Compare among others, Jeremy Bentham: "Theorie des Peines et des Recompenses," traduct. d'Et.
Dumont, 3eme edit. Paris, 1826, t. II, L. IV., ch. II.

f501 Bentham is a purely English phenomenon. Not even excepting our philosopher, Christian Wolff, in
no time and in no country has the most homespun commonplace ever strutted about in so self-satisfied a
way. The principle of utility was no discovery of Bentham. He simply reproduced in his dull way what
Helvetius and other Frenchmen had said with esprit in the 18th century. To know what is useful for a
dog, one must study dog-nature. This nature itself is not to be deduced from the principle of utility.
Applying this to man, he that would criticise all human acts, movements, relations, etc., by the principle
of utility, must first deal with human nature in general, and then with human nature as modified in each
historical epoch. Bentham makes short work of it. With the driest naivete he takes the modern
shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal man. Whatever is useful to this queer
normal man, and to his world, is absolutely useful. This yard-measure, then, he applies to past, present,
and future. The Christian religion, e.g., is "useful," "because it forbids in the name of religion the same
faults that the penal code condemns in the name of the law." Artistic criticism is "harmful," because it
disturbs worthy people in their enjoyment of Martin Tupper, etc. With such rubbish has the brave fellow,
with his motto, "nuila dies sine line!," piled up mountains of books. Had I the courage of my friend,
Heinrich Heine, I should call Mr. Jeremy a genius in the way of bourgeois stupidity.

f511 "Political economists are too apt to consider a certain quantity of capital and a certain number of
labourers as productive instruments of uniform power, or operating with a certain uniform intensity....
Those... who maintain ... that commodities are the sole agents of production ... -prove that production
could never be enlarged, for it requires as an indispensable condition to such an enlargement that food,
raw materials, and tools should be previously augmented; which is in fact maintaining that no increase of
production can take place without a previous increase, or, in other words, that an increase is impossible."
(S. Bailey: "Money and its Vicissitudes," pp. 58 and 70.) Bailey criticises the dogma mainly from the
point of view of the process of circulation.

f521 John Stuart Mill, in his "Principles of Political Economy," says: "The really exhausting and the
really repulsive labours instead of being better paid than others, are almost invariably paid the worst of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (24 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

all.... The more revolting the occupation, the more certain it is to receive the minimum of remuneration....
The hardships and the earnings, instead of being directly proportional, as in any just arrangements of
society they would be, are generally in an inverse ratio to one another." To avoid misunderstanding, let
me say that although men like John Stuart Mill are to blame for the contradiction between their
traditional economic dogmas and their modem tendencies, it would be very wrong to class them with the
herd of vulgar economic apologists.

f531 H. Fawcett, Professor of Political Economy at Cambridge. "The Economic position of the British
labourer." London, 1865, p. 120.

f541 1 must here remind the reader that the categories, "variable and constant capital," were first used by
me. Political Economy since the time of Adam Smith has confusedly mixed up the essential distinctions
involved in these categories, with the mere formal differences, arising out of the process of circulation, of
fixed and circulating capital. For further details on this point, see Book II., Part II.

[551 Fawcett, 1. c, pp. 122, 123.

f561 It might be said that not only capital, but also labourers, in the shape of emigrants, are annually
exported from England. In the text, however, there is no question of the peculium of the emigrants, who
are in great part not labourers. The sons of farmers make up a great part of them. The additional capital
annually transported abroad to be put out at interest is in much greater proportion to the annual
accumulation than the yearly emigration is to the yearly increase of population.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Five: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (25 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VII:

The Accumulation of Capital



CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE:

THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION

Contents

Section 1 - The Increased Demand for Labour-Power that Accompanies Accumulation, the Composition of Capital

Remaining the same

Section 2 - Relative Diminution of the Variable Part of Capital Simultaneously with the Progress of Accumulation and

of the Concentration that Accompanies it

Section 3 - Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus-Population or Industrial Reserve Army

Section 4 - Different Forms of the Relative Surplus-Population. The General Law of Capitalistic Accumulation

Section 5 - Illustrations of the General Law of Capitalist Accumulation

A. England from 1846-1866

B. The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class

C. The Nomad Population

D. Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working-Class

E. The British Agricultural Proletariat

F. Ireland

SECTION 1.

THE INCREASED DEMAND FOR LABOUR-POWER THAT ACCOMPANIES ACCUMULATION, THE
COMPOSITION OF CAPITAL REMAINING THE SAME



In this chapter we consider the influence of the growth of capital on the lot of the labouring class. The most important
factor in this inquiry is the composition of capital and the changes it undergoes in the course of the process of
accumulation.

The composition of capital is to be understood in a two-fold sense. On the side of value, it is determined by the
proportion in which it is divided into constant capital or value of the means of production, and variable capital or
value of labour-power, the sum total of wages. On the side of material, as it functions in the process of production, all
capital is divided into means of production and living labour-power. This latter composition is determined by the
relation between the mass of the means of production employed, on the one hand, and the mass of labour necessary for
their employment on the other. I call the former the value-composition, the latter the technical composition of capital.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (1 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Between the two there is a strict correlation. To express this, I call the value-composition of capital, in so far as it is
determined by its technical composition and mirrors the changes of the latter, the organic composition of capital.
Wherever I refer to the composition of capital, without further qualification, its organic composition is always
understood.

The many individual capitals invested in a particular branch of production have, one with another, more or less
different compositions. The average of their individual compositions gives us the composition of the total capital in
this branch of production. Lastly, the average of these averages, in all branches of production, gives us the
composition of the total social capital of a country, and with this alone are we, in the last resort, concerned in the
following investigation.

Growth of capital involves growth of its variable constituent or of the part invested in labour-power. A part of the
surplus-value turned into additional capital must always be re-transformed into variable capital, or additional
labour-fund. If we suppose that, all other circumstances remaining the same, the composition of capital also remains
constant (i.e., that a definite mass of means of production constantly needs the same mass of labour-power to set it in
motion), then the demand for labour and the subsistence-fund of the labourers clearly increase in the same proportion
as the capital, and the more rapidly, the more rapidly the capital increases. Since the capital produces yearly a
surplus- value, of which one part is yearly added to the original capital; since this increment itself grows yearly along
with the augmentation of the capital already functioning; since lastly, under special stimulus to enrichment, such as
the opening of new markets, or of new spheres for the outlay of capital in consequence of newly developed social
wants, &c, the scale of accumulation may be suddenly extended, merely by a change in the division of the
surplus-value or surplus-product into capital and revenue, the requirements of accumulating capital may exceed the
increase of labour-power or of the number of labourers; the demand for labourers may exceed the supply, and,
therefore, wages may rise. This must, indeed, ultimately be the case if the conditions supposed above continue. For
since in each year more labourers are employed than in its predecessor, sooner or later a point must be reached, at
which the requirements of accumulation begin to surpass the customary supply of labour, and, therefore, a rise of
wages takes place. A lamentation on this score was heard in England during the whole of the fifteenth, and the first
half of the eighteenth centuries. The more or less favourable circumstances in which the wage-working class supports
and multiplies itself, in no way alter the fundamental character of capitalist production. As simple reproduction
constantly reproduces the capital-relation itself, i.e., the relation of capitalists on the one hand, and wage-workers on
the other, so reproduction on a progressive scale, i.e., accumulation, reproduces the capital-relation on a progressive
scale, more capitalists or larger capitalists at this pole, more wage-workers at that. The reproduction of a mass of
labour-power, which must incessantly re-incorporate itself with capital for that capital's self-expansion; which cannot
get free from capital, and whose enslavement to capital is only concealed by the variety of individual capitalists to
whom it sells itself, this reproduction of labour-power forms, in fact, an essential of the reproduction of capital itself.
Accumulation of capital is, therefore, increase of the proletariat. J_1J

Classical economy grasped this fact so thoroughly that Adam Smith, Ricardo, &c, as mentioned earlier, inaccurately
identified accumulation with the consumption, by the productive labourers, of all the capitalised, part of the
surplus-product, or with its transformation into additional wage-labourers. As early as 1696 John Bellers says: "For if
one had a hundred thousand acres of land and as many pounds in money, and as many cattle, without a labourer, what
would the rich man be, but a labourer? And as the labourers make men rich, so the more labourers there will be, the
more rich men ... the labour of the poor being the mines of the rich." £2] So also Bernard de Mandeville at the
beginning of the eighteenth century: "It would be easier, where property is well secured, to live without money than
without poor; for who would do the work? ... As they [the poor] ought to be kept from starving, so they should receive
nothing worth saving. If here and there one of the lowest class by uncommon industry, and pinching his belly, lifts
himself above the condition he was brought up in, nobody ought to hinder him; nay, it is undeniably the wisest course
for every person in the society, and for every private family to be frugal; but it is the interest of all rich nations, that
the greatest part of the poor-should almost never be idle, and yet continually spend what they get.... Those that get
their living by their daily labour ... have nothing to stir them up to be serviceable but their wants which it is prudence
to relieve, but folly to cure. The only thing then that can render the labouring man industrious, is a moderate quantity
of money, for as too little will, according as his temper is, either dispirit or make him desperate, so too much will

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (2 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

make him insolent and lazy.... From what has been said, it is manifest, that, in a free nation, where slaves are not
allowed of, the surest wealth consists in a multitude of laborious poor; for besides, that they are the never-failing
nursery of fleets and armies, without them there could be no enjoyment, and no product of any country could be
valuable. "To make the society" [which of course consists of non-workers] "happy and people easier under the
meanest circumstances, it is requisite that great numbers of them should be ignorant as well as poor; knowledge both
enlarges and multiplies our desires, and the fewer things a man wishes for, the more easily his necessities may be
supplied." [3] What Mandeville, an honest, clear-headed man, had not yet seen, is that the mechanism of the process
of accumulation itself increases, along with the capital, the mass of "labouring poor," i.e., the wage-labourers, who
turn their labour-power into an increasing power of self-expansion of the growing capital, and even by doing so must
eternise their dependent relation on their own product, as personified in the capitalists. In reference to this relation of
dependence, Sir F. M. Eden in his "The State of the Poor, an History of the Labouring Classes in England," says, "the
natural produce of our soil is certainly not fully adequate to our subsistence; we can neither be clothed, lodged nor fed
but in consequence of some previous labour. A portion at least of the society must be indefatigably employed ....
There are others who, though they 'neither toil nor spin,' can yet command the produce of industry, but who owe their
exemption from labour solely to civilisation and order .... They are peculiarly the creatures of civil institutions, [4]
which have recognised that individuals may acquire property by various other means besides the exertion of labour....
Persons of independent fortune ... owe their superior advantages by no means to any superior abilities of their own,
but almost entirely ... to the industry of others. It is not the possession of land, or of money, but the command of
labour which distinguishes the opulent from the labouring part of the community .... This [scheme approved by Eden]
would give the people of property sufficient (but by no means too much) influence and authority over those who ...
work for them; and it would place such labourers, not in an abject or servile condition, but in such a state of easy and
liberal dependence as all who know human nature, and its history, will allow to be necessary for their own comfort."
[5] Sir F. M. Eden, it may be remarked in passing, is the only disciple of Adam Smith during the eighteenth century
that produced any work of importance. [6]

Under the conditions of accumulation supposed thus far, which conditions are those most favourable to the labourers,
their relation of dependence upon capital takes on a form endurable or, as Eden says: "easy and liberal." Instead of
becoming more intensive with the growth of capital, this relation of dependence only becomes more extensive, i.e., the
sphere of capital's exploitation and rule merely extends with its own dimensions and the number of its subjects. A
larger part of their own surplus-product, always increasing and continually transformed into additional capital, comes
back to them in the shape of means of payment, so that they can extend the circle of their enjoyments; can make some
additions to their consumption-fund of clothes, furniture, &c, and can lay by small reserve-funds of money. But just
as little as better clothing, food, and treatment, and a larger peculium, do away with the exploitation of the slave, so
little do they set aside that of the wage- worker. A rise in the price of labour, as a consequence of accumulation of
capital, only means, in fact, that the length and weight of the golden chain the wage-worker has already forged for
himself, allow of a relaxation of the tension of it. In the controversies on this subject the chief fact has generally been
overlooked, viz., the differentia specifica of capitalistic production. Labour-power is sold to-day, not with a view of
satisfying, by its service or by its product, the personal needs of the buyer. His aim is augmentation of his capital,
production of commodities containing more labour than he pays for, containing therefore a portion of value that costs
him nothing, and that is nevertheless realised when the commodities are sold. Production of surplus-value is the
absolute law of this mode of production. Labour-power is only saleable so far as it preserves the means of production
in their capacity of capital, reproduces its own value as capital, and yields in unpaid labour a source of additional
capital. [7] The conditions of its sale, whether more or less favourable to the labourer, include therefore the necessity
of its constant re-selling, and the constantly extended reproduction of all wealth in the shape of capital. Wages, as we
have seen, by their very nature, always imply the performance of a certain quantity of unpaid labour on the part of the
labourer. Altogether, irrespective of the case of a rise of wages with a falling price of labour, &c, such an increase
only means at best a quantitative diminution of the unpaid labour that the worker has to supply. This diminution can
never reach the point at which it would threaten the system itself. Apart from violent conflicts as to the rate of wages
(and Adam Smith has already shown that in such a conflict, taken on the whole, the master is always master), a rise in
the price of labour resulting from accumulation of capital implies the following alternative:



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (3 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Either the price of labour keeps on rising, because its rise does not interfere with the progress of accumulation. In this
there is nothing wonderful, for, says Adam Smith, "after these (profits) are diminished, stock may not only continue to
increase, but to increase much faster than before.... A great stock, though with small profits, generally increases faster
than a small stock with great profits." (1. c, ii, p. 189.) In this case it is evident that a diminution in the unpaid labour
in no way interferes with the extension of the domain of capital. — Or, on the other hand, accumulation slackens in
consequence of the rise in the price of labour, because the stimulus of gain is blunted. The rate of accumulation
lessens; but with its lessening, the primary cause of that lessening vanishes, i.e., the disproportion between capital and
exploitable labour-power. The mechanism of the process of capitalist production removes the very obstacles that it
temporarily creates. The price of labour falls again to a level corresponding with the needs of the self-expansion of
capital, whether the level be below, the same as, or above the one which was normal before the rise of wages took
place. We see thus: In the first case, it is not the diminished rate either of the absolute, or of the proportional, increase
in labour-power, or labouring population, which causes capital to be in excess, but conversely the excess of capital
that makes exploitable labour-power insufficient. In the second case, it is not the increased rate either of the absolute,
or of the proportional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, that makes capital insufficient; but,
conversely, the relative diminution of capital that causes the exploitable labour-power, or rather its price, to be in
excess. It is these absolute movements of the accumulation of capital which are reflected as relative movements of the
mass of exploitable labour-power, and therefore seem produced by the latter's own independent movement. To put it
mathematically: the rate of accumulation is the independent, not the dependent, variable; the rate of wages, the
dependent, not the independent, variable. Thus, when the industrial cycle is in the phase of crisis, a general fall in the
price of commodities is expressed as a rise in the value of money, and, in the phase of prosperity, a general rise in the
price of commodities, as a fall in the value of money. The so-called currency school concludes from this that with high
prices too much, with low prices too little [8] money is in circulation. Their ignorance and complete misunderstanding
of facts [9] are worthily paralleled by the economists, who interpret the above phenomena of accumulation by saying
that there are now too few, now too many wage-labourers.

The law of capitalist production, that is at the bottom of the pretended "natural law of population," reduces itself
simply to this: The correlation between accumulation of capital and rate of wages is nothing else than the correlation
between the unpaid labour transformed into capital, and the additional paid labour necessary for the setting in motion
of this additional capital. It is therefore in no way a relation between two magnitudes, independent one of the other: on
the one hand, the magnitude of the capital; on the other, the number of the labouring population; it is rather, at bottom,
only the relation between the unpaid and the paid labour of the same labouring population. If the quantity of unpaid
labour supplied by the working-class, and accumulated by the capitalist class, increases so rapidly that its conversion
into capital requires an extraordinary addition of paid labour, then wages rise, and, all other circumstances remaining
equal, the unpaid labour diminishes in proportion. But. as soon as this diminution touches the point at which the
surplus-labour that nourishes capital is no longer supplied in normal quantity, a reaction sets in: a smaller part of
revenue is capitalised accumulation lags, and the movement of rise in wages receives a check. The rise of wages
therefore is confined within limits that not only leave intact the foundations of the capitalistic system, but also secure
its reproduction on a progressive scale. The law of capitalistic accumulation, metamorphosed by economists into
pretended law of Nature, in reality merely states that the very nature of accumulation excludes every diminution in the
degree of exploitation of labour, and every rise in the price of labour, which could seriously imperil the continual
reproduction, on an ever-enlarging scale, of the capitalistic relation. It cannot be otherwise in a mode of production in
which the labourer exists to satisfy the needs of self-expansion of existing values, instead of, on the contrary, material
wealth existing to satisfy the needs of development on the part of the labourer. As, in religion, man is governed by the
products of his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is governed by the products of his own hand. [101



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (4 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

SECTION 2.

RELATIVE DIMINUTION OF THE VARIABLE PART OF CAPITAL SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE
PROGRESS OF ACCUMULATION AND OF THE CONCENTRATION THAT ACCOMPANIES IT



According to the economists themselves, it is neither the actual extent of social wealth, nor the magnitude of the
capital already functioning, that lead to a rise of wages, but only the constant growth of accumulation and the degree
of rapidity of that growth. (Adam Smith, Book L, chapter 8.) So far, we have only considered one special phase of this
process, that in which the increase of capital occurs along with a constant technical composition of capital. But the
process goes beyond this phase.

Once given the general basis of the capitalistic system, then, in the course of accumulation, a point is reached at which
the development of the productivity of social labour becomes the most powerful lever of accumulation. "The same
cause," says Adam Smith, "which raises the wages of labour, the increase of stock, tends to increase its productive
powers, and to make a smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work."

Apart from natural conditions, such as fertility of the soil, &C, and from the skill of independent and isolated
producers (shown rather qualitatively in the goodness than quantitatively in the mass of their products), the degree of
productivity of labour, in a given society, is expressed in the relative extent of the means of production that one
labourer, during a given time, with the same tension of labour-power, turns into products. The mass of the means of
production which he thus transforms, increases with the productiveness of his labour. But those means of production
play a double part. The increase of some is a consequence, that of the others a condition of the increasing productivity
of labour. E.g., with the division of labour in manufacture, and with the use of machinery, more raw material is
worked up in the same time, and, therefore, a greater mass of raw material and auxiliary substances enter into the
labour-process. That is the consequence of the increasing productivity of labour. On the other hand, the mass of
machinery, beasts of burden, mineral manures, drain-pipes, &c, is a condition of the increasing productivity of labour.
So also is it with the means of production concentrated in buildings, furnaces, means of transport, &c. But whether
condition or consequence, the growing extent of the means of production, as compared with the labour-power
incorporated with them, is an expression of the growing productiveness of labour. The increase of the latter appears,
therefore, in the diminution of the mass of labour in proportion to the mass of means of production moved by it, or in
the diminution of the subjective factor of the labour-process as compared with the objective factor.

This change in the technical composition of capital, this growth in the mass of means of production, as compared with
the mass of the labour-power that vivifies them, is reflected again in its value-composition, by the increase of the
constant constituent of capital at the expense of its variable constituent. There may be, e.g., originally 50 per cent, of a
capital laid out in means of production, and 50 per cent, in labour-power; later on, with the development of the
productivity of labour, 80 per cent, in means of production, 20 per cent, in labour-power, and so on. This law of the
progressive increase in constant capital, in proportion to the variable, is confirmed at every step (as already shown) by
the comparative analysis of the prices of commodities, whether we compare different economic epochs or different
nations in the same epoch. The relative magnitude of the element of price, which represents the value of the means of
production only, or the constant part of capital consumed, is in direct, the relative magnitude of the other element of
price that pays labour (the variable part of capital) is in inverse proportion to the advance of accumulation.

This diminution in the variable part of capital as compared with the constant, or the altered value-composition of the
capital, however, only shows approximately the change in the composition of its material constituents. If, e.g., the
capital-value employed to-day in spinning is 7/8 constant and 1/8 variable, whilst at the beginning of the 18th century
it was 1/2 constant and 1/2 variable, on the other hand, the mass of raw material, instruments of labour, &c, that a
certain quantity of spinning labour consumes productively to-day, is many hundred times greater than at the beginning
of the 18th century. The reason is simply that, with the increasing productivity of labour, not only does the mass of the
means of production consumed by it increase, but their value compared with their mass diminishes. Their value

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (5 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

therefore rises absolutely, but not in proportion to their mass. The increase of the difference between constant and
variable capital, is, therefore, much less than that of the difference between the mass of the means of production into
which the constant, and the mass of the labour-power into which the variable, capital is converted. The former
difference increases with the latter, but in a smaller degree.

But, if the progress of accumulation lessens the relative magnitude of the variable part of capital, it by no means, in
doing this, excludes the possibility of a rise in its absolute magnitude. Suppose that a capital-value at first is divided
into 50 per cent, of constant and 50 per cent, of variable capital; later into 80 per cent, of constant and 20 per cent, of
variable. If in the meantime the original capital, say £6,000, has increased to £18,000, its variable constituent has also
increased. It was £3,000, it is now £3,600. But where as formerly an increase of capital by 20 per cent, would have
sufficed to raise the demand for labour 20 per cent., now this latter rise requires a tripling of the original capital.

In Part IV. it was shown, how the development of the productiveness of social labour pre-supposes co-operation on a
large scale; how it is only upon this supposition that division and combination of labour can be organised, and the
means of production economised by concentration on a vast scale; how instruments of labour which, from their very
nature, are only fit for use in common, such as a system of machinery, can be called into being; how huge natural
forces can be pressed into the service of production; and how the transformation can be effected of the process of
production into a technological application of science. On the basis of the production of commodities, where the
means of production are the property of private persons, and where the artisan therefore either produces commodities,
isolated from and independent of others, or sells his labour-power as a commodity, because he lacks the means for
independent industry, co-operation on a large scale can realise itself only in the increase of individual capitals, only in
proportion as the -means of social production and the means of subsistence are transformed into the private property
of capitalists. The basis of the production of commodities can admit of production on a large scale in the capitalistic
form alone. A certain accumulation of capital, in the hands of individual producers of commodities, forms therefore
the necessary preliminary of the specifically capitalistic mode of production. We had, therefore, to assume that this
occurs during the transition from handicraft to capitalistic industry. It may be called primitive accumulation, because it
is the historic basis, instead of the historic result of specifically capitalist production. How it itself originates, we need
not here inquire as yet. It is enough that it forms the starting-point. But all methods for raising the social productive
power of labour that are developed on this basis, are at the same time methods for the increased production of
surplus-value or surplus-product, which in its turn is the formative element of accumulation. They are, therefore, at the
same time methods of the production of capital by capital, or methods of its accelerated accumulation. The continual
re-transformation of surplus-value into capital now appears in the shape of the increasing magnitude of the capital that
enters into the process of production. This in turn is the basis of an extended scale of production, of the methods for
raising the productive power of labour that accompany it, and of accelerated production of surplus-value. If, therefore,
a certain degree of accumulation of capital appears as a condition of the specifically capitalist mode of production, the
latter causes conversely an accelerated accumulation of capital. With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the
specifically capitalistic mode of production develops, and with the capitalist mode of production the accumulation of
capital. Both these economic factors bring about, in the compound ratio of the impulses they reciprocally give one
another, that change in the technical composition of capital by which the variable constituent becomes always smaller
and smaller as compared with the constant.

Every individual capital is a larger or smaller concentration of means of production, with a corresponding command
over a larger or smaller labour-army. Every accumulation becomes the means of new accumulation. With the
increasing mass of wealth which functions as capital, accumulation increases the concentration of that wealth in the
hands of individual capitalists, and thereby widens the basis of production on a large scale and of the specific methods
of capitalist production. The growth of social capital is effected by the growth of many individual capitals. All other
circumstances remaining the same, individual capitals, and with them the concentration of the means of production,
increase in such proportion as they form aliquot parts of the total social capital. At the same time portions of the
original capitals disengage themselves and function as new independent capitals. Besides other causes, the division of
property, within capitalist families, plays a great part in this. With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the number
of capitalists grows to a greater or less extent. Two points characterise this kind of concentration which grows directly
out of, or rather is identical with, accumulation. First: The increasing concentration of the social means of production



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (6 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

in the hands of individual capitalists is, other things remaining equal, limited by the degree of increase of social
wealth. Second: The part of social capital domiciled in each particular sphere of production is divided among many
capitalists who face one another as independent commodity-producers competing with each other. Accumulation and
the concentration accompanying it are, therefore, not only scattered over many points, but the increase of each
functioning capital is thwarted by the formation of new and the sub-division of old capitals. Accumulation, therefore,
presents itself on the one hand as increasing concentration of the means of production, and of the command over
labour; on the other, as repulsion of many individual capitals one from another.

This splitting-up of the total social capital into many individual capitals or the repulsion of its fractions one from
another, is counteracted by their attraction. This last does not mean that simple concentration of the means of
production and of the command over labour, which is identical with accumulation. It is concentration of capitals
already formed, destruction of their individual independence, expropriation of capitalist by capitalist, transformation
of many small into few large capitals. This process differs from the former in this, that it only pre-supposes a change
in the distribution of capital already to hand, and functioning; its field of action is therefore not limited by the absolute
growth of social wealth, by the absolute limits of accumulation. Capital grows in one place to a huge mass in a single
hand, because it has in another place been lost by many. This is centralisation proper, as distinct from accumulation
and concentration.

The laws of this centralisation of capitals, or of the attraction of capital by capital, cannot be developed here. A brief
hint at a few facts must suffice. The battle of competition is fought by cheapening of commodities. The cheapness of
commodities demands, caeteris paribus, on the productiveness of labour, and this again on the scale of production.
Therefore, the larger capitals beat the smaller. It will further be remembered that, with the development of the
capitalist mode of production, there is an increase in the minimum amount of individual capital necessary to carry on a
business under its normal conditions. The smaller capitals, therefore, crowd into spheres of production which Modern
Industry has only sporadically or incompletely got hold of. Here competition rages in direct proportion to the number,
and in inverse proportion to the magnitudes, of the antagonistic capitals. It always ends in the ruin of many small
capitalists, whose capitals partly pass into the hands of their conquerors, partly vanish. Apart from this, with capitalist
production an altogether new force comes into play — the credit system, which in its first stages furtively creeps in as
the humble assistant of accumulation, drawing into the hands of individual or associated capitalists, by invisible
threads, the money resources which lie scattered, over the surface of society, in larger or smaller amounts; but it soon
becomes a new and terrible weapon in the battle of competition and is finally transformed into an enormous social
mechanism for the centralisation of capitals.

Commensurately with the development of capitalist production and accumulation there develop the two most powerful
levers of centralisation — competition and credit. At the same time the progress of accumulation increases the
material amenable to centralisation, i.e., the individual capitals, whilst the expansion of capitalist production creates,
on the one hand, the social want, and, on the other, the technical means necessary for those immense industrial
undertakings which require a previous centralisation of capital for their accomplishment. To-day, therefore, the force
of attraction, drawing together individual capitals, and the tendency to centralisation are stronger than ever before. But
if the relative extension and energy of the movement towards centralisation is determined, in a certain degree, by the
magnitude of capitalist wealth and superiority of economic mechanism already attained, progress in centralisation
does not in any way depend upon a positive growth in the magnitude of social capital. And this is the specific
difference between centralisation and concentration, the latter being only another name for reproduction on an
extended scale. Centralisation may result from a mere change in the distribution of capitals already existing,from a
simple alteration in the quantitative grouping of the component parts of social capital. Here capital can grow into
powerful masses in a single hand because there it has been withdrawn from many individual hands. In any given
branch of industry centralisation would reach its extreme limit if all the individual capitals invested in it were fused
into a single capital. [121 In a, given society the limit would be reached only when the entire social capital was united
in the hands of either a single capitalist or a single capitalist company.

Centralisation completes the work of accumulation by enabling industrial capitalists to extend the scale of their
operations. Whether this latter result is the consequence of accumulation or centralisation, whether centralisation is
accomplished by the violent method of annexation — when certain capitals become such preponderant centres of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (7 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

attraction for others that they shatter the individual cohesion of the latter and then draw the separate fragments to
themselves — or whether the fusion of a number of capitals already formed or in process of formation takes place by
the smoother process of organising joint-stock companies — the economic effect remains the same. Everywhere the
increased scale of industrial establishments is the starting-point for a more comprehensive organisation of the
collective work of many, for a wider development of their material motive forces — in other words, for the
progressive transformation of isolated processes of production, carried on by customary methods, into processes of
production socially combined and scientifically arranged.

But accumulation, the gradual increase of capital by reproduction as it passes from the circular to the spiral form, is
clearly a very slow procedure compared with centralisation, which has only to change the quantitative groupings of
the constituent parts of social capital. The world would still be without railways if it had had to wait until
accumulation had got a few individual capitals far enough to be adequate for the construction of a railway.
Centralisation, on the contrary, accomplished this in the twinkling of an eye, by means of joint-stock companies. And
whilst centralisation thus intensifies and accelerates the effects of accumulation, it simultaneously extends and speeds
those revolutions in the technical composition of capital which raise its constant portion at the expense of its variable
portion, thus diminishing the relative demand for labour.

The masses of capital fused together overnight by centralisation reproduce and multiply as the others do, only more
rapidly, thereby becoming new and powerful levers in social accumulation. Therefore, when we speak of the progress
of social accumulation we tacitly include — to-day — the effects of centralisation.

The additional capitals formed in the normal course of accumulation (see Chapter XXIV, Section 1) serve particularly
as vehicles for the exploitation of new inventions and discoveries, and industrial improvements in general. But in time
the old capital also reaches the moment of renewal from top to toe, when it sheds its skin and is reborn like the others
in a perfected technical form, in which a smaller quantity of labour will suffice to set in motion a larger quantity of
machinery and raw materials. The absolute reduction in the demand for labour which necessarily follows from this is
obviously so much the greater the higher the degree in which the capitals undergoing this process of renewal are
already massed together by virtue of the centralisation movement.

On the one hand, therefore, the additional capital formed in the course of accumulation attracts fewer and fewer
labourers in proportion to its magnitude. On the other hand, the old capital periodically reproduced with change of
composition, repels more and more of the labourers formerly employed by it.



SECTION 3.

PROGRESSIVE PRODUCTION OF A RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION OR INDUSTRIAL RESERVE
ARMY



The accumulation of capital, though originally appearing as its quantitative extension only, is effected, as we have
seen, under a progressive qualitative change in its composition, under a constant increase of its constant, at the
expense of its variable constituent. [131

The specifically capitalist mode of production, the development of the productive power of labour corresponding to it,
and the change thence resulting in the organic composition of capital, do not merely keep pace with the advance of
accumulation, or with the growth of social wealth. They develop at a much quicker rate, because mere accumulation,
the absolute increase of the total social capital, is accompanied by the centralisation of the individual capitals of which
that total is made up; and because the change in the technological composition of the additional capital goes hand in
hand with a similar change in the technological composition of the original capital. With the advance of accumulation,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (8 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

therefore, the proportion of constant to variable capital changes. If it was originally say 1:1, it now becomes
successively 2:1, 3:1, 4:1, 5:1, 7:1, &c, so that, as the capital increases, instead of 1/2 of its total value, only 1/3, 1/4,
1/5, 1/6, 1/8, &c, is transformed into labour-power, and, on the other hand, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, 5/6, 7/8 into means of
production. Since the demand for labour is determined not by the amount of capital as a whole, but by its variable
constituent alone, that demand falls progressively with the increase of the total capital, instead of, as previously
assumed, rising in proportion to it. It falls relatively to the magnitude of the total capital, and at an accelerated rate, as
this magnitude increases. With the growth of the total capital, its variable constituent or the labour incorporated in it,
also does increase, but in a constantly diminishing proportion. The intermediate pauses are shortened, in which
accumulation works as simple extension of production, on a given technical basis. It is not merely that an accelerated
accumulation of total capital, accelerated in a constantly growing progression, is needed to absorb an additional
number of labourers, or even, on account of the constant metamorphosis of old capital, to keep employed those
already functioning. In its turn, this increasing accumulation and centralisation becomes a source of new changes in
the composition of capital, of a more accelerated diminution of its variable, as compared with its constant constituent.
This accelerated relative diminution of the variable constituent, that goes along with the accelerated increase of the
total capital, and moves more rapidly than this increase, takes the inverse form, at the other pole, of an apparently
absolute increase of the labouring population, an increase always moving more rapidly than that of the variable capital
or the means of employment. But in fact, it is capitalistic accumulation itself that constantly produces, and produces in
the direct ratio of its own energy and extent, a relativity redundant population of labourers, i.e., a population of greater
extent than suffices for the average needs of the self-expansion of capital, and therefore a surplus-population.

Considering the social capital in its totality, the movement of its accumulation now causes periodical changes,
affecting it more or less as a whole, now distributes its various phases simultaneously over the different spheres of
production. In some spheres a change in the composition of capital occurs without increase of its absolute magnitude,
as a consequence of simple centralisation; in others the absolute growth of capital is connected with absolute
diminution of its variable constituent, or of the labour-power absorbed by it; in others again, capital continues growing
for a time on its given technical basis, and attracts additional labour-power in proportion to its increase, while at other
times it undergoes organic change, and lessens its variable constituent; in all spheres, the increase of the variable part
of capital, and therefore of the number of labourers employed by it, is always connected with violent fluctuations and
transitory production of surplus-population, whether this takes the more striking form of the repulsion of labourers
already employed, or the less evident but not less real form of the more difficult absorption of the additional labouring
population through the usual channels. [141 With the magnitude of social capital already functioning, and the degree
of its increase, with the extension of the scale of production, and the mass of the labourers set in motion, with the
development of the productiveness of their labour, with the greater breadth and fulness of all sources of wealth, there
is also an extension of the scale on which greater attraction of labourers by capital is accompanied by their greater
repulsion; the rapidity of the change in the organic composition of capital, and in its technical form increases, and an
increasing number of spheres of production becomes involved in this change, now simultaneously, now alternately.
The labouring population therefore produces, along with the accumulation of capital produced by it, the means by
which it itself is made relatively superfluous, is turned into a relative surplus-population; and it does this to an always
increasing extent. [151 This is a law of population peculiar to the capitalist mode of production; and in fact every
special historic mode of production has its own special laws of population, historically valid within its limits and only
in so far as man has not interfered with them.

But if a surplus labouring population is a necessary product of accumulation or of the development of wealth on a
capitalist basis, this surplus-population becomes, conversely, the lever of capitalistic accumulation, nay, a condition of
existence of the capitalist mode of production. It forms a disposable industrial reserve army, that belongs to capital
quite as absolutely as if the latter had bred it at its own cost. Independently of the limits of the actual increase of
population, it creates, for the changing needs of the self-expansion of capital, a mass of human material always ready
for exploitation. With accumulation, and the development of the productiveness of labour that accompanies it, the
power of sudden expansion of capital grows also; it grows, not merely because the elasticity of the capital already
functioning increases, not merely because the absolute wealth of society expands, of which capital only forms an
elastic part, not merely because credit, under every special stimulus, at once places an unusual part of this wealth at
the disposal of production in the form of additional capital; it grows, also, because the technical conditions of the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (9 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

process of production themselves — machinery, means of transport, &c. — now admit of the rapidest transformation
of masses of surplus-product into additional means of production. The mass of social wealth, overflowing with the
advance of accumulation, and transformable into additional capital, thrusts itself frantically into old branches of
production, whose market suddenly expands, or into newly formed branches, such as railways, &c, the need for
which grows out of the development of the old ones. In all such cases, there must be the possibility of throwing great
masses of men suddenly on the decisive points without injury to the scale of production in other spheres.
Overpopulation supplies these masses. The course characteristic of modern industry, viz., a decennial cycle
(interrupted by smaller oscillations), of periods of average activity, production at high pressure, crisis and stagnation,
depends on the constant formation, the greater or less absorption, and the re-formation of the industrial reserve army
or surplus-population. In their turn, the varying phases of the industrial cycle recruit the surplus-population, and
become one of the most energetic agents of its reproduction. This peculiar course of modem industry, which occurs in
no earlier period of human history, was also impossible in the childhood of capitalist production. The composition of
capital changed but very slowly. With its accumulation, therefore, there kept pace, on the whole, a corresponding
growth in the demand for labour. Slow as was the advance of accumulation compared with that of more modem times,
it found a check in the natural limits of the exploitable labouring population, limits which could only be got rid of by
forcible means to be mentioned later. The expansion by fits and starts of the scale of production is the preliminary to
its equally sudden contraction; the latter again evokes the former, but the former is impossible without disposable
human material, without an increase, in the number of labourers independently of the absolute growth of the
population. This increase is effected by the simple process that constantly "sets free" a part of the labourers; by
methods which lessen the number of labourers employed in proportion to the increased production. The whole form of
the movement of modem industry depends, therefore, upon the constant transformation of a part of the labouring
population into unemployed or half-employed hands. The superficiality of Political Economy shows itself in the fact
that it looks upon the expansion and contraction of credit, which is a mere symptom of the periodic changes of the
industrial cycle, as their cause. As the heavenly bodies, once thrown into a certain definite motion, always repeat this,
so is it with social production as soon as it is once thrown into this movement of alternate expansion and contraction.
Effects, in their turn, become causes, and the varying accidents of the whole process, which always reproduces its own
conditions, take on the form of periodicity. When this periodicity is once consolidated, even Political Economy then
sees that the production of a relative surplus-population — i.e., surplus with regard to the average needs of the
self-expansion of capital — is a necessary condition of modern industry.

"Suppose," says H. Merivale, formerly Professor of Political Economy at Oxford, subsequently employed in the
English Colonial Office, "suppose that, on the occasion of some of these crises, the nation were to rouse itself to the
effort of getting rid by emigration of some hundreds of thousands of superfluous arms, what would be the
consequence? That, at the first returning demand for labour, there would be a deficiency. However rapid reproduction
may be, it takes, at all events, the space of a generation to replace the loss of adult labour. Now, the profits of our
manufacturers depend mainly on the power of making' use of the prosperous moment when demand is brisk, and thus
compensating themselves for the interval during which it is slack. This power is secured to them only by the command
of machinery and of manual labour. They must have hands ready by them, they must be able to increase the activity of
their operations when required, and to slacken it again, according to the state of the market, or they cannot possibly
maintain that pre-eminence in the race of competition on which the wealth of the country is founded." [T61 Even
Malthus recognises overpopulation as a necessity of modem industry, though, after his narrow fashion, he explains it
by the absolute over-growth of the labouring population, not by their becoming relatively supernumerary. He says:
"Prudential habits with regard to marriage, carried to a considerable extent among the labouring class of a country
mainly depending upon manufactures and commerce, might injure it.... From the nature of a population, an increase of
labourers cannot be brought into market in consequence of a particular demand till after the lapse of 16 or 18 years,
and the conversion of revenue into capital, by saving, may take place much more rapidly: a country is always liable to
an increase in the quantity of the funds for the maintenance of labour faster than the increase of population." [171
After Political Economy has thus demonstrated the constant production of a relative surplus-population of labourers to
be a necessity of capitalistic accumulation, she very aptly, in the guise of an old maid, puts in the mouth of her "beau
ideal" of a capitalist the following words addressed to those supernumeraries thrown on the streets by their own
creation of additional capital: — "We manufacturers do what we can for you, whilst we are increasing that capital on



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (10 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five
which you must subsist, and you must do the rest by accommodating your numbers to the means of subsistence." [181

Capitalist production can by no means content itself with the quantity of disposable labour-power which the natural
increase of population yields. It requires for its free play an industrial reserve army independent of these natural limits.

Up to this point it has been assumed that the increase or diminution of the variable capital corresponds rigidly with the
increase or diminution of the number of labourers employed.

The number of labourers commanded by capital may remain the same, or even fall, while the variable capital
increases. This is the case if the individual labourer yields more labour, and therefore his wages increase, and this
although the price of labour remains the same or even falls, only more slowly than the mass of labour rises. Increase
of variable capital, in this case, becomes an index of more labour, but not of more labourers employed. It is the
absolute interest of every capitalist to press a given quantity of labour out of a smaller, rather than a greater number of
labourers, if the cost is about the same. In the latter case, the outlay of constant capital increases in proportion to the
mass of labour set in action; in the former that increase is much smaller. The more extended the scale of production,
the stronger this motive. Its force increases with the accumulation of capital.

We have seen that the development of the capitalist mode of production and of the productive power of labour — at
once the cause and effect of accumulation — enables the capitalist, with the same outlay of variable capital, to set in
action more labour by greater exploitation (extensive or intensive) of each individual labour-power. We have further
seen that the capitalist buys with the same capital a greater mass of labour-power, as he progressively replaces skilled
labourers by less skilled, mature labour-power by immature, male by female, that of adults by that of young persons or
children.

On the one hand, therefore, with the progress of accumulation, a larger variable capital sets more labour in action
without enlisting more labourers; on the other, a variable capital of the same magnitude sets in action more labour
with the same mass of labour-power; and, finally, a greater number of inferior labour-powers by displacement of
higher.

The production of a relative surplus-population, or the setting free of labourers, goes on therefore yet more rapidly
than the technical revolution of the process of production that accompanies, and is accelerated by, the advance of
accumulation; and more rapidly than the corresponding diminution of the variable part of capital as compared with the
constant. If the means of production, as they increase in extent and effective power, become to a less extent means of
employment of labourers, this state of things is again modified by the fact that in proportion as the productiveness of
labour increases, capital increases its supply of labour more quickly than its demand for labourers. The over-work of
the employed part of the working-class swells the ranks of the reserve, whilst conversely the greater pressure that the
latter by its competition exerts on the former, forces these to submit to overwork and to subjugation under the dictates
of capital. The condemnation of one part of the working-class to enforced idleness by the overwork of the other part,
and the converse, becomes a means of enriching the individual capitalists, [191 and accelerates at the same time the
production of the industrial reserve army on a scale corresponding with the advance of social accumulation. How
important is this element in the formation of the relative surplus-population, is shown by the example of England. Her
technical means for saving labour are colossal. Nevertheless, if to-morrow morning labour generally were reduced to a
rational amount, and proportioned to the different sections of the working-class according to age and sex, the working
population to hand would be absolutely insufficient for the carrying on of national production on its present scale. The
great majority of the labourers now "unproductive" would have to be turned into "productive" ones.

Taking them as a whole, the general movements of wages are exclusively regulated by the expansion and contraction
of the industrial reserve army, and these again correspond to the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. They are,
therefore, not determined by the variations of the absolute number of the working population, but by the varying
proportions in which the working-class is divided into active and reserve army, by the increase or diminution in the
relative amount of the surplus-population, by the extent to which it is now absorbed, now set free. For Modern
Industry with its decennial cycles and periodic phases, which, moreover, as accumulation advances, are complicated
by irregular oscillations following each other more and more quickly, that would indeed be a beautiful law, which
pretends to make the action of capital dependent on the absolute variation of the population, instead of regulating the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (11 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

demand and supply of labour by the alternate expansion and contraction of capital, the labour-market now appearing
relatively under-full, because capital is expanding, now again over-full, because it is contracting. Yet this is the dogma
of the economists. According to them, wages rise in consequence of accumulation of capital. The higher wages
stimulate the working population to more rapid multiplication, and this goes on until the labour-market becomes too
full, and therefore capital, relatively to the supply of labour, becomes insufficient. Wages fall, and now we have the
reverse of the medal. The working population is little by little decimated as the result of the fall in wages, so that
capital is again in excess relatively to them, or, as others explain it, falling wages and the corresponding increase in
the exploitation of the labourer again accelerates accumulation, whilst, at the same time, the lower wages hold the
increase of the working-class in check. Then comes again the time, when the supply of labour is less than the demand,
wages rise, and so on. A beautiful mode of motion this for developed capitalist production! Before, in consequence of
the rise of wages, any positive increase of the population really fit for work could occur, the time would have been
passed again and again, during which the industrial campaign must have been carried through, the battle fought and
won.

Between 1849 and 1859, a rise of wages practically insignificant, though accompanied by falling prices of corn, took
place in the English agricultural districts. In Wiltshire, e.g., the weekly wages rose from 7s. to 8s.; in Dorsetshire from
7s. or 8s., to 9s., &c. This was the result of an unusual exodus of the agricultural surplus-population caused by the
demands of war, the vast extension of railroads, factories, mines, &c. The lower the wages, the higher is the
proportion in which ever so insignificant a rise of them expresses itself. If the weekly wage, e.g., is 20s. and it rises to
22s., that is a rise of 10 per cent.; but if it is only 7s. and it rises to 9s., that is a rise of 28 4/7 per cent., which sounds
very fine. Everywhere the farmers were howling, and the London Economist, with reference to these starvation-wages,
prattled quite seriously of "a general and substantial advance." [201 What did the farmers do now? Did they wait until,
in consequence of this brilliant remuneration, the agricultural labourers had so increased and multiplied that their
wages must fall again, as prescribed by the dogmatic economic brain? They introduced more machinery, and in a
moment the labourers were redundant again in a proportion satisfactory even to the farmers. There was now "more
capital" laid out in agriculture than before, and in a more productive form. With this the demand for labour fell, not
only relatively, but absolutely.

The above economic fiction confuses the laws that regulate the general movement of wages, or the ratio between the
working-class — i.e., the total labour-power — and the total social capital, with the laws that distribute the working
population over the different spheres of production. If, e.g., in consequence of favourable circumstances, accumulation
in a particular sphere of production becomes especially active, and profits in it, being greater than the average profits,
attract additional capital, of course the demand for labour rises and wages also rise. The higher wages draw a larger
part of the working population into the more favoured sphere, until it is glutted with labour-power, and wages at
length fall again to their average level or below it, if the pressure is too great. Then, not only does the immigration of
labourers into the branch of industry in question cease; it gives place to their emigration. Here the political economist
thinks he sees the why and wherefore of an absolute increase of workers accompanying an increase of wages, and of a
diminution of wages accompanying an absolute increase of labourers. But he sees really only the local oscillation of
the labour-market in a particular sphere of production — he sees only the phenomena accompanying the distribution
of the working population into the different spheres of outlay of capital, according to its varying needs.

The industrial reserve army, during the periods of stagnation and average prosperity, weighs down the active
labour-army; during the periods of over-production and paroxysm, it holds its pretensions in check. Relative
surplus-population is therefore the pivot upon which the law of demand and supply of labour works. It confines the
field of action of this law within the limits absolutely convenient to the activity of exploitation and to the domination
of capital.

This is the place to return to one of the grand exploits of economic apologetics. It will be remembered that if through
the introduction of new, or the extension of old, machinery, a portion of variable capital is transformed into constant,
the economic apologist interprets this operation which "fixes" capital and by that very act sets labourers "free," in
exactly the opposite way, pretending that it sets free capital for the labourers. Only now can one fully understand the
effrontery of these apologists. What are set free are not only the labourers immediately turned out by the machines,
but also their future substitutes in the rising generation, and the additional contingent, that with the usual extension of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (12 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

trade on the old basis would be regularly absorbed. They are now all "set free," and every new bit of capital looking
out for employment can dispose of them. Whether it attracts them or others, the effect on the general labour demand
will be nil, if this capital is just sufficient to take out of the market as many labourers as the machines threw upon it. If
it employs a smaller number, that of the supernumeraries increases; if it employs a greater, the general demand for
labour only increases to the extent of the excess of the employed over those "set free." The impulse that additional
capital, seeking an outlet, would otherwise have given to the general demand for labour, is therefore in every case
neutralised to the extent of the labourers thrown out of employment by the machine. That is to say, the mechanism of
capitalistic production so manages matters that the absolute increase of capital is accompanied by no corresponding
rise in the general demand for labour. And this the apologist calls a compensation for the misery, the sufferings, the
possible death of the displaced labourers during the transition period that banishes them into the industrial reserve
army! The demand for labour is not identical with increase of capital, nor supply of labour with increase of the
working-class. It is not a case of two independent forces working on one another. Les des sont pipes. Capital works on
both sides at the same time. If its accumulation, on the one hand, increases the demand for labour, it increases on the
other the supply of labourers by the "setting free" of them, whilst at the same time the pressure of the unemployed
compels those that are employed to furnish more labour, and therefore makes the supply of labour, to a certain extent,
independent of the supply of labourers. The action of the law of supply and demand of labour on this basis completes
the despotism of capital. As soon, therefore, as the labourers learn the secret, how it comes to pass that in the same
measure as they work more, as they produce more wealth for others, and as the productive power of their labour
increases, so in the same measure even their function as a means of the self-expansion of capital becomes more and
more precarious for them; as soon as they discover that the degree of intensity of the competition among themselves
depends wholly on the pressure of the relative surplus-population; as soon as, by Trades' Unions, &c, they try to
organise a regular co-operation between employed and unemployed in order to destroy or to weaken the ruinous
effects of this natural law of capitalistic production on their class, so soon capital and its sycophant, Political
Economy, cry out at the infringement of the "eternal" and so to say "sacred" law of supply and demand. Every
combination of employed and unemployed disturbs the "harmonious" action of this law. But, on the other hand, as
soon as (in the colonies, e.g.) adverse circumstances prevent the creation of an industrial reserve army and, with it, the
absolute dependence of the working-class upon the capitalist class, capital, along with its commonplace Sancho Panza,
rebels against the "sacred" law of supply and demand, and tries to check its inconvenient action by forcible means and
State interference.



SECTION 4.

DIFFERENT FORMS OF THE RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION.THE GENERAL LAW OF
CAPITALISTIC ACCUMULATION



The relative surplus-population exists in every possible form. Every labourer belongs to it during the time when he is
only partially employed or wholly unemployed. Not taking into account the great periodically recurring forms that the
changing phases of the industrial cycle impress on it, now an acute form during the crisis, then again a chronic form
during dull times — it has always three forms, the floating, the latent, the stagnant.

In the centres of modern industry — factories, manufactures, ironworks, mines, &c. — the labourers are sometimes
repelled, sometimes attracted again in greater masses, the number of those employed increasing on the whole,
although in a constantly decreasing proportion to the scale of production. Here the surplus-population exists in the
floating form.

In the automatic factories, as in all the great workshops, where machinery enters as a factor, or where only the modern
division of labour is carried out, large numbers of boys are employed up to the age of maturity. When this term is once

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (13 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

reached, only a very small number continue to find employment in the same branches of industry, whilst the majority
are regularly discharged. This majority forms an element of the floating surplus-population, growing with the
extension of those branches of industry. Part of them emigrates, following in fact capital that has emigrated. One
consequence is that the female population grows more rapidly than the male, teste England. That the natural increase
of the number of labourers does not satisfy the requirements of the accumulation of capital, and yet all the time is in
excess of them, is a contradiction inherent to the movement of capital itself. It wants larger numbers of youthful
labourers, a smaller number of adults. The contradiction is not more glaring than that other one that there is a
complaint of the want of hands, while at the same time many thousands are out of work, because the division of labour
chains them to a particular branch of industry. [211

The consumption of labour-power by capital is, besides, so rapid that the labourer, half-way through his life, has
already more or less completely lived himself out. He falls into the ranks of the supernumeraries, or is thrust down
from a higher to a lower step in the scale. It is precisely among the work-people of modern industry that we meet with
the shortest duration of life. Dr. Lee, Medical Officer of Health for Manchester, stated "that the average age at death of
the Manchester ... upper middle class was 38 years, while the average age at death of the labouring class was 17; while
at Liverpool those figures were represented as 35 against 15. It thus appeared that the well-to-do classes had a lease of
life which was more than double the value of that which fell to the lot of the less favoured citizens." [221 In order to
conform to these circumstances, the absolute increase of this section of the proletariat must take place under
conditions that shall swell their numbers, although the individual elements are used up rapidly. Hence, rapid renewal
of the generations of labourers (this law does not hold for the other classes of the population). This social need is met
by early marriages, a necessary consequence of the conditions in which the labourers of modern industry live, and by
the premium that the exploitation of children sets on their production.

As soon as capitalist production takes possession of agriculture, and in proportion to the extent to which it does so, the
demand for an agricultural labouring population falls absolutely, while the accumulation of the capital employed in
agriculture advances, without this repulsion being, as in non- agricultural industries, compensated by a greater
attraction. Part of the agricultural population is therefore constantly on the point of passing over into an urban or
manufacturing proletariat, and on the look-out for circumstances favourable to this transformation. (Manufacture is
used here in the sense of all nonagricultural industries.) [231 This source of relative surplus-population is thus
constantly flowing. But the constant flow towards the towns pre-supposes, in the country itself, a constant latent
surplus-population, the extent of which becomes evident only when its channels of outlet open to exceptional width.
The agricultural labourer is therefore reduced to the minimum of wages, and always stands with one foot already in
the swamp of pauperism.

The third category of the relative surplus-population, the stagnant, forms a part of the active labour army, but with
extremely irregular employment. Hence it furnishes to capital an inexhaustible reservoir of disposable labour-power.
Its conditions of life sink below the average normal level of the working-class; this makes it at once the broad basis of
special branches of capitalist exploitation. It is characterised by maximum of working-time, and minimum of wages.
We have learnt to know its chief form under the rubric of "domestic industry." It recruits itself constantly from the
supernumerary forces of modern industry and agriculture, and specially from those decaying branches of industry
where handicraft is yielding to manufacture, manufacture to machinery. Its extent grows, as with the extent and energy
of accumulation, the creation of a surplus-population advances. But it forms at the same time a self-reproducing and
self -perpetuating element of the working-class, taking a proportionally greater part in the general increase of that class
than the other elements. In fact, not only the number of births and deaths, but the absolute size of the families stand in
inverse proportion to the height of wages, and therefore to the amount of means of subsistence of which the different
categories of labourers dispose. This law of capitalistic society would sound absurd to savages, or even civilised
colonists. It calls to mind the boundless reproduction of animals individually weak and constantly hunted down. [241

The lowest sediment of the relative surplus-population finally dwells in the sphere of pauperism. Exclusive of
vagabonds, criminals, prostitutes, in a word, the "dangerous" classes, this layer of society consists of three categories.
First, those able to work. One need only glance superficially at the statistics of English pauperism to find that the
quantity of paupers increases with every crisis, and diminishes with every revival of trade. Second, orphans and



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (14 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

pauper children. These are candidates for the industrial reserve army, and are, in times of great prosperity, as 1860,
e.g., speedily and in large numbers enrolled in the active army of labourers. Third, the demoralised and ragged, and
those unable to work, chiefly people who succumb to their incapacity for adaptation, due to the division of labour;
people who have passed the normal age of the labourer; the victims of industry, whose number increases with the
increase of dangerous machinery, of mines, chemical works, &c, the mutilated, the sickly, the widows, &c.
Pauperism is the hospital of the active labour-army and the dead weight of the industrial reserve army. Its production
is included in that of the relative surplus-population, its necessity in theirs; along with the surplus-population,
pauperism forms a condition of capitalist production, and of the capitalist development of wealth. It enters into the
fauxfrais of capitalist production; but capital knows how to throw these, for the most part, from its own shoulders on
to those of the working-class and the lower middle class.

The greater the social wealth, the functioning capital, the extent and energy of its growth, and, therefore, also the
absolute mass of the proletariat and the productiveness of its labour, the greater is the industrial reserve army. The
same causes which develop the expansive power of capital, develop also the labour-power at its disposal. The relative
mass of the industrial reserve army increases therefore with the potential energy of wealth. But the greater this reserve
army in proportion to the active labour-army, the greater is the mass of a consolidated surplus-population, whose
misery is in inverse ratio to its torment of labour. The more extensive, finally, the lazarus-layers of the working-class,
and the industrial reserve army, the greater is official pauperism. This is the absolute general law of capitalist
accumulation. Like all other laws it is modified in its working by many circumstances, the analysis of which does not
concern us here.

The folly is now patent of the economic wisdom that preaches to the labourers the accommodation of their number to
the requirements of capital. The mechanism of capitalist production and accumulation constantly effects this
adjustment. The first word of this adaptation is the creation of a relative surplus-population, or industrial reserve army.
Its last word is the misery of constantly extending strata of the active army of labour, and the dead weight of
pauperism.

The law by which a constantly increasing quantity of means of production, thanks to the advance in the
productiveness of social labour, may be set in movement by a progressively diminishing expenditure of human power,
this law, in a capitalist society — where the labourer does not employ the means of production, but the means of
production employ the labourer — undergoes a complete inversion and is expressed thus: the higher the
productiveness of labour, the greater is the pressure of the labourers on the means of employment, the more
precarious, therefore, becomes their condition of existence, viz., the sale of their own labour-power for the increasing
of another's wealth, or for the self-expansion of capital. The fact that the means of production, and the productiveness
of labour, increase more rapidly than the productive population, expresses itself, therefore, capitalistically in the
inverse form that the labouring population always increases more rapidly than the conditions under which capital can
employ this increase for its own self-expansion.

We saw in Part IV., when analysing the production of relative surplus-value: within the capitalist system all methods
for raising the social productiveness of labour are brought about at the cost of the individual labourer; all means for
the development of production transform themselves into means of domination over, and exploitation of, the
producers; they mutilate the labourer into a fragment of a man, degrade him to the level of an appendage of a machine,
destroy every remnant of charm in his work and turn it into a hated toil; they estrange from him the intellectual
potentialities of the labour-process in the same proportion as science is incorporated in it as an independent power;
they distort the conditions under which he works, subject him during the labour-process to a despotism the more
hateful for its meanness; they transform his life-time into working-time, and drag his wife and child beneath the
wheels of the Juggernaut of capital. But all methods for the production of surplus-value are at the same time methods
of accumulation; and every extension of accumulation becomes again a means for the development of those methods.
It follows therefore that in proportion as capital accumulates, the lot of the labourer, be his payment high or low, must
grow worse. The law, finally, that always equilibrates the relative surplus-population, or industrial reserve army, to the
extent and energy of accumulation, this law rivets the labourer to capital more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan did
Prometheus to the rock. It establishes an accumulation of misery, corresponding with accumulation of capital.
Accumulation of wealth at one pole is, therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil slavery,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (15 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole, i.e., on the side of the class that produces its own
product in the form of capital. [251 This antagonistic character of capitalistic accumulation is enunciated in various
forms by political economists, although by them it is confounded with phenomena, certainly to some extent
analogous, but nevertheless essentially distinct, and belonging to pre-capitalistic modes of production.

The Venetian monk Ortes, one of the great economic writers of the 18th century, regards the antagonism of capitalist
production as a general natural law of social wealth. "In the economy of a nation, advantages and evils always balance
one another (il bene ed il male economico in una nazione sempre all, istessa misura): the abundance of wealth with
some people, is always equal to the want of it with others (la copia dei beni in alcuni sempre eguale alia mancanza di
essi in altri): the great riches of a small number are always accompanied by the absolute privation of the first
necessaries of life for many others. The wealth of a nation corresponds with its population, and its misery corresponds
with its wealth. Diligence in some compels idleness in others. The poor and idle are a necessary consequence of the
rich and active," &c. [261 In a thoroughly brutal way about 10 years after Ortes, the Church of England parson,
Townsend, glorified misery as a necessary condition of wealth. "Legal constraint (to labour) is attended with too much
trouble, violence, and noise, whereas hunger is not only a peaceable, silent, unremitted pressure, but as the most
natural motive to industry and labour, it calls forth the most powerful exertions." Everything therefor ' e depends upon
making hunger permanent among the working-class, and for this, according to Townsend, the principle of population,
especially active among the poor, provides. "It seems to be a law of Nature that the poor should be to a certain degree
improvident" [i.e., so improvident as to be born without a silver spoon in the mouth], "that there may always be some
to fulfil the most servile, the most sordid, and the most ignoble offices in the community. The stock of human
happiness is thereby much increased, whilst the more delicate are not only relieved from drudgery ... but are left at
liberty without interruption to pursue those callings which are suited to their various dispositions ... it [the Poor Law]
tends to destroy the harmony and beauty, the symmetry and order of that system which God and Nature have
established in the world. [27] If the Venetian monk found in the fatal destiny that makes misery eternal, the raison
d'etre of Christian charity, celibacy, monasteries and holy houses, the Protestant prebendary finds in it a pretext for
condemning the laws in virtue of which the poor possessed a right to a miserable public relief.

"The progress of social wealth," says Storch, "begets this useful class of society ... which performs the most
wearisome, the vilest, the most disgusting functions, which takes, in a word, on its shoulders all that is disagreeable
and servile in life, and procures thus for other classes leisure, serenity of mind and conventional [c'est bon!] dignity of
character." [28] Storch asks himself in what then really consists the progress of this capitalistic civilisation with its
misery and its degradation of the masses, as compared with barbarism. He finds but one answer: security!

"Thanks to the advance of industry and science," says Sismondi, "every labourer can produce every day much more
than his consumption requires. But at the same time, whilst his labour produces wealth, that wealth would, were he
called on to consume it himself, make him less fit for labour." According to him, "men" [i.e., non-workers] "would
probably prefer to do without all artistic perfection, and all the enjoyments that manufacturers procure for us, if it were
necessary that all should buy them by constant toil like that of the labourer.... Exertion to-day is separated from its
recompense; it is not the same man that first works, and then reposes; but it is because the one works that the other
rests.... The indefinite multiplication of the productive powers of labour can then only have for result the increase of
luxury and enjoyment of the idle rich." [29]

Finally Destutt de Tracy, the fish-blooded bourgeois doctrinaire, blurts out brutally: "In poor nations the people are
comfortable, in rich nations they are generally poor." [30]



SECTION 5.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (16 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



A. England from 1846-1866

No period of modern society is so favourable for the study of capitalist accumulation as the period of the last 20 years.
It is as if this period had found Fortunatus' purse. But of all countries England again furnishes the classical example,
because it holds the foremost place in the world-market, because capitalist production is here alone completely
developed, and lastly, because the introduction of the Free-trade millennium since 1846 has cut off the last retreat of
vulgar economy. The titanic advance of production — the latter half of the 20 years' period again far surpassing the
former — has been already pointed out sufficiently in Part IV.

Although the absolute increase of the English population in the last half century was very great, the relative increase
or rate of growth fell constantly, as the following table borrowed from the census shows.

Annual increase per cent, of the population of England and Wales in decimal numbers:





1811-1821 1.533 per cent.


1821-1831 1.446 per cent.


1831-1841 1.326 percent.


1841-1851 1.216 per cent.


1851-1861 1.141 per cent.



Let us now, on the other hand, consider the increase of wealth. Here the movement of profit, rent of land, &c, that
come under the income tax. furnishes the surest basis. The increase of profits liable to income tax (farmers and some
other categories not included) in Great Britain from 1853 to 1864 amounted to 50.47% or 4.58% as the annual
average, [311 that of the population during the same period to about 12%. The augmentation of the rent of land subject
to taxation (including houses, railways, mines, fisheries, &c), amounted for 1853 to 1864 to 38% or 3 5/12%
annually. Under this head the following categories show the greatest increase:





Excess of annual income
of 1864 over that of 1853


Increase
per year


Houses 38.60%


3.50%


Quarries 84.76%


7.70%


Mines 68.85%


6.26%


Ironworks 39.92%


3.63%


Fisheries 57.37%


5.21%


Gasworks 126.02%


11.45%


Railways 83.29%


7.57%



If we compare the years from 1853 to 1864 in three sets of four consecutive years each, the rate of augmentation of
the income increases constantly. f321 It is, e.g., for that arising from profits between 1853 to 1857, 1.73% yearly;
1857-1861, 2.74%, and for 1861-64, 9.30% yearly. The sum of the incomes of the United Kingdom that come under
the income tax was in 1856, £307,068,898; in 1859, £328,127,416; in 1862. £351,745,241; in 1863, £359,142,897; in
1864, £362,462,279; in 1865, £385,530,020. [331

The accumulation of capital was attended at the same time by its concentration and centralisation. Although no official
statistics of agriculture existed for England (they did for Ireland), they were voluntarily given in 10 counties. These



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (17 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

statistics gave the result that from 1851 to 1861 the number of farms of less than 100 acres had fallen from 31,583 to
26,597, so that 5,016 had been thrown together into larger farms. [341 From 1815 to 1825 no personal estate of more
than £1,000,000 came under the succession duty; from 1825 to 1855, however, 8 did; and 4 from 1856 to June, 1859,
i.e., in 4 1/2 years. [351 The centralisation will, however, be best seen from a short analysis of the Income Tax
Schedule D (profits, exclusive of farms, &c), in the years 1864 and 1865. 1 note beforehand that incomes from this
source pay income tax on everything over £60. These incomes liable to taxation in England, Wales and Scotland,
amounted in 1864 to £95,844,222. in 1865 to £105,435,579. I36J The number of persons taxed were in 1864, 308,416,
out of a population of 23,891,009; in 1865, 332,431 out of a population of 24,127,003. The following table shows the
distribution of these incomes in the two years:









Year ending
April 5th, 1864.


Year ending
April 5th, 1865.


Income from
Profits


Income from
People


Income from
Profits


Income from
People


Total Income


£95,844,222


308,416


105,435,738


332,431


of these


57,028,289


23,334


64,554,297


24,265


of these


36,415,225


3,619


42,535,576


4,021


of these


22,809,781


832


27,555,313


973


of these


8,744,762


91


11,077,238


107



In 1855 there were produced in the United Kingdom 61,453,079 tons of coal, of value £16,1 13,167; in 1864,
92,787,873 tons, of value £23,197,968; in 1855, 3,218,154 tons of pig-iron, of value £8,045,385; 1864, 4,767,951
tons, of value £1 1,919,877. In 1854 the length of the railroads worked in the United Kingdom was 8,054 miles, with a
paid-up capital of £286,068,794; in 1864 the length was 12,789 miles, with capital paid up of £425,719,613. In 1854
the total sum of the exports and imports of the United Kingdom was £268,210,145; in 1865, £489,923,285. The
following table shows the movement of the exports:





1846


£58,842,377


1849


63,596,052


1856


115,826,948


1860


135,842,817


1865


165,862,402


1866


188,917,563




[371



After these few examples one understands the cry of triumph of the Registrar-General of the British people: "Rapidly
as the population has increased, it has not kept pace with the progress of industry and wealth." [381

Let us turn now to the direct agents of this industry, or the producers of this wealth, to the working-class. "It is one of
the most melancholy features in the social state of this country," says Gladstone, "that while there was a decrease in
the consuming powers of the people, and while there was an increase in the privations and distress of the labouring
class and operatives, there was at the same time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, and a constant
increase of capital." [391 Thus spake this unctuous minister in the House of Commons of February 13th, 1843. On
April 16th, 1863, 20 years later, in the speech in which he introduced his Budget: "From 1842 to 1852 the taxable
income of the country increased by 6 per cent.... In the 8 years from 1853 to 1861 it had increased from the basis taken
in 1853 by 20 per cent.! The fact is so astonishing as to he almost incredible ... this intoxicating augmentation of
wealth and power ... entirely confined to classes of property ... must be of indirect benefit to the labouring population,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (18 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

because it cheapens the commodities of general consumption. While the rich have been growing richer, the poor have
been growing less poor. At any rate, whether the extremes of poverty are less, I do not presume to say." [401 How
lame an anti-climax! If the working-class has remained "poor," only "less poor" in proportion as it produces for the
wealthy class "an intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power," then it has remained relatively just as poor. If the
extremes of poverty have not lessened, they have increased, because the extremes of wealth have. As to the
cheapening of the means of subsistence, the official statistics, e.g., the accounts of the London Orphan Asylum, show
an increase in price of 20% for the average of the three years 1860-1862, compared with 1851-1853. In the following
three years, 1863-1865, there was a progressive rise in the price of meat, butter, milk, sugar, salt, coals, and a number
of other necessary means of subsistence. [411 Gladstone's next Budget speech of April 7th, 1864, is a Pindaric
dithyrambus on the advance of surplus-value-making and the happiness of the people "tempered by poverty." He
speaks of masses "on the border" of pauperism, of branches of trade in which "wages have not increased," and finally
sums up the happiness of the working-class in the words: "human life is but, in nine cases out of ten, a struggle for
existence." [421 Professor Fawcett, not bound like Gladstone by official considerations, declares roundly: "I do not, of
course, deny that money wages have been augmented by this increase of capital (in the last ten years), but this
apparent advantage is to a great extent lost, because many of the necessaries of life are becoming dearer" (he believes
because of the fall in value of the precious metals)... "the rich grow rapidly richer, whilst there is no perceptible
advance in the comfort enjoyed by the industrial classes.... They (the labourers) become almost the slaves of the
tradesman, to whom they owe money." [431

In the chapters on the "working-day" and "machinery," the reader has seen under what circumstances the British
working-class created an "intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power" for the propertied classes. There we were
chiefly concerned with the social functioning of the labourer. But for a full elucidation of the law of accumulation, his
condition outside the workshop must also be looked at, his condition as to food and dwelling. The limits of this book
compel us to concern ourselves chiefly with the worst paid part of the industrial proletariat, and with the agricultural
labourers, who together form the majority of the working-class.

But first, one word on official pauperism, or on that part of the working-class which has forfeited its condition of
existence (the sale of labour-power), and vegetates upon public alms. The official list of paupers numbered in England
[441 851,369 persons; in 1856, 877,767; in 1865, 971,433. In consequence of the cotton famine, it grew in the years
1863 and 1864 to 1,079,382 and 1,014,978. The crisis of 1866, which fell most heavily on London, created in this
centre of the world-market, more populous than the kingdom of Scotland, an increase of pauperism for the year 1866
of 19.5% compared with 1865, and of 24.4% compared with 1864, and a still greater increase for the first months of
1867 as compared with 1866. From the analysis of the statistics of pauperism, two points are to be taken. On the one
hand, the fluctuation up and down of the number of paupers, reflects the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. On
the other, the official statistics become more and more misleading as to the actual extent of pauperism in proportion
as, with the accumulation of capital, the class-struggle, and, therefore, the class-consciousness of the working-men,
develop. E.g., the barbarity in the treatment of the paupers, at which the English Press (The Times, Pall Mall Gazette,
etc.) have cried out so loudly during the last two years, is of ancient date. F. Engels showed in 1844 exactly the same
horrors, exactly the same transient canting outcries of "sensational literature." But frightful increase of "deaths by
starvation" in London during the last ten years proves beyond doubt the growing horror in which the working-people
hold the slavery of the workhouse, that place of punishment for misery. [451



B. The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class

During the cotton famine of 1862, Dr. Smith was charged by the Privy Council with an inquiry into the conditions of
nourishment of the distressed operatives in Lancashire and Cheshire. His observations during many preceding years
had led him to the conclusion that "to avert starvation diseases," the daily food of an average woman ought to contain
at least 3,900 grains of carbon with 180 grains of nitrogen; the daily food of an average man, at least 4,300 grains of
carbon with 200 grains of nitrogen; for women, about the same quantity of nutritive elements as are contained in 2 lbs.
of good wheaten bread, for men 1/9 more; for the weekly average of adult men and women, at least 28,600 grains of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (19 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

carbon and 1,330 grains of nitrogen. His calculation was practically confirmed in a surprising manner by its agreement
with the miserable quantity of nourishment to which want had forced down the consumption of the cotton operatives.
This was, in December, 1862, 29,211 grains of carbon, and 1,295 grains of nitrogen weekly.

In the year 1863, the Privy Council ordered an inquiry into the state of distress of the worst-nourished part of the
English working-class. Dr. Simon, medical officer to the Privy Council, chose for this work the above-mentioned Dr.
Smith. His inquiry ranges on the one hand over the agricultural labourers, on the other, over silk-weavers,
needlewomen, kid-glovers, stocking-weavers, glove-weavers, and shoemakers. The latter categories are, with the
exception of the stocking- weavers, exclusively town-dwellers. It was made a rule in the inquiry to select in each
category the most healthy families, and those comparatively in the best circumstances.

As a general result it was found that "in only one of the examined classes of in-door operatives did the average
nitrogen-supply just exceed, while in another it nearly reached, the estimated standard of bare sufficiency [i.e.,
sufficient to avert starvation diseases], and that in two classes there was defect — in one, a very large defect — of
both nitrogen and carbon. Moreover, as regards the examined families of the agricultural population, it appeared that
more than a fifth were with less than the estimated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that more than one-third were
with less than the estimated sufficiency of nitrogenous food, and that in three counties (Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and
Somersetshire), insufficiency of nitrogenous food was the average local diet." [461 Among the agricultural labourers,
those of England, the wealthiest part of the United Kingdom, were the worst fed. [471 The insufficiency of food
among the agricultural labourers, fell, as a rule, chiefly on the women and children, for "the man must eat to do his
work." Still greater penury ravaged the town-workers examined. "They are so ill fed that assuredly among them there
must be many cases of severe and injurious privation." [481 ("Privation" of the capitalist all this! i.e., "abstinence"
from paying for the means of subsistence absolutely necessary for the mere vegetation of his "hands. ")[49J

The following table shows the conditions of nourishment of the above-named categories of purely town-dwelling
work-people, as compared with the minimum assumed by Dr. Smith, and with the food-allowance of the cotton
operatives during the time of their greatest distress:





Both Sexes


Average weekly
carbon


Average weekly
nitrogen


Five in-door
occupations


28,876 grains


1,192 grains


Unemployed Lancashire
Operatives


28,211 grains


1,295 grains


Minimum quantity to be
allowed to the Lancashire
Operatives, equal number
of males and females


28,600 grains


1,330 grains



One half, or 60/125, of the industrial labour categories investigated, had absolutely no beer, 28% no milk. The weekly
average of the liquid means of nourishment in the families varied from seven ounces in the needle-women to 24 3/4
ounces in the stocking-makers. The majority of those who did not obtain milk were needle-women in London. The
quantity of bread-stuffs consumed weekly varied from 7 3/4 lbs. for the needle-women to 1 1 1/2 lbs. for the
shoemakers, and gave a total average of 9.9 lbs. per adult weekly. Sugar (treacle, etc.) varied from 4 ounces weekly
for the kid-glovers to 1 1 ounces for the stockingmakers; and the total average per week for all categories was 8 ounces
per adult weekly. Total weekly average of butter (fat, etc.) 5 ounces per adult. The weekly average of meat (bacon,
etc.) varied from 7 1/4 ounces for the silk- weavers, to 18 1/4 ounces for the kid-glovers; total average for the different
categories 13.6 ounces. The weekly cost of food per adult, gave the following average figures; silk- weavers 2s. 2
l/2d., needle-women 2s. 7d., kid-glovers 2s. 9 l/2d., shoemakers 2s 7 3/4d., stocking-weavers 2s. 6 l/4d. For the
silk- weavers of Macclesfield the average was only Is. 8 l/2d. The worst categories were the needle- women,
silk-weavers and kid-glovers. [501 Of these facts, Dr. Simon in his General Health Report says: "That cases are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (20 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

innumerable in which defective diet is the cause or the aggravator of disease, can be affirmed by any one who is
conversant with poor law medical practice, or with the wards and out-patient rooms of hospitals.... Yet in this point of
view, there is, in my opinion, a very important sanitary context to be added. It must be remembered that privation of
food is very reluctantly borne, and that as a rule great poorness of diet will only come when other privations have
preceded it. Long before insufficiency of diet is a matter of hygienic concern, long before the physiologist would think
of counting the grains of nitrogen and carbon which intervene between life and starvation, the household will have
been utterly destitute of material comfort; clothing and fuel will have been even scantier than food — against
inclemencies of weather there will have been no adequate protection — dwelling space will have been stinted to the
degree in which over-crowding produces or increases disease; of household utensils and furniture there will have been
scarcely any-even cleanliness will have been found costly or difficult, and if there still be self-respectful endeavours to
maintain it, every such endeavour will represent additional pangs of hunger. The home, too, will be where shelter can
be cheapest bought; in quarters where commonly there is least fruit of sanitary supervision, least drainage, least
scavenging, least suppression of public nuisances, least or worst water supply, and, if in town, least light and air. Such
are the sanitary dangers to which poverty is almost certainly exposed, when it is poverty enough to imply scantiness of
food. And while the sum of them is of terrible magnitude against life, the mere scantiness of food is in itself of very
serious moment.... These are painful reflections, especially when it is remembered that the poverty to which they
advert is not the deserved poverty of idleness. In all cases it is the poverty of working populations. Indeed, as regards
the in-door operatives, the work which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is for the most part excessively prolonged.
Yet evidently it is only in a qualified sense that the work can be deemed self-supporting.... And on a very large scale
the nominal self-support can be only a circuit, longer or shorter, to pauperism." [511

The intimate connexion between the pangs of hunger of the most industrious layers of the working-class, and the
extravagant consumption, coarse or refined, of the rich, for which capitalist accumulation is the basis, reveals itself
only when the economic laws are known. It is otherwise with the "housing of the poor." Every unprejudiced observer
sees that the greater the centralisation of the means of production, the greater is the corresponding heaping together of
the labourers, within a given space; that therefore the swifter capitalistic accumulation, the more miserable are the
dwellings of the working-people. "Improvements" of towns, accompanying the increase of wealth, by the demolition
of badly built quarters, the erection of palaces for banks, warehouses, &c, the widening of streets for business traffic,
for the carriages of luxury, and for the introduction of tramways, &c, drive away the poor into even worse and more
crowded hiding places. On the other hand, every one knows that the dearness of dwellings is in inverse ratio to their
excellence, and that the mines of misery are exploited by house speculators with more profit or less cost than ever
were the mines of Potosi. The antagonistic character of capitalist accumulation, and therefore of the capitalistic
relations of property generally, [521 is here so evident, that even the official English reports on this subject teem with
heterodox onslaughts on "property and its rights." With the development of industry, with the accumulation of capital,
with the growth and "improvement" of towns, the evil makes such progress that the mere fear of contagious diseases
which do not spare even "respectability," brought into existence from 1847 to 1864 no less than 10 Acts of Parliament
on sanitation, and that the frightened bourgeois in some towns, as Liverpool, Glasgow, &c, took strenuous measures
through their municipalities. Nevertheless Dr. Simon, in his report of 1865, says: "Speaking generally, it may be said
that the evils are uncontrolled in England." By order of the Privy Council, in 1864, an inquiry was made into the
conditions of the housing of the agricultural labourers, in 1865 of the poorer classes in the towns. The results of the
admirable work of Dr. Julian Hunter are to be found in the seventh (1865) and eighth (1866) exports on "Public
Health." To the agricultural labourers, I shall come later. On the condition of town dwellings, I quote, as preliminary,
a general remark of Dr. Simon. "Although my official point of view," he says, "is one exclusively physical, common
humanity requires that the other aspect of this evil should not be ignored .... In its higher degrees it [i.e.,
over-crowding] almost necessarily involves such negation of all delicacy, such unclean confusion of bodies and bodily
functions, such exposure of animal and sexual nakedness, as is rather bestial than human. To be subject to these
influences is a degradation which must become deeper and deeper for those on whom it continues to work. To
children who are born under its curse, it must often be a very baptism into infamy. And beyond all measure hopeless is
the wish that persons thus circumstanced should ever in other respects aspire to that atmosphere of civilisation which
has its essence in physical and moral cleanliness." [531

London takes the first place in over-crowded habitations, absolutely unfit for human beings. "He feels clear," says Dr.
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (21 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Hunter, "on two points; first, that there are about 20 large colonies in London, of about 10,000 persons each, whose
miserable condition exceeds almost anything he has seen elsewhere in England, and is almost entirely the result of
their bad house accommodation; and second, that the crowded and dilapidated condition of the houses of these
colonies is much worse than was the case 20 years ago." [541 "It is not too much to say that life in parts of London and
Newcastle is infernal." [551

Further, the better-off part of the working-class, together with the small shopkeepers and other elements of the lower
middle class, falls in London more and more under the curse of these vile conditions of dwelling, in proportion as
"improvements," and with them the demolition of old streets and houses, advance, as factories and the afflux of human
beings grow in the metropolis, and finally as house rents rise with the ground-rents. "Rents have become so heavy that
few labouring men can afford more than one room." [561 There is almost no house-property in London that is not
overburdened with a number of middlemen. For the price of land in London is always very high in comparison with
its yearly revenue, and therefore every buyer speculates on getting rid of it again at a jury price (the expropriation
valuation fixed by jurymen), or on pocketing an extraordinary increase of value arising from the neighbourhood of
some large establishment. As a consequence of this there is a regular trade in the purchase of "fag-ends of leases."
"Gentlemen in this business may be fairly expected to do as they do — get all they can from the tenants while they
have them, and leave as little as they can for their successors." [571

The rents are weekly, and these gentlemen run no risk. In consequence of the making of railroads in the City, "the
spectacle has lately been seen in the East of London of a number of families wandering about some Saturday night
with their scanty worldly goods on their backs, without any resting place but the workhouse." [581 The workhouses
are already over-crowded, and the "improvements" already sanctioned by Parliament are only just begun. If labourers
are driven away by the demolition of their old houses, they do not leave their old parish, or at most they settle down
on its borders, as near as they can get to it. "They try, of course, to remain as near as possible to their workshops. The
inhabitants do not go beyond the same or the next parish, parting their two-room tenements into single rooms, and
crowding even those.... Even at an advanced rent, the people who are displaced will hardly be able to get an
accommodation so good as the meagre one they have left.... Half the workmen ... of the Strand ... walked two miles to
their work." [591 This same Strand, a main thoroughfare which gives strangers an imposing idea of the wealth of
London, may serve as an example of the packing together of human beings in that town. In one of its parishes, the
Officer of Health reckoned 581 persons per acre, although half the width of the Thames was reckoned in. It will be
self-understood that every sanitary measure, which, as has been the case hitherto in London, hunts the labourers from
one quarter, by demolishing uninhabitable houses, serves only to crowd them together yet more closely in another.
"Either," says Dr. Hunter, "the whole proceeding will of necessity stop as an absurdity, or the public compassion (!) be
effectually aroused to the obligation which may now be without exaggeration called national, of supplying cover to
those who by reason of their having no capital, cannot provide it for themselves, though they can by periodical
payments reward those who, will provide it for them." [601 Admire this capitalistic justice! The owner, of land, of
houses, the businessman, when expropriated by "improvements" such as railroads, the building of new streets, &c,
not only receives full indemnity. He must, according to law, human and divine, be comforted for his enforced
"abstinence" over and above this by a thumping profit. The labourer, with his wife and child and chattels, is thrown
out into the street, and — if he crowds in too large numbers towards quarters of the town where the vestries insist on
decency, he is prosecuted in the name of sanitation!

Except London, there was at the beginning of the 19th century no single town in England of 100,000 inhabitants. Only
five had more than 50,000. Now there are 28 towns with more than 50,000 inhabitants. "The result of this change is
not only that the class of town people is enormously increased, but the old close-packed little towns are now centres,
built round on every side, open nowhere to air, and being no longer agreeable to the rich are abandoned by them for
the pleasanter outskirts. The successors of these rich are occupying the larger houses at the rate of a family to each
room [... and find accommodation for two or three lodgers ...] and a population, for which the houses were not
intended and quite unfit, has been created, whose surroundings are truly degrading to the adults and ruinous to the
children." [611 The more rapidly capital accumulates in an industrial or commercial town, the more rapidly flows the
stream of exploitable human material, the more miserable are the improvised dwellings of the labourers.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (22 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Newcastle-on-Tyne, as the centre of a coal and iron district of growing productiveness, takes the next place after
London in the housing inferno. Not less than 34,000 persons live there in single rooms. Because of their absolute
danger to the community, houses in great numbers have lately been destroyed by the authorities in Newcastle and
Gateshead. The building of new houses progresses very slowly, business very quickly. The town was, therefore, in
1865, more full than ever. Scarcely a room was to let. Dr. Embleton, of the Newcastle Fever Hospital, says: "There
can be little doubt that the great cause of the continuance and spread of the typhus has been the over-crowding of
human beings, and the uncleanliness of their dwellings. The rooms, in which labourers in many cases live, are situated
in confined and unwholesome yards or courts, and for space, light, air, and cleanliness, are models of insufficiency
and insalubrity, and a disgrace to any civilised community; in them men, women, and children lie at night huddled
together: and as regards the men, the night-shift succeed the day-shift, and the day-shift the night-shift in unbroken
series for some time together, the beds having scarcely time to cool; the whole house badly supplied with water and
worse with privies; dirty, unventilated, and pestiferous." [62] The price per week of such lodgings ranges from 8d. to
3s. "The town of Newcastle-on-Tyne," says Dr. Hunter, "contains a sample of the finest tribe of our countrymen, often
sunk by external circumstances of house and street into an almost savage degradation." [631

As a result of the ebbing and flowing of capital and labour, the state of the dwellings of an industrial town may to-day
be bearable, tomorrow hideous. Or the aedileship of the town may have pulled itself together for the removal of the
most shocking abuses. To-morrow, like a swarm of locusts, come crowding in masses of ragged Irishmen or decayed
English agricultural labourers. They are stowed away in cellars and lofts, or the hitherto respectable labourer's
dwelling is transformed into a lodging-house whose personnel changes as quickly as the billets in the 30 years' war.
Example: Bradford (Yorkshire). There the municipal philistine was just busied with urban improvements. Besides,
there were still in Bradford, in 1861, 1,751 uninhabited houses. But now comes that revival of trade which the mildly
liberal Mr. Forster, the negro's friend, recently crowed over with so much grace. With the revival of trade came of
course an overflow from the waves of the ever fluctuating "reserve army" or "relative surplus-population." The
frightful cellar habitations and rooms registered in the list, [64] which Dr. Hunter obtained from the agent of an
Insurance Company, were for the most part inhabited by well-paid labourers. They declared that they would willingly
pay for better dwellings if they were to be had. Meanwhile, they become degraded, they fall ill, one and all, whilst the
mildly liberal Forster, M. P., sheds tears over the blessings of Free-trade, and the profits of the eminent men of
Bradford who deal in worsted. In the Report of September, 1865, Dr. Bell, one of the poor law doctors of Bradford,
ascribes the frightful mortality of fever-patients in his district to the nature of their dwellings. "In one small cellar
measuring 1,500 cubic feet ... there are ten persons .... Vincent Street, Green Aire Place, and the Leys include 223
houses having 1,450 inhabitants, 435 beds, and 36 privies.... The beds-and in that term I include any roll of dirty old
rags, or an armful of shavings-have an average of 3.3 persons to each, many have 5 and 6 persons to each, and some
people, I am told, are absolutely without beds; they sleep in their ordinary clothes, on the bare boards — young men
and women, married and unmarried, all together. I need scarcely add that many of these dwellings are dark, damp,
dirty, stinking holes, utterly unfit for human habitations; they are the centres from which disease and death are
distributed amongst those in better circumstances, who have allowed them thus to fester in our midst." [651

Bristol takes the third place after London in the misery of its dwellings. "Bristol, where the blankest poverty and
domestic misery abound in the wealthiest town of Europe." [661



C. The Nomad Population

We turn now to a class of people whose origin is agricultural, but whose occupation is in great part industrial. They
are the light infantry of capital, thrown by it, according to its needs, now to this point, now to that. When they are not
on the march, they "camp." Nomad labour is used for various operations of building and draining, brick-making,
lime-burning, railway-making, &c. A flying column of pestilence, it carries into the places in whose neighbourhood it
pitches its camp, small-pox, typhus, cholera, scarlet fever, &c. [671 In undertakings that involve much capital outlay,
such as railways, &c, the contractor himself generally provides his army with wooden huts and the like, thus
improvising villages without any sanitary provisions, outside the control of the local boards, very profitable to the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (23 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

contractor, who exploits the labourers in two-fold fashion — as soldiers of industry and as tenants. According as the
wooden hut contains 1, 2, or 3 holes, its inhabitant, navvy, or whatever he may be, has to pay 1, 3, or 4 shillings
weekly. [681 One example will suffice. In September, 1864, Dr. Simon reports that the Chairman of the Nuisances
Removal Committee of the parish of Sevenoaks sent the following denunciation to Sir George Grey, Home Secretary:
— "Small-pox cases were rarely heard of in this parish until about twelve months ago. Shortly before that time, the
works for a railway from Lewisham to Tunbridge were commenced here, and, in addition to the principal works being
in the immediate neighbourhood of this town, here was also established the depot for the whole of the works, so that a
large number of persons was of necessity employed here. As cottage accommodation could not be obtained for them
all, huts were built in several places along the line of the works by the contractor, Mr. Jay, for their especial
occupation. These huts possessed no ventilation nor drainage, and, besides, were necessarily over-crowded, because
each occupant had to accommodate lodgers, whatever the number in his own family might be, although there were
only two rooms to each tenement. The consequences were, according to the medical report we received, that in the
night-time these poor people were compelled to endure all the horror of suffocation to avoid the pestiferous smells
arising from the filthy, stagnant water, and the privies close under their windows. Complaints were at length made to
the Nuisances Removal Committee by a medical gentleman who had occasion to visit these huts, and he spoke of their
condition as dwellings in the most severe terms, and he expressed his fears that some very serious consequences might
ensue, unless some sanitary measures were adopted. About a year ago, Mr. Jay promised to appropriate a hut, to which
persons in his employ, who were suffering from contagious diseases, might at once be removed. He repeated that
promise on the 23rd July last, but although since the date of the last Promise there have been several cases of
small-pox in his huts, and two deaths from the same disease, yet he has taken no steps whatever to carry out his
promise. On the 9th September instant, Mr. Kelson, surgeon, reported to me further cases of small-pox in the same
huts, and he described their condition as most disgraceful. I should add, for your (the Home Secretary's) information
that an isolated house, called the Pest-house, which is set apart for parishioners who might be suffering from
infectious diseases, has been continually occupied by such patients for many months past, and is also now occupied;
that in one family five children died from small-pox and fever; that from the 1st April to the 1st September this year, a
period of five months, there have been no fewer than ten deaths from small-pox in the parish, four of them being in the
huts already referred to; that it is impossible to ascertain the exact number of persons who have suffered from that
disease although they are known to be many, from the fact of the families keeping it as private as possible." [691

The labourers in coal and other mines belong to the best paid categories of the British proletariat. The price at which
they buy their wages was shown on an earlier page. [701 Here I merely cast a hurried glance over the conditions of
their dwellings. As a rule, the exploiter of a mine, whether its owner or his tenant, builds a number of cottages for his
hands. They receive cottages and coal for firing "for nothing" — i.e., these form part of their wages, paid in kind.
Those who are not lodged in this way receive in compensation £4 per annum. The mining districts attract with rapidity
a large population, made up of the miners themselves, and the artisans, shopkeepers, &c, that group themselves
around them. The ground-rents are high, as they are generally where population is dense. The master tries, therefore,
to run up, within the smallest space possible at the mouth of the pit, just so many cottages as are necessary to pack
together his hands and their families. If new mines are opened in the neighborhood, or old ones are again set working,
the pressure increases. In the construction of the cottages, only one point of view is of moment, the "abstinence" of the
capitalist front all expenditure that is not absolutely unavoidable. "The lodging which is obtained by the pitman and
other labourers connected with the collieries of Northumberland and Durham," says Dr. Julian Hunter, "is perhaps, on
the whole, the worst and the dearest of which any large specimens can be found in England, the similar parishes of
Monmouthshire excepted.... The extreme badness is in the high number of men found in one room, in the smallness of
the ground-plot on which a great number of houses are thrust, the want of water, the absence of privies, and the
frequent placing of one house on the top of another, or distribution into flats, ... the lessee acts as if the whole colony
were encamped, not resident." [711

"In pursuance of my instructions," says Dr. Stevens, "I visited most of the large colliery villages in the Durham
Union.... With very few exceptions, the general statement that no means are taken to secure the health of the
inhabitants would be true of all of them.... All colliers are bound ['bound,' an expression which, like bondage, dates
from the age of serfdom] to the colliery lessee or owner for twelve months.... If the colliers express discontent, or in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (24 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

any way annoy the 'viewer,' a mark of memorandum is made against their names, and, at the annual 'binding,' such
men are turned off... It appears to me that no part of the 'truck system' could be worse than what obtains in these
densely-populated districts. The collier is bound to take as part of his hiring a house surrounded with pestiferous
influences; he cannot help himself, and it appears doubtful whether anyone else can help him except his proprietor (he
is, to all intents and purposes, a serf), and his proprietor first consults his balance-sheet, and the result is tolerably
certain. The collier is also often supplied with water by the proprietor, which, whether it be good or bad, he has to pay
for, or rather he suffers a deduction for from his wages." \12]

In conflict with "public opinion," or even with the Officers of Health, capital makes no difficulty about "justifying"
the conditions partly dangerous, partly degrading, to which it confines the working and domestic life of the labourer,
on the ground that they are necessary for profit. It is the same thing when capital "abstains" from protective measures
against dangerous machinery in the factory, from appliances for ventilation and for safety in mines, &c. It is the same
here with the housing of the miners. Dr. Simon, medical officer of the Privy Council, in his official Report says: "In
apology for the wretched household accommodation ... it is alleged that miners are commonly worked on lease; that
the duration of the lessee's interest (which in collieries is commonly for 21 years), is not so long that he should deem it
worth his while to create good accommodation for his labourers, and for the tradespeople and others whom the work
attracts; that even if he were disposed to act liberally in the matter, this disposition would commonly be defeated by
his landlord's tendency to fix on him, as ground-rent, an exorbitant additional charge for the privilege of having on the
surface of the ground the decent and comfortable village which the labourers of the subterranean property ought to
inhabit, and that prohibitory price (if not actual prohibition) equally excludes others who might desire to build. It
would be foreign to the purpose of this report to enter upon any discussion of the merits of the above apology. Nor
here is it even needful to consider where it would be that, if decent accommodation were provided, the cost ... would
eventually fall — whether on landlord, or lessee, or labourer, or public. But in presence of such shameful facts as are
vouched for in the annexed reports [those of Dr. Hunter, Dr. Stevens, &c] a remedy may well be claimed.... Claims of
landlordship are being so used as to do great public wrong. The landlord in his capacity of mine-owner invites an
industrial colony to labour on his estate, and then in his capacity of surface-owner makes it impossible that the
labourers whom he collects, should find proper lodging where they must live. The lessee [the capitalist exploiter]
meanwhile has no pecuniary motive for resisting that division of the bargain; well knowing that if its latter conditions
be exorbitant, the consequences fall, not on him, that his labourers on whom they fall have not education enough to
know the value of their sanitary rights, that neither obscenest lodging nor foulest drinking water will be appreciable
inducements towards a 'strike.'" [731



D. Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working-Class

Before I turn to the regular agricultural labourers, I may be allowed to show, by one example, how industrial
revulsions affect even the bestpaid, the aristocracy, of the working-class. It will be remembered that the year 1857
brought one of the great crises with which the industrial cycle periodically ends. The next termination of the cycle was
due in 1866. Already discounted in the regular factory districts by the cotton famine, which threw much capital from
its wonted sphere into the great centres of the money-market, the crisis assumed, at this time, an especially financial
character. Its outbreak in 1866 was signalised by the failure of a gigantic London Bank, immediately followed by the
collapse of countless swidling companies. One of the great London branches of industry involved in the catastrophe
was iron shipbuilding. The magnates of this trade had not only over-produced beyond all measure during the
overtrading time, but they had, besides, engaged in enormous contracts on the speculation that credit would be
forthcoming to an equivalent extent. Now, a terrible reaction set in, that even at this hour (the end of March, 1867)
continues in this and other London industries. [741 To show the condition of the labourers, I quote the following from
the circumstantial report of a correspondent of the Morning Star, who, at the end of 1866, and beginning of 1867,
visited the chief centres of distress: "In the East End districts of Poplar, Millwall, Greenwich, Deptford, Limehouse
and Canning Town, at least 15,000 workmen and their families were in a state of utter destitution, and 3,000 skilled
mechanics were breaking stones in the workhouse yard (after distress of over half a year's duration).... I had great
difficulty in reaching the workhouse door, for a hungry crowd besieged it.... They were waiting for their tickets, but

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (25 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

the time had not yet arrived for the distribution. The yard was a great square place with an open shed running all round
it, and several large heaps of snow covered the paving-stones in the middle. In the middle, also, were little
wicker-fenced spaces, like sheep pens, where in finer weather the men worked; but on the day of my visit the pens
were so snowed up that nobody could sit in them. Men were busy, however, in the open shed breaking paving-stones
into macadam. Each man had a big paving- stone for a seat, and he chipped away at the rime-covered granite with a
big hammer until he had broken up, and think! five bushels of it, and then he had done his day's work, and got his
day's pay — threepence and an allowance of food. In another part of the yard was a rickety little wooden house, and
when we opened the door of it, we found it filled with men who were huddled together shoulder to shoulder for the
warmth of one another's bodies and breath. They were picking oakum and disputing the while as to which could work
the longest on a given quantity of food — for endurance was the point of honour. Seven thousand ... in this one
workhouse ... were recipients of relief ... many hundreds of them ... it appeared, were, six or eight months ago, earning
the highest wages paid to artisans.... Their number would be more than doubled by the count of those who, having
exhausted all their savings, still refuse to apply to the parish, because they have a little left to pawn. Leaving the
workhouse, I took a walk through the streets, mostly of little one-storey houses, that abound in the neighbourhood of
Poplar. My guide was a member of the Committee of the Unemployed.... My first call was on an ironworker who had
been seven and twenty weeks out of employment. I found the man with his family sitting in a little back room. The
room was not bare of furniture, and there was a fire in it. This was necessary to keep the naked feet of the young
children from getting frost bitten, for it was a bitterly cold day. On a tray in front of the fire lay a quantity of oakum,
which the wife and children were picking in return for their allowance from the parish. The man worked in the stone
yard of the workhouse for a certain ration of food, and threepence per day. He had now come home to dinner quite
hungry, as he told us with a melancholy smile, and his dinner consisted of a couple of slices of bread and dripping,
and a cup of milkless tea.... The next door at which we knocked was opened by a middle-aged woman, who, without
saying a word, led us into a little back parlour, in which sat all her family, silent and fixedly staring at a rapidly dying
fire. Such desolation, such hopelessness was about these people and their little room, as I should not care to witness
again. 'Nothing have they done, sir,' said the woman, pointing to her boys, 'for six and twenty weeks; and all our
money gone — all the twenty pounds that me and father saved when times were better, thinking it would yield a little
to keep us when we got past work. Look at it,' she said, almost fiercely, bringing out a bank-book with all its well kept
entries of money paid in, and money taken out, so that we could see how the little fortune had begun with the first five
shilling deposit, and had grown by little and little to be twenty pounds, and how it had melted down again till the sum
in hand got from pounds to shillings, and the last entry made the book as worthless as a blank sheet. This family
received relief from the workhouse, and it furnished them with just one scanty meal per day.... Our next visit was to an
iron labourer's wife, whose husband had worked in the yards. We found her ill from want of food, lying on a mattress
in her clothes, and just covered with a strip of carpet, for all the bedding had been pawned. Two wretched children
were tending her, themselves looking as much in need of nursing as their mother. Nineteen weeks of enforced idleness
had brought them to this pass, and while the mother told the history of that bitter past, she moaned as if all her faith in
a future that should atone for it were dead.... On getting outside a young fellow came running after us, and asked us to
step inside his house and see if anything could be done for him. A young wife, two pretty children, a cluster of
pawn-tickets, and a bare room were all he had to show."

On the after pains of the crisis of 1866, the following extract from a Tory newspaper. It must not be forgotten that the
East-end of London, which is here dealt with, is not only the seat of the iron shipbuilding mentioned above,, but also
of a so-called "home-industry" always underpaid. "A frightful spectacle was to be seen yesterday in one part of the
metropolis. Although the unemployed thousands of the East-end did not parade with their black flags en masse, the
human torrent was imposing enough. Let us remember what these people suffer. They are dying of hunger. That is the
simple and terrible fact. There are 40,000 of them.... In our presence, in one quarter of this wonderful metropolis, are
packed — next door to the most enormous accumulation of wealth the world ever saw — cheek by jowl with this are
40,000 helpless, starving people. These thousands are now breaking in upon the other quarters; always half- starving,
they cry their misery in our ears, they cry to Heaven, they tell us from their miserable dwellings, that it is impossible
for them to find work, and useless for them to beg. The local ratepayers themselves are driven by the parochial
charges to the verge of pauperism." — {Standard, 5th April, 1867.)

As it is the fashion amongst English capitalists to quote Belgium as the Paradise of the labourer because "freedom of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (26 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

labour," or what is the same thing, "freedom of capital," is there limited neither by the despotism of Trades' Unions,
nor by Factory Acts, a word or two on the "happiness' of the Belgian labourer. Assuredly no one was more thoroughly
initiated in the mysteries of this happiness than the late M. Ducpetiaux, inspector-general of Belgian prisons and
charitable institutions, and member of the central commission of Belgian statistics. Let us take his work: "Budgets
economiques des classes ouvrieres de la Belgique," Bruxelles, 1855. Here we find among other matters, a normal
Belgian labourer's family, whose yearly income and expenditure he calculates on very exact data, and whose
conditions of nourishment are then compared with those of the soldier, sailor, and prisoner. The family "consists of
father, mother, and four children." Of these 6 persons "four may be usefully employed the whole year through." It is
assumed that "there is no sick person nor one incapable of work, among them," nor are there "expenses for religious,
moral, and intellectual purposes, except a very small sum for church sittings," nor "contributions to savings banks or
benefit societies," nor "expenses due to luxury or the result of improvidence." The father and eldest son, however,
allow themselves "the use of tobacco," and on Sundays "go to the cabaret" for which a whole 86 centimes a week are
reckoned. "From a general compilation of wages allowed to the labourers in different trades, it follows that the highest
average of daily wage is 1 franc 56c, for men, 89 centimes for women, 56 centimes for boys, and 55 centimes for
girls. Calculated at this rate, the resources of the family would amount, at the maximum, to 1,068 francs a-year.... In
the family ... taken as typical we have calculated all possible resources. But in ascribing wages to the mother of the
family we raise the question of the direction of the household. How will its internal economy be cared for? Who will
look after the young children? Who will get ready the meals, do the washing and mending? This is the dilemma
incessantly presented to the labourers."

According to this the budget of the family is:



The father 300 working-days at fr. 1.56 fr. 468


mother 300 working-days at fr. 0.89 fr. 267


boy 300 working-days at fr. 0.56 fr. 168


|girl |300 working-days at fr. 0.55 fr. 165


Total fr. 1,068



The annual expenditure of the family would cause a deficit upon the hypothesis that the labourer has the food of:



A


The man-of-war's man fr. 1,828 Deficit fr. 760 |


The soldier fr. 1,473 Deficit fr. 405 |


The prisoner fr. 1,112 Deficit fr. 44 |



"We see that few labouring families can reach, we will not say the average of the sailor or soldier, but even that of the
prisoner. 'The general average (of the cost of each prisoner in the different prisons during the period 1847-1849), has
been 63 centimes for all prisons. This figure, compared with that of the daily maintenance of the labourer, shows a
difference of 13 centimes. It must be remarked further, that if in the prisons it is necessary to set down in the account
the expenses of administration and surveillance, on the other hand, the prisoners have not to pay for their lodging; that
the purchases they make at the canteens are not included in the expenses of maintenance, and that these expenses are
greatly lowered in consequence of the large number of persons that make up the establishments, and of contracting for
or buying wholesale, the food and other things that enter into their consumption.... How comes it, however, that a
great number, we might say, a great majority, of labourers, live in a more economical way? It is ... by adopting
expedients, the secret of which only the labourer knows;, by reducing his daily rations; by substituting rye-bread for
wheat; by eating less meat, or even none at all, and the same with butter and condiments; by contenting themselves
with one or two rooms where the family is crammed together, where boys and girls sleep side by side, often on the
same pallet; by economy of clothing, washing, decency: by giving up the Sunday diversions; by, in short, resigning
themselves to the most painful privations. Once arrived at this extreme limit, the least rise in the price of food,
stoppage of work, illness, increases the labourer's distress and determines his complete ruin; debts accumulate, credit
fails, the most necessary clothes and furniture are pawned, and finally, the family asks to be enrolled on the list of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (27 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

paupers." (Ducpetiaux, 1. c, pp. 151, 154, 155.) In fact, in this "Paradise of capitalists" there follows, on the smallest
change in the price of the most essential means of subsistence, a change in the number of deaths and crimes! (See
Manifesto of the Maatschappij: "De Vlamingen Vooruit!" Brussels, 1860, pp. 15, 16.) In all Belgium are 930,000
families, of whom, according to the official statistics, 90,000 are wealthy and on the list of voters = 450,000 persons;
390,000 families of the lower middle-class in towns and villages, the greater part of them constantly sinking into the
proletariat, = 1,950,000 persons, Finally, 450,000 working-class families = 2,250,000 persons, of whom the model
ones enjoy the happiness depicted by Ducpetiaux. Of the 450,000 working-class families, over 200,000 are on the
pauper list.



E. The British Agricultural Proletariat

Nowhere does the antagonistic character of capitalistic product and accumulation assert itself more brutally than in the
progress of English agriculture (including cattle-breeding) and the retrogression the English agricultural labourer.
Before I turn to his present situate a rapid retrospect. Modern agriculture dates in England from the middle of the 18th
century, although the revolution in landed property, from which the changed mode of production starts as a basis, has
a much earlier date.

If we take the statements of Arthur Young, a careful observer, though a superficial thinker, as to the agricultural
labourer of 1771, the latter plays a very pitiable part compared with his predecessor of the end of the 14th century,
"when the labourer ... could live in plenty, and accumulate wealth," [751 not to speak of the 15th century, "the golden
age of the English labourer in town and country." We need not, however, go back so far. In a very instructive work of
the year 1777 we read: "The great farmer is nearly mounted to a level with him [the gentleman]; while the poor
labourer is depressed almost to the earth. His unfortunate situation will fully appear, by taking a comparative view of
it, only forty years ago, and at present.... Landlord and tenant ... have both gone hand in hand in keeping the labourer
down." [761 It is then proved in detail that the real agricultural wages between 1737 and 1777 fell nearly 1/4 or 25 per
cent. "Modern policy," says Dr. Richard Price also, "is, indeed, more favourable to the higher classes of people; and
the consequences may in time prove that the whole kingdom will consist of only gentry and beggars, or of grandees
and slaves." [771

Nevertheless, the position of the English agricultural labourer from 1770 to 1780, with regard to his food and
dwelling, as well as to his self-respect, amusements, &c, is an ideal never attained again since that time. His average
wage expressed in pints of wheat was from 1770 to 1771, 90 pints, in Eden's time (1797) only 65, in 1808 but 60. [781

The state of the agricultural labourer at the end of the Anti- Jacobin War, during which landed proprietors, farmers,
manufacturers, merchants, bankers, stockbrokers, army-contractors, &c, enriched themselves so extraordinarily, has
been already indicated above. The nominal wages rose in consequence partly of the bank-note depreciation, partly of a
rise in the price of the primary means of subsistence independent of this depreciation.- But the actual wage-variation
can be evidenced in a very simple way, without entering into details that are here unnecessary. The Poor Law and its
administration were in 1795 and 1814 the same. It will be remembered how this law was carried out in the country
districts: in the form of alms the parish made up the nominal wage to the nominal sum required for the simple
vegetation of the labourer. The ratio between the wages paid by the farmer, and the wage-deficit made good by the
parish, shows us two things. First, the falling of wages below their minimum; second, the degree in which the
agricultural labourer was a compound of wage-labourer and pauper, or the degree in which he had been turned into a
serf of his parish. Let us take one county that represents the average condition of things in all counties. In
Northamptonshire, in 1795, the average weekly wage was 7s. 6d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 6
persons, £36 12s. 5d.; their total income, £29 18s.; deficit made good by the parish, £6 14s. 5d. In 1814, in the same
county, the weekly wage was 12s. 2d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 5 persons, £54 18s. 4d.; their total
income, £36, 2s.; deficit made good by the parish, £18 6s. 4d. [791 In 1795 the deficit was less than 1/4 the wage, in
1814, more than half. It is self-evident that, under these circumstances, the meagre comforts that Eden still found in
the cottage of the agricultural labourer, had vanished by 1814. [801 Of all the animals kept by the farmer, the labourer,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (28 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five
the instrumentum vocals, was, thenceforth, the most oppressed, the worst nourished, the most brutally treated.

The same state of things went on quietly until "the Swing riots, in 1830, revealed to us {i.e., the ruling classes) by the
light of blazing corn-stacks, that misery and black mutinous discontent smouldered quite as fiercely under the surface
of agricultural as of manufacturing England." [811 At this time, Sadler, in the House of Commons, christened the
agricultural labourers "white slaves," and a Bishop echoed the epithet in the Upper House. The most notable political
economist of that period — E. G. Wakefield — says: "The peasant of the South of England ... is not a freeman, nor is
he a slave; he is a pauper." [821

The time just before the repeal of the Corn Laws threw new light on the condition of the agricultural labourers. On the
one hand; it was to the interest of the middle-class agitators to prove how little the Corn Laws protected the actual
producers of the corn. On the other hand, the industrial bourgeoisie foamed with sullen rage at the denunciations of
the factory system by the landed aristocracy, at the pretended sympathy with the woes of the factory operatives, of
those utterly corrupt, heartless, and genteel loafers, and at their "diplomatic zeal" for factory legislation. It is an old
English proverb that "when thieves fall out, honest men come by their own," and, in fact, the noisy, passionate quarrel
between the two fractions of the ruling class about the question, which of the two exploited the labourers the more
shamefully, was on each hand the midwife of the truth. Earl Shaftesbury, then Lord Ashley, was commander-in-chief
in the aristocratic, philanthropic, anti-factory campaign. He was, therefore, in 1845, a favourite subject in the
revelations of the Morning Chronicle on the condition of the agricultural labourers. This journal, then the most
important Liberal organ, sent special commissioners into the agricultural districts, who did not content themselves
with mere general descriptions and statistics, but published the names both of the labouring families examined and of
their landlords. The following list gives the wages paid in three villages in the neighbourhood of Blanford,
Wimbourne, and Poole. The villages are the property of Mr. G. Bankes and of the Earl of Shaftesbury. It will be noted
that, just like Bankes, this "low church pope," this head of English pietists, pockets a great part of the miserable wages
of the labourers under the pretext of house-rent: —





FIRST VILLAGE


(a) Children.


2


3 2 2


6


3


(b) Number of Members in Family.


4


5 4 4


8


5


(c) Weekly Wage of the Men.


8s. Od.


8s. Od. 8s. Od. 8s. Od.


7s. Od.


7s. Od.


(d) Weekly Wage of the Children.


—


— — —


1/-, 1/6


1/-, Il-


(e) Weekly Income of the whole Family.


8s. Od.


8s. Od. 8s. Od. 8s. Od.


10s. 6d.


ls. Od.


(f) Weekly Rent.


2s. Od.


Is. 6d. Is. Od. Is. Od.


2s. Od.


Is. 4d.


(g) Total Weekly wage after deduction of Rent. 6s. Od.


6s. 6d. 7s. Od. 7s. Od.


8s. 6d.


5s. 8d.


(h) Weekly income per head.


Is. 6d.


Is. 3 l/2d. Is. 9d. Is. 9d.


Is. 3/4d.


Is. 1 l/2d.



SECOND VILLAGE


(a) Children. 6 6 8 4 3


(b) Number of Members in Family. 8 8 10 6 5


(c) Weekly Wage of the Men. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od.


(d) Weekly Wage of the Children. 1/-, 1/6 1/-, 1/6


(e) Weekly Income of the whole Family. 10s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od.


(f) Weekly Rent. Is. 6d. Is. 3 l/2d. Is. 3 l/2d. Is. 6 l/2d. Is. 6 l/2d.


(g) Total Weekly wage after deduction of Rent. 8s. 6d. 5s. 8 l/2d. 5s. 8 l/2d. 5s. 5 l/2d. 5s. 5 l/2d.


(h) Weekly income per head. Is. 3/4d. 0s. 8 l/2d. 0s. 7d. 0s. lid. Is. Id.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (29 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five





THIRD VILLAGE


(a) Children. 4


3


(b) Number of Members in Family. 6


5 2


(c) Weekly Wage of the Men. 7s. Od.


7s. Od. 5s. Od.


(d) Weekly Wage of the Children.


1/-2/- 1/-2/6


(e) Weekly Income of the whole Family. 7s. Od.


lis. 6d. 5s. Od.


if) Weekly Rent. Is. Od.


Os. lOd. Is. Od.


(g) Total Weekly wage after deduction of Rent. 6s. Od.


10s. 8d. 4s. Od.


(h) Weekly income per head. Is. Od.


2s. 1 3/5d. 2s. Od.



1841

The repeal of the Corn Laws gave a marvellous impulse to English agriculture. [831 Drainage on the most extensive
scale, new methods of stall-feeding, and of the artificial cultivation of green crops, introduction of mechanical
manuring apparatus, new treatment of clay soils, increased use of numeral manures, employment of the steam-engine,
and of all kinds of new machinery, more intensive cultivation generally, characterised this epoch. Mr. Pusey,
Chairman of the Royal Agricultural Society, declares that the (relative) expenses of farming have been reduced nearly
one half by the introduction of new machinery. On the other hand, the actual return of the soil rose rapidly. Greater
outlay of capital per acre, and, as a consequence, more rapid concentration of farms, were essential conditions of the
new method. [851 At the same time, the area under cultivation increased, from 1846 to 1856, by 464,1 19 acres,
without reckoning the great area in the Eastern Counties which was transformed from rabbit warrens and poor
pastures into magnificent corn-fields. It has already been seen that, at the same time, the total number of persons
employed in agriculture fell. As far as the actual agricultural labourers of both sexes and of all ages are concerned,
their number fell from 1,241,396, in 1851, to 1,163, 217 in 1861. [861 If the English Registrar-General, therefore,
rightly remarks: "The increase of farmers and farm-labourers, since 1801, bears no kind of proportion ... to the
increase of agricultural produce," [871 this disproportion obtains much more for the last period, when a positive
decrease of the agricultural population went hand in hand with increase of the area under cultivation, with more
intensive cultivation, unheard-of accumulation of the capital incorporated with the soil, and devoted to its working, an
augmentation in the products of the soil without parallel in the history of English agriculture, plethoric rent-rolls of
landlords, and growing wealth of the capitalist farmers. If we take this, together with the swift, unbroken extension of
the markets, viz., the towns, and the reign of Free-trade, then the agricultural labourer was at last, post tot discrimina
rerum, placed in circumstances that ought, secundum ariem, to have made him drunk with happiness.

But Professor Rogers comes to the conclusion that the lot of the English agricultural labourer of to-day, not to speak
of his predecessor in the last half of the 14th and in the 15th century, but only compared with his predecessor from
1770 to 1780, has changed for the worse to an extraordinary extent, that "the peasant has again become a serf," and a
serf worse fed and worse clothed. [881 Dr. Julian Hunter, in his epochmaking report on the dwellings of the
agricultural labourers, says: "The cost of the hind" (a name for the agricultural labourer, inherited from the time of
serfdom) "is fixed at the lowest possible amount on which he can live ... the supplies of wages and shelter are not
calculated on the profit to be derived from him. He is a zero in farming calculations... [891 The means [of subsistence]
being always supposed to be a fixed quantity. [901 As to any further reduction of his income, he may say, nihil habeo
nihil euro. He has no fears for the future, because he has now only the spare supply necessary to keep him. He has
reached the zero from which are dated the calculations of the farmer. Come what will, he has no share either in
prosperity or adversity." [911

In the year 1863, an official inquiry took place into the conditions of nourishment and labour of the criminals
condemned to transportation and penal servitude. The results are recorded in two voluminous Blue books. Among
other things it is said: "From an elaborate comparison between the diet of convicts in the convict prisons in England,
and that of paupers in workhouses and of free labourers in the same country ... it certainly appears that the former are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (30 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

much better fed than either of the two other classes," [92] whilst "the amount of labour required from an ordinary
convict under penal servitude is about one half of what would be done by an ordinary day-labourer." [931 A few
characteristic depositions of witnesses: John Smith, governor of the Edinburgh prison, deposes: No. 5056. "The diet of
the English prisons [is] superior to that of ordinary labourers in England." No 50. "It is the fact ... that the ordinary
agricultural labourers in Scotland very seldom get any meat at all." Answer No. 3047. "Is there anything that you are
aware of to account for the necessity of feeding them very much better than ordinary labourers? — Certainly not." No.
3048. "Do you think that further experiments ought to be made in order to ascertain whether a dietary might not be hit
upon for prisoners employed on public works nearly approaching to the dietary of free labourers? ..." [941 "He [the
agricultural labourer] might say: I work hard, and have not enough to eat, and when in prison I did not work harder
where I had plenty to eat, and therefore it is better for me to be in prison again than here.'" [95] From the tables
appended to the first volume of the Report I have compiled the annexed comparative summary.





WEEKLY AMOUNT OF NUTRIENTS




Quantity Of
Nitrogenous
Ingredients


Quantity Of
Non-Nitro-
genous In-
gredients


Quantity Of
Mineral
Matter


TOTAL


Ounces


Ounces


Ounces


Ounces


Portland (convict)


28.95


150.06


4.68


183.69


Sailor in the Navy


29.63


152.91


4.52


187.06


Soldier


25.55


114.49


3.94


143.98


Working Coachmaker


24.53


162.06


4.23


190.82


Compositor


21.24


100.83


3.12


125.19


Agricultural labourer


17.73


118.06


3.29


139.08



[96J

The general result of the inquiry by the medical commission of 1863 on the food of the lowest fed classes, is already
known to the reader. He will remember that the diet of a great part of the agricultural labourers' families is below the
minimum necessary "to arrest starvation diseases." This is especially the case in all the purely rural districts of
Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Wilts, Stafford, Oxford, Berks, and Herts. "The nourishment obtained by the labourer
himself," says Dr. E. Smith, "is larger than the average quantity indicates, since he eats a larger share ... necessary to
enable him to perform his labour ... of food than the other members of the family, including in the poorer districts
nearly all the meat and bacon.... The quantity of food obtained by the wife and also by the children at the period of
rapid growth, is in many cases, in almost every county, deficient, and particularly in nitrogen." [97] The male and
female servants living with the farmers themselves are sufficiently nourished. Their number fell from 288,277 in
1851, to 204,962 in 1861. "The labour of women in the fields," says Dr. Smith, "whatever may be its disadvantages, ...
is under present circumstances of great advantage to the family, since it adds that amount of income which ... provides
shoes and clothing and pays the rent, and thus enables the family to be better fed." [98] One of the most remarkable
results of the inquiry was that the agricultural labourer of England, as compared with other parts of the United
Kingdom, "is considerably the worst fed," as the appended table shows:

Quantities of Carbon and Nitrogen weekly consumed by an average agricultural adult:









Carbon,
grains


Nitrogen,
grains


England


46,673


1,594


1 Wales


48,354


2,031



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (31 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



Scotland 48,980 2,348


Ireland 43,366 2,4341 |



[99J

"To the insufficient quantity and miserable quality of the house accommodation generally had," says Dr. Simon, in his
official Health Report, "by our agricultural labourers, almost every page of Dr. Hunter's report bears testimony. And
gradually, for many years past, the state of the labourer in these respects has been deteriorating, house-room being
now greatly more difficult for him to find, and, when found, greatly less suitable to his needs than, perhaps, for
centuries had been the case. Especially within the last twenty or thirty years, the evil has been in very rapid increase,
and the household circumstances of the labourer are now in the highest degree deplorable. Except in so far as they
whom his labour enriches, see fit to treat him with a kind of pitiful indulgence, he is quite peculiarly helpless in the
matter. Whether he shall find house-room on the land which he contributes to till, whether the house-room which he
gets shall be human or swinish, whether he shall have the little space of garden that so vastly lessens the pressure of
his poverty — all this does not depend on his willingness and ability to pay reasonable rent for the decent
accommodation he requires, but depends on the use which others may see fit to make of their 'right to do as they will
with their own.' However large may be a farm, there, is no law that a certain proportion of labourers' dwellings (much
less of decent dwellings) shall be upon it; nor does any law reserve for the labourer ever so little right in that soil to
which his industry is as needful as sun and rain.... An extraneous element weighs the balance heavily against him ...
the influence of the Poor Law in its provisions concerning settlement and chargeability. [1001 Under this influence,
each parish has a pecuniary interest in reducing to a minimum the number of its resident labourers: — for, unhappily,
agricultural labour instead of implying a safe and permanent independence for the hardworking labourer and his
family, implies for the most part only a longer or shorter circuit to eventual pauperism — a pauperism which, during
the whole circuit, is so near, that any illness or temporary failure of occupation necessitates immediate recourse to
parochial relief — and thus all residence of agricultural population in a parish is glaringly an addition to its poor-rates
.... Large proprietors [1011 ... have but to resolve that there shall be no labourers' dwellings on their estates, and their
estates will thenceforth be virtually free from half their responsibility for the poor. How far it has been intended, in the
English constitution and law, that this kind of unconditional property in land should be acquirable, and that a landlord
'doing as he wills with his own,' should be able to treat the cultivators of the soil as aliens, whom he may expel from
his territory, is a question which I do not pretend to discuss.... For that (power) of eviction ... does not exist only in
theory. On a very large scale it prevails in practice — prevails ... as a main governing condition in the household
circumstances of agricultural labour.... As regards the extent of the evil, it may suffice to refer to the evidence which
Dr. Hunter has compiled from the last census, that destruction of houses, notwithstanding increased local demands for
them, had, during the last ten years, been in progress in 821 separate parishes or townships of England, so that
irrespectively of persons who had been forced to become non-resident (that is in the parishes in which they work),
these parishes and townships were receiving in 1861, as compared with 1851, a population 5 1/3 per cent, greater, into
houseroom 4 1/2 per cent. less... When the process of depopulation has completed itself, the result, says Dr. Hunter, is
a show-village where the cottages have been reduced to a few, and where none but persons who are needed as
shepherds, gardeners, or game-keepers, are allowed to live; regular servants who receive the good treatment usual to
their class. [1021 But the land requires cultivation, and it will be found that the labourers employed upon it are not the
tenants of the owner, but that they come from a neighbouring open village, perhaps three miles off, where a numerous
small proprietary had received them when their cottages were destroyed in the close villages around. Where things are
tending to the above result, often the cottages which stand, testify, in their unrepaired and wretched condition, to the
extinction to which they are doomed. They are seen standing in the various stages of natural decay. While the shelter
holds together, the labourer is permitted to rent it, and glad enough he will often be to do so, even at the price of
decent lodging. But no repair, no improvement shall it receive, except such as its penniless occupants can supply. And
when at last it becomes quite uninhabitable — uninhabitable even to the humblest standard of serfdom — it will be
but one more destroyed cottage, and future poor-rates will be somewhat lightened. While great owners are thus
escaping from poor-rates through the depopulation of lands over which they have control, the nearest town or open
village receive the evicted labourers: the nearest, I say, but this "nearest" may mean three or four miles distant from
the farm where the labourer has his daily toil. To that daily toil there will then have to be added, as though it were

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (32 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

nothing, the daily need of walking six or eight miles for power of earning his bread. And whatever farmwork is done
by his wife and children, is done at the same disadvantage. Nor is this nearly all the toil which the distance occasions
him. In the open village, cottage-speculators buy scraps of land, which they throng as densely as they can with the
cheapest of all possible hovels. And into those wretched habitations (which, even if they adjoin the open country, have
some of the worst features of the worst town residences) crowd the agricultural labourers of England. [1031 •■•■ Nor on
the other hand must it be supposed that even when the labourer is housed upon the lands which he cultivates, his
household circumstances are generally such as his life of productive industry would seem to deserve. Even on princely
estates ... his cottage ... may be of the meanest description. There are landlords who deem any stye good enough for
their labourer and his family, and who yet do not disdain to drive with him the hardest possible bargain for rent. IT 041
It may be but a ruinous one-bedroomed hut, having no fire-grate, no privy, no opening window, no water supply but
the ditch, no garden — but the labourer is helpless against the wrong.... And the Nuisances Removal Acts ... are ... a
mere dead letter ... in great part dependent for their working on such cottage-owners as the one from whom his (the
labourer's) hovel is rented.... From brighter, but exceptional scenes, it is requisite in the interests of justice, that
attention should again be drawn to the overwhelming preponderance of facts which are a reproach to the civilisation of
England. Lamentable indeed, must be the case, when, notwithstanding all that is evident with regard to the quality of
the present accommodation, it is the common conclusion of competent observers that even the general badness of
dwellings is an evil infinitely less urgent than their mere numerical insufficiency. For years the over-crowding of rural
labourers' dwellings has been a matter of deep concern, not only to persons who care for sanitary good, but to persons
who care for decent and moral life. For, again and again in phrases so uniform that they seem stereotyped, reporters on
the spread of epidemic disease in rural districts, have insisted en the extreme importance of that over-crowding, as an
influence which renders it a quite hopeless task, to attempt the limiting of any infection which is introduced. And
again and again it has been pointed out that, notwithstanding the many salubrious influences which there are in
country life, the crowding which so favours the extension of contagious disease, also favours the origination of disease
which is not contagious. And those who have denounced the over-crowded state of our rural population have not been
silent as to a further mischief. Even where their primary concern has been only with the injury to health, often almost
perforce they have referred to other relations on the subject. In showing how frequently it happens that adult persons
of both sexes, married and unmarried, are huddled together in single small sleeping rooms, their reports have carried
the conviction that, under the circumstances they describe, decency must always be outraged, and morality almost of
necessity must suffer. [1051 Thus, for instance, in the appendix of my last annual report, Dr. Ord, reporting on an
outbreak of fever at Wing, in Buckinghamshire, mentions how a young man who had come thither from Wingrave
with fever, "in the first days of his illness slept in a room with nine other persons. Within a fortnight several of these
persons were attacked, and in the course of a few weeks five out of the nine had fever, and one died..." From Dr.
Harvey, of St. George's Hospital, who, on private professional business, visited Wing during the time of the epidemic,
I received information exactly in the sense of the above report.... "A young woman having fever, lay at night in a room
occupied by her father and mother, her bastard child, two young men (her brothers), and her two sisters, each with a
bastard child — 10 persons in all. A few weeks ago 13 persons slept in it." [1061

Dr. Hunter investigated 5,375 cottages of agricultural labourers, not only in the purely agricultural districts, but in all
counties of England. Of these, 2,195 had only one bedroom (often at the same time used as living-room), 2,930 only
two, and 250, more than two. I will give a few specimens culled from a dozen counties.



(1 .) Bedfordshire



Wrestlingworth. Bedrooms about 12 feet long and 10 broad, although many are smaller than this. The small,
one-storied cots are often divided by partitions into two bedrooms, one bed frequently in a kitchen, 5 feet 6 inches in
height. Rent, £3 a year. The tenants have to make their own privies, the landlord only supplies a hole. As soon as one
has made a privy, it is made use of by the whole neighbourhood. One house, belonging to a family called Richardson,
was of quite unapproachable beauty. "Its plaster walls bulged very like a lady's dress in a curtsey. One gable end was
convex, the other concave, and on this last, unfortunately, stood the chimney, a curved tube of clay and wood like an

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (33 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

elephant's trunk. A long stick served as prop to prevent the chimney from falling. The doorway and window were
rhomboidal." Of 17 houses visited, only 4 had more than one bedroom, and those four over-crowded. The cots with
one bedroom sheltered 3 adults and 3 children, a married couple with 6 children, &c.

Dunton. High rents, from £4 to £5; weekly wages of the man, 10s. They hope to pay the rent by the straw-plaiting of
the family. The higher the rent, the greater the number that must work together to pay it. Six adults, living with 4
children in one sleeping apartment, pay £3 10s. for it. The cheapest house in Dunton, 15 feet long externally, 10 broad,
let for £3. Only one of the houses investigated had 2 bedrooms. A little outside the village, a house whose "tenants
dunged against the house-side," the lower 9 inches of the door eaten away through sheer rottenness; the doorway, a
single opening closed at night by a few bricks, ingeniously pushed up after shutting and covered with some matting.
Half a window, with glass and frame, had gone the way of all flesh. Here, without furniture, huddled together were 3
adults and 5 children. Dunton is not worse than the rest of Biggleswade Union.



(2.) Berkshire



Beenham. In June, 1864, a man, his wife and 4 children lived in a cot (one-storied cottage). A daughter came home
from service with scarlet fever. She died. One child sickened and died. The mother and one child were down with
typhus when Dr. Hunter was called in. The father and one child slept outside, but the difficulty of securing isolation
was seen here, for in the crowded market of the miserable village lay the linen of the fever- stricken household, waiting
for the wash. The rent of H.'s house, Is. a- week; one bedroom for man, wife, and 6 children. One house let for 8d.
a- week, 14 feet 6 inches long, 7 feet broad, kitchen, 6 feet high; the bedroom without window, fire-place, door, or
opening, except into the lobby; no garden. A man lived here for a little while, with two grown-up daughters and one
grown-up son; father and son slept on the bed, the girls in the passage. Each of the latter had a child while the family
was living here, but one went to the workhouse for her confinement and then came home.



(3.) Buckinghamshire



30 cottages — on 1,000 acres of land — contained here about 130-140 persons. The parish of Bradenham comprises
1,000 acres; it numbered, in 1851, 36 houses and a population of 84 males and 54 females. This inequality of the sexes
was partly remedied in 1861, when they numbered 98 males and 87 females; increase in 10 years of 14 men and 33
women. Meanwhile, the number of houses was one less.

Winslow. Great part of this newly built in good style; demand for houses appears very marked, since very miserable
cots let at Is. to Is. 3d. per week.

Water Eaton. Here the landlords, in view of the increasing population, have destroyed about 20 per cent, of the
existing houses. A poor labourer, who had to go about 4 miles to his work, answered the question, whether he could
not find a cot nearer: "No; they know better than to take a man in with my large family."

Tinker's End, near Winslow. A bedroom in which were 4 adults and 4 children; 1 1 feet long, 9 feet broad, 6 feet 5
inches high at its highest part; another 1 1 feet 3 inches by 9 feet, 5 feet 10 inches high, sheltered 6 persons. Each of
these families had less space than is considered necessary for a convict. No house had more than one bedroom, not
one of them a back-door; water very scarce; weekly rent from Is. 4d. to 2s. In 16 of the houses visited, only 1 man that
earned 10s. a-week. The quantity of air for each person under the circumstances just described corresponds to that
which he would have if he were shut up in a box of 4 feet measuring each way, the whole night. But then, the ancient
dens afforded a certain amount of unintentional ventilation.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (34 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

(4.) Cambridgeshire



Gamblingay belongs to several landlords. It contains the wretchedest cots to be found anywhere. Much straw-plaiting.
"A deadly lassitude, a hopeless surrendering up to filth," reigns in Gamblingay. The neglect in its centre, becomes
mortification at its extremities, north and south, where the houses are rotting to pieces. The absentee landlords bleed
this poor rookery too freely. The rents are very high; 8 or 9 persons packed in one sleeping apartment, in 2 cases 6
adults, each with 1 or 2 children in one small bedroom.



(5.) Essex



In this county, diminutions in the number of persons and of cottages go, in many parishes, hand in hand. In not less
than 22 parishes, however, the destruction of houses has not prevented increase of population, or has not brought
about that expulsion which, under the name "migration to towns," generally occurs. In Fingringhoe, a parish of 3,443
acres, were in 1851, 145 houses; in 1861, only 1 10. But the people did not wish to go away, and managed even to
increase under these circumstances. In 1851, 252 persons inhabited 61 houses, but in 1861, 262 persons were
squeezed into 49 houses. In Basilden, in 1851, 157 persons lived on 1,827 acres, in 35 houses; at the end often years,
180 persons in 27 houses. In the parishes of Fingringhoe, South Fambridge, Widford, Basilden, and Ramsden Crags,
in 1851, 1,392 persons were living on 8,449 acres in 316 houses; in 1861, on the same area, 1,473 persons in 249
houses.



(6.) Herefordshire



This little county has suffered more from the "eviction-spirit" than any other in England. At Nadby, over-crowded
cottages generally, with only 2 bedrooms, belonging for the most part to the farmers. They easily let them for £3 or £4
a-year, and paid a weekly wage of 9s.



(7) Huntingdon



Hartford had, in 1851, 87 houses; shortly after this, 19 cottages were destroyed in this small parish of 1,720 acres;
population in 1831, 452; in 1852, 832; and in 1861, 341. 14 cottages, each with 1 bedroom, were visited. In one, a
married couple, 3 grown-up sons, 1 grown-up daughter, 4 children — in all 10 in another, 3 adults, 6 children. One of
these rooms, in which 8 people slept, was 12 feet 10 inches long, 12 feet 2 inches broad, 6 feet 9 inches high: the
average, without making any deduction for projections into the apartment, gave about 130 cubic feet per head. In the
14 sleeping rooms, 34 adults and 33 children. These cottages are seldom provided with gardens, but many of the
inmates are able to farm small allotments at 10s. or 12s. per rood. These allotments are at a distance from the houses,
which are without privies. The family "must either go to the allotment to deposit their ordures," or, as happens in this
place, saving your presence, "use a closet with a trough set like a drawer in a chest of drawers, and drawn out weekly
and conveyed to the allotment to be emptied where its contents were wanted." In Japan, the circle of life-conditions
moves more decently than this.



(8) Lincolnshire



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (35 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



Langtoft. A man lives here, in Wright's house, with his wife, her mother, and 5 children; the house has a front kitchen,
scullery, bedroom over the front kitchen; front kitchen and bedroom, 12 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches; the whole
ground floor, 21 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches. The bedroom is a garret: the walls run together into the roof like a
sugar-loaf, a dormer-window opening in front. "Why did he live here? On account of the garden? No; it is very small.
Rent? High, Is. 3d. per week. Near his work? No; 6 miles away, so that he walks daily, to and fro, 12 miles. He lived
there, because it was a tenantable cot," and because he wanted to have a cot for himself alone, anywhere, at any price,
and in any conditions. The following are the statistics of 12 houses in Langtoft, with 12 bedrooms, 38 adults, and 36
children.





TWELVE HOUSES IN LANGTOFT


House


No. 1.


No. 2.


No. 3.


No. 4.


No. 5.


No. 6.


No. 7.


No. 8.


No. 9.


No. 10.


No. 11.


No. 12.


Bedrooms.


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


Adults.


3


4


4


5


2


5


3


3


2


2


3


2


Children.


5


3


4


4


2


3


3


2





3


3


4


Number of
Persons.


8


7


8


9


4


8


6


5


2


.5


6


6



(9.) Kent



Kennington, very seriously over-populated in 1859, when diphtheria appeared, and the parish doctor instituted a
medical inquiry into the condition of the poorer classes. He found that in this locality, where much labour is
employed, various cots had been destroyed and no new ones built. In one district stood four houses, named birdcages;
each had 4 rooms of the following dimensions in feet and inches:



Kitchen :
Scullery
Bedroom:
Bedroom:



9 ft. 5 by

8 ft. 6 by

8 ft. 5 by

8 ft. 3 by



8 ft. 11 by 6 ft. 6

4 f t . 6 by 6 f t . 6

5 ft. 10 by 6 ft. 3
8 ft. 4 by 6 ft. 3



(10.) Northamptonshire



Brinworth, Pickford and Floore: in these villages in the winter 2030 men were lounging about the streets from want of
work. The farmers do not always till sufficiently the corn and turnip lands, and the landlord has found it best to throw
all his farms together into 2 or 3. Hence want of employment. Whilst on one side of the wall, the land calls for labour,
on the other side the defrauded labourers are casting at it longing glances. Feverishly over-worked in summer, and
half-starved in winter, it is no wonder if they say in their peculiar dialect, "the parson and gentlefolk seem frit to death
at them."

At Floore, instances, in one bedroom of the smallest size, of couples with 4, 5, 6 children; 3 adults with 5 children; a
couple with grandfather and 6 children down with scarlet fever, &c; in two houses with two bedrooms, two families
of 8 and 9 adults respectively.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (36 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



(11.) Wiltshire



Stratton. 31 houses visited, 8 with only one bedroom. Pentill, in the same parish: a cot let at Is. 3d. weekly with 4
adults and 4 children, had nothing good about it, except the walls, from the floor of rough-hewn pieces of stones to the
roof of worn-out thatch.



(12. ) Worcestershire



House-destruction here not quite so excessive; yet from 1851 to 1861, the number of inhabitants to each house on the
average, has risen from 4.2 to 4.6.

Badsey. Many cots and little gardens here. Some of the farmers declare that the cots are "a great nuisance here,
because they bring the poor." On the statement of one gentleman: "The poor are none the better for them; if you build
500 they will let fast enough, in fact, the more you build, the more they want" (according to him the houses give birth
to the inhabitants, who then by a law of Nature press on "the means of housing"). Dr. Hunter remarks: "Now these
poor must come from somewhere, and as there is no particular attraction, such as doles, at Badsey, it must be
repulsion from some other unfit place, which will send them here. If each could find an allotment near his work, he
would not prefer Badsey, where he pays for his scrap of ground twice as much as the farmer pays for his."

The continual emigration to the towns, the continual formation of surplus-population in the country through the
concentration of farms, conversion of arable land into pasture, machinery, &c, and the continual eviction of the
agricultural population by the destruction of their cottages, go hand in hand. The more empty the district is of men, the
greater is its "relative surplus-population," the greater is their pressure on the means of employment, the greater is the
absolute excess of the agricultural population over the means for housing it, the greater, therefore, in the villages is the
local surplus-population and the most pestilential packing together of human beings. The packing together of knots of
men in scattered little villages and small country towns corresponds to the forcible draining of men from the surface of
the land. The continuous superseding of the agricultural labourers, in spite of their diminishing number and the
increasing mass of their products, gives birth to their pauperism. Their pauperism is ultimately a motive to their
eviction and the chief source of their miserable housing which breaks down their last power of resistance, and makes
them more slaves of the landed proprietors and the farmers. [1071 Thus the minimum of wages becomes a law of
Nature to them. On the other hand, the land, in spite of its constant "relative surplus-population," is at the same time
under-populated. This is seen, not only locally at the points where the efflux of men to towns, mines, railroad-making,
&c, is most marked. It is to be seen everywhere, in harvest-time as well as in spring and summer, at those frequently
recurring times when English agriculture, so careful and intensive, wants extra hands. There are always too many
agricultural labourers for the ordinary, and always too few for the exceptional or temporary needs of the cultivation of
the soil. [1081 "Hence we find in the official documents contradictory complaints from the same places of deficiency
and excess of labour simultaneously. The temporary or local want of labour brings about no rise in wages, but a
forcing of the women and children into the fields, and exploitation at an age constantly lowered. As soon as the
exploitation of the women and children takes place on a larger scale, it becomes in turn a new means of making a
surplus-population of the male agricultural labourer and of keeping down his wage. In the east of England thrives a
beautiful fruit of this vicious circle — the so-called gang-system, to which I must briefly return here. [1091

The gang-system obtains almost exclusively in the counties of Lincoln, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk,
and Nottingham, here and there in the neighbouring counties of Northampton, Bedford, and Rutland. Lincolnshire will
serve us as an example. A large part of this county is new land, marsh formerly, or even, as in others of the eastern
counties just named, won lately from the sea. The steam-engine has worked wonders in the way of drainage. What



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (37 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

were once fens and sandbanks, bear now a luxuriant sea of corn and the highest of rents. The same thing holds of the
alluvial lands won by human endeavour, as in the island of Axholme and other parishes on the banks of the Trent. In
proportion as the new farms arose, not only were no new cottages built: old ones were demolished, and the supply of
labour had to come from open villages, miles away, by long roads that wound along the sides of the hills. There alone
had the population formerly found shelter from the incessant floods of the winter-time. The labourers that dwell on the
farms of 400-1,000 acres (they are called "confined labourers") are solely employed on such kinds of agricultural
work as is permanent, difficult, and carried on by aid of horses. For every 100 acres there is, on an average, scarcely
one cottage. A fen farmer, e.g., gave evidence before the Commission of Inquiry: "I farm 320 acres, all arable land. I
have not one cottage on my farm. I have only one labourer on my farm now. I have four horsemen lodging about. We
get light work done by gangs." [1101 The soil requires much light field labour, such as weeding, hoeing, certain
processes of manuring, removing of stones, &c. This is done by the gangs, or organised bands that dwell in the open
villages.

The gang consists of 10 to 40 or 50 persons, women, young persons of both sexes (13-18 years of age, although the
boys are for the most part eliminated at the age of 13), and children of both sexes (6-13 years of age). At the head is
the gang-master, always an ordinary agricultural labourer, generally what is called a bad lot, a scapegrace, unsteady,
drunken, but with a dash of enterprise and savoir-faire. He is the recruiting-sergeant for the gang, which works under
him, not under the farmer. He generally arranges with the latter for piece-work, and his income, which on the average
is not very much above that of an ordinary agricultural labourer, |T111 depends almost entirely upon the dexterity with
which he manages to extract within the shortest time the greatest possible amount of labour from his gang. The
farmers have discovered that women work steadily only under the direction of men, but that women and children,
once set going, impetuously spend their life-force — as Fourier knew — while the adult male labourer is shrewd
enough to economise his as much as he can. The gang-master goes from one farm to another, and thus employs his
gang from 6 to 8 months in the year. Employment by him is, therefore, much more lucrative and more certain for the
labouring families, than employment by the individual farmer, who only employs children occasionally. This
circumstance so completely rivets his influence in the open villages that children are generally only to be hired
through his instrumentality. The lending out of these individually, independently of the gang, is his second trade.

The "drawbacks" of the system are the over-work of the children and young persons, the enormous marches that they
make daily to and from the farms, 5, 6, and sometimes 7 miles distant, finally, the demoralisation of- the gang.
Although the gang-master, who, in some districts is called "the driver," is armed with a long stick, he uses it but
seldom, and complaints of brutal treatment are exceptional. He is a democratic, emperor, or a kind of Pied Piper of
Hamelin. He must therefore be popular with his subjects, and he binds them to himself by the charms of the gipsy life
under his direction. Coarse freedom, a noisy jollity, and obscenest impudence give attractions to the gang. Generally
the gangmaster pays up in a public house; then he returns home at the head of the procession reeling drunk, propped
up right and left by a stalwart virago, while children and young persons bring up the rear, boisterous, and singing
chaffing and bawdy songs. On the return journey what Fourier calls "phanerogamie," is the order of the day. The
getting with child of girls of 13 and 14 by their male companions of the same age, is common. The open villages
which supply the contingent of the gang, become Sodoms and Gomorrahs, [1121 and have twice as high a rate of
illegitimate births as the rest of the kingdom. The moral character of girls bred in these schools, when married women,
was shown above. Their children, when opium does not give them the finishing stroke, are born recruits of the gang.

The gang in its classical form just described, is called the public, common, or tramping gang. For there are also private
gangs. These are made up in the same way as the common gang, but count fewer members, and work, not under a
gang-master, but under some old farm servant, whom the farmer does not know how to employ in any better way. The
gipsy fun has vanished here, but according to all witnesses, the payment and treatment of the children is worse.

The gang-system, which during the last years has steadily increased, [1131 clearly does not exist for the sake of the
gang-master, it exists for the enrichment of the large farmers, [1141 and indirectly of the landlords. [1151 For the
farmer there is no more ingenious method of keeping his labourers well below the normal level, and yet of always
having an extra hand ready for extra work, of extracting the greatest possible amount of labour with the least possible
amount of money [1161 and of making adult male labour "redundant." From the exposition already made, it will be

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (38 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

understood why, on the one hand, a greater or less lack of employment for the agricultural labourer is admitted, while
on the other, the gang-system is at the same time declared "necessary" on account of the want of adult male labour and
its migration to the towns. [117] The cleanly weeded land, and the uncleanly human weeds, of Lincolnshire, are pole
and counterpole of capitalistic production. [1181



F. Ireland

In concluding this section, we must travel for a moment to Ireland. First, the main facts of the case.

The population of Ireland had, in 1841, reached 8,222,664; in 1851, it had dwindled to 6,623,985; in 1861, to
5,850,309; in 1866, to 5 1/2 millions, nearly to its level in 1801. The diminution began with the famine year, 1846, so
that Ireland, in less than twenty years, lost more than 5/16 ths of its people. [1191 Its total emigration from May, 1851,
to July, 1865, numbered 1,591,487: the emigration during the years 1861-1865 was more than half-a-million. The
number of inhabited houses fell, from 1851-1861, by 52,990. From 1851-1861, the number of holdings of 15 to 30
acres increased 61,000, that of holdings over 30 acres, 109,000, whilst the total number of all farms fell 120,000, a
fall, therefore, solely due to the suppression of farms under 15 acres — i.e., to their centralisation.



Table A



LIVE-STOCK


Year


Horses


Cattle


Sheep


Pigs


Total
Number


Decrease


Total
Number


Decrease


Increase


Total
Number


Decrease


Increase


Total
Number


Decrease


Increase


1860


619,811


—


3,606,374


—


—


3,542,080


—


—


1,271,072


—


—


1861


614,232


5,579


3,471,688


134,686


—


3,556,050


—


13,970


1,102,042


169,030


—


1862


602,894


11,338


3,254,890


216,798


—


3,456,132


99,918


—


1,154,324


—


52,282


1863


579,978


22,916


3,144,231


110,659


—


3,308,204


147,982


—


1,067,458


86,866


—


1864


562,158


17,820


3,262,294


—


118,063


3,366,941


—


58,737


1,058,480


8,978


—


1865


547,867


14,291


3,493,414


—


231,120


3,688,742


—


321,801


1,299,893


—


241,413



The decrease of the population was naturally accompanied by a decrease in the mass of products. For our purpose, it
suffices to consider the 5 years from 1861-1865 during which over half-a-million emigrated, and the absolute number
of people sank by more than 1 of a million. From the above table it results: —



Horses Cattle Sheep Pigs


Absolute Decrease Absolute Decrease Absolute Increase Absolute Increase


71,944 112,960 146,662 28,8211



£120]

Let us now turn to agriculture, which yields the means of subsistence for cattle and for men. In the following table is
calculated the decrease or increase for each separate year, as compared with its immediate predecessor. The Cereal
Crops include wheat, oats, barley, rye, beans, and peas; the Green Crops, potatoes, turnips, marigolds, beet-root,
cabbages, carrots, parsnips, vetches. &c.



Table B



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (39 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five





INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CROPS AND GRASS IN ACREAGE


Year


Cereal
Crop


Green
Crop


Grass and
Clover


Flax


Total

Cultivated

Land


Decrease

(Acres)


Decrease

(Acres)


Increase
(Acres)


Decrease

(Acres)


Increase
(Acres)


Decrease

(Acres)


Increase
(Acres)


Decrease

(Acres)


Increase
(Acres)


1861


15,701


36,974


—


47,969


—


—


19,271


81,373


—


1862


72,734


74,785


—


—


6,623


—


2,055


138,841


—


1863


144,719


19,358


—


—


7,724


—


63,922


92,431


—


1864


122,437


2,317


—


—


47,486


—


87,761


—


10,493


1865


72,450


—


25,241


—


68,970


50,159


—


28,398


—


1861-65


428,041


108,193


—


—


82,834


—


122,8501


330,350


—



In the year 1865, 127,470 additional acres came under the heading "grass land," chiefly because the area under the
heading of "bog and waste unoccupied," decreased by 101,543 acres. If we compare 1865 with 1864, there is a
decrease in cereals of 246,667 qrs., of which 48,999 were wheat, 160,605 oats, 29,892 barley, &c: the decrease in
potatoes was 446,398 tons, although the area of their cultivation increased in 1865.

From the movement of population and the agricultural produce of Ireland, we pass to the movement in the purse of its
landlords, larger farmers, and industrial capitalists. It is reflected in the rise and fall of the Income-tax. It may be
remembered that Schedule D. (profits with the exception of those of farmers), includes also the so-called,
"professional" profits — i.e., the incomes of lawyers, doctors, &c; and the Schedules C. and E., in which no special
details are given, include the incomes of employees, officers, State sinecurists, State fundholders, &c.











Table C [121]
















INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CULTIVATION,
PRODUCT PER ACRE, AND TOTAL PRODUCT OF 1865 COMPARED WITH 1864


Product


Acres of
Cultivated Land


Product
per Acre


Total Product


1864


1865


Increase or
Decrease, 1865


1864


1865


Increase

or

Decrease,

1865


1864


1865


Increase or
Decrease, 1865


Wheat


276,483


266,989


—


9,494


cwt.,
13.3


13.0


—


0.3


875,782
Qrs.


826,783
Qrs.


—


48,999
Qrs.


Oats


1,814,886


1,745,228


—


69,658


cwt.,
12.1


12.3


0.2


—


7,826,332
Qrs.


7,659,727
Qrs.


—


166,605
Qrs.


Barley


172,700


177,102


4,402


—


cwt.,
15.9


14.9


—


1.0


761,909
Qrs.


732,017
Qrs.


—


29,892
Qrs.


Bere


8,894


10,091


1,197


—


cwt.,
16.4


14.8


—


1.6


15,160
Qrs.


13,989
Qrs.


—


1,171
Qrs.


Rye


cwt.,
8.5


10.4


1.9


—


12,680
Qrs.


18,314
Qrs.


5,684
Qrs.


—


Potatoes


1,039,724


1,066,260


26,536


—


tons,
4.1


3.6


—


0.5


4,312,388
ts.


3,865,990

ts.


—


446,398
ts.





























http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (40 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. 1 -


- Chapter Twenty-Five






















Turnips


337,355


334,212


—


3,143


tons,
10.3


9.9


—


0.4


3,467,659
ts.


3,301,683
ts.


—


165,976
ts.


Mangold-
wurzel


14,073


14,389


316


—


tons,
10.5


13.3


2.8


—


147,284
ts.


191,937

ts.


44,653
ts.


—


Cabbages


31,821


33,622


1,801


—


tons,
9.3


10.4


1.1


—


297,375
ts.


350,252
ts.


52,877
ts.


—


Flax


301,693


251,433


—


50,260


St.

(14
lb.)
34.2


25.2


—


9.0


64,506

St.


39,561

St.


—


24,945

St.


Hay


1,609,569


1,678,493


68,9241


—


tons,
1.6


1.8


0.2


—


2,607,153

ts.


3,068,707
ts.


461,554
ts.


—



Table D





THE INCOME-TAX ON THE SUBJOINED INCOMES IN POUNDS STERLING

(Tenth Report of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue, Lond. 1866.)




1860


1861


1862


1863


1864


1865


Schedule A.
Rent of Land


13,893,829


13,003,554


13,398,938


13,494,091


13,470,700


13,801,616


Schedule B.
Farmers' Profits.


2,765,387


2,773,644


2,937,899


2,938,923


2,930,874


2,946,072


Schedule D.
Industrial,
&c., Profits


4,891,652


4,836,203


4,858,800


4,846,497


4,546,147


4,850,199


Total Schedules
AtoE


22,962,885


22,998,394


23,597,574


23,658,631


23,236,298


23,930,340



Under Schedule D., the average annual increase of income from 1853-1864 was only 0.93; whilst, in the same period,
in Great Britain, it was 4.58. The following table shows the distribution of the profits (with the exception of those of
farmers) for the years 1864 and 1865: —



Table E \ 1221





SCHEDULE D.
INCOME FROM PROFITS (OVER £60) IN IRELAND




1864
£


1865
£


Total yearly
income of


4,368,610 divided
among 17,467 persons.


4,669,979 divided
among 18,081 persons.


Yearly income

over £60

and under £100


238,726 divided
among 5,015 persons.


222,575 divided
among 4,703 persons.


Of the yearly
total income


1,979,066 divided
among 11,321 persons.


2,028,571 divided
among 12,184 persons.


Remainder of the
total yearly income


2,150,818 divided
among 1,131 persons.


2,418,833 divided
among 1,194 persons.









http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (41 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



Of these


1,073,906 divided
among 1,010 persons.


1,097,927 divided
among 1,044 persons.


1,076,912 divided
among 121 persons.


1,320,906 divided
among 150 persons.


430,535 divided
among 95 persons.


584,458 divided
among 2 persons.


646,377divided
among 26


736,448 divided
among 28


262,819 divided
among 3


274,528 divided
among 3



England, a country with fully developed capitalist production, and pre-eminently industrial, would have bled to death
with such a drain of population as Ireland has suffered. But Ireland is at present only an agricultural district of
England, marked off by a wide channel from the country to which it yields corn, wool, cattle, industrial and military
recruits.

The depopulation of Ireland has thrown much of the land out of cultivation, has greatly diminished the produce of the
soil, [1231 and, in spite of the greater area devoted to cattle breeding, has brought about, in some of its branches, an
absolute diminution, in others, an advance scarcely worthy of mention, and constantly interrupted by retrogressions.
Nevertheless, with the fall in numbers of the population, rents and farmers' profits rose, although the latter not as
steadily as the former. The reason of this is easily comprehensible. On the one hand, with the throwing of small
holdings into large ones, and the change of arable into pasture land, a larger part of the whole produce was
transformed into surplus-produce. The surplus-produce increased, although the total produce, of which it formed a
fraction, decreased. On the other hand, the money-value of this surplus-produce increased yet more rapidly than its
mass, in consequence of the rise in the English market-price of meat, wool, &c, during the last 20, and especially
during the last 10, years.

The scattered means of production that serve the producers themselves as means of employment and of subsistence,
without expanding their own value by the incorporation of the labour of others, are no more capital than a product
consumed by its own producer is a commodity. If, with the mass of the population, that of the means of production
employed in agriculture also diminished, the mass of the capital employed in agriculture increased, because a part of
the means of production that were formerly scattered, was concentrated and turned into capital.

The total capital of Ireland outside agriculture, employed in industry and trade, accumulated during the last two
decades slowly, and with great and constantly recurring fluctuations; so much the more rapidly did the concentration
of its individual constituents develop. And, however small its absolute increase, in proportion to the dwindling
population it had increased largely.

Here, then, under our own eyes and on a large scale, a process is revealed, than which nothing more excellent could be
wished for by orthodox economy for the support of its dogma: that misery springs from absolute surplus-population,
and that equilibrium is re-established by depopulation. This is a far more important experiment than was the plague in
the middle of the 14th century so belauded of Malthusians. Note further: If only the naivete of the schoolmaster could
apply, to the conditions of production and population of the nineteenth century, the standard of the 14th, this naivete,
into the bargain, overlooked the fact that whilst, after the plague and the decimation that accompanied it, followed on
this side of the Channel, in England, enfranchisement and enrichment of the agricultural population, on that side, in
France, followed greater servitude and more misery. [1241

The Irish famine of 1846 killed more than 1,000,000 people, but it killed poor devils only. To the wealth of the
country it did not the slightest damage. The exodus of the next 20 years, an exodus still constantly increasing, did not,
as, e.g., the Thirty Years' War, decimate, along with the human beings, their means of production. Irish genius
discovered an altogether new way of spiriting a poor people thousands of miles away from the scene of its misery. The
exiles transplanted to the United States, send home sums of money every year as travelling expenses for those left



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (42 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

behind. Every troop that emigrates one year, draws another after it the next. Thus, instead of costing Ireland
anything, emigration forms one of the most lucrative branches of its export trade. Finally, it is a systematic process,
which does not simply make a passing gap in the population, but sucks out of it every year more people than are
replaced by the births, so that the absolute level of the population falls year by year. [1251

What were the consequences for the Irish labourers left behind and freed from the surplus-population? That the
relative surplus-population is to-day as great as before 1846; that wages are just as low, that the oppression of the
labourers has increased, that misery is forcing the country towards a new crisis. The facts are simple. The revolution in
agriculture has kept pace with emigration. The production of relative surplus-population has more than kept pace with
the absolute depopulation. A glance at table C. shows that the change of arable to pasture land must work yet more
acutely in Ireland than in England. In England the cultivation of green crops increases with the breeding of cattle; in
Ireland, it decreases. Whilst a large number of acres, that were formerly tilled, lie idle or are turned permanently into
grass-land, a great part of the waste land and peat bogs that were unused formerly, become of service for the extension
of cattle-breeding. The smaller and medium farmers — I reckon among these all who do not cultivate more than 100
acres — still make up about 8/10ths of the whole number. [1261 They are one after the other, and with a degree of
force unknown before, crushed by the competition of an agriculture managed by capital, and therefore they
continually furnish new recruits to the class of wage-labourers. The one great industry of Ireland, linen-manufacture,
requires relatively few adult men and only employs altogether, in spite of its expansion since the price of cotton rose
in 1861-1866, a comparatively insignificant part of the population. Like all other great modem industries, it constantly
produces, by incessant fluctuations, a relative surplus-population within its own sphere, even with an absolute increase
in the mass of human beings absorbed by it. The misery of the agricultural population forms the pedestal for gigantic
shirt- factories, whose armies of labourers are, for the most part, scattered over the country. Here, we encounter again
the system described above of domestic industry, which in underpayment and over-work, possesses its own systematic
means for creating supernumerary labourers. Finally, although the depopulation has not such destructive consequences
as would result in a country with fully developed capitalistic production, it does not go on without constant reaction
upon the home-market. The gap which emigration causes here, limits not only the local demand for labour, but also
the incomes of small shopkeepers, artisans, tradespeople generally. Hence the diminution in incomes between £60 and
£100 in Table E.

A clear statement of the condition of the agricultural labourers in Ireland is to be found in the Reports of the Irish Poor
Law Inspectors (1870). [1271 Officials of a government which is maintained only by bayonets and by a state of siege,
now open, now disguised, they have to observe all the precautions of language that their colleagues in England
disdain. In spite of this, however, they do not let their government cradle itself in illusions. According to them the rate
of wages in the country, still very low, has within the last 20 years risen 50-60 per cent., and stands now, on the
average, at 6s. to 9s. per week. But behind this apparent rise, is hidden an actual fall in wages, for it does not
correspond at all to the rise in price of the necessary means of subsistence that has taken place in the meantime. For
proof, the following extract from the official accounts of an Irish workhouse.





AVERAGE WEEKLY COST PER HEAD


Year ended


Provisions and
Necessaries.


Clothing.


TOTAL.


29th Sept., 1849.


Is. 3 l/4d.


3d.


Is. 6 l/4d.


29th Sept., 1869.


2s. 7 l/4d.


6d.


3s. 1 l/4d.



The price of the necessary means of subsistence is therefore fully twice, and that of clothing exactly twice, as much as
they were 20 years before.

Even apart from this disproportion, the mere comparison of the rate of wages expressed in gold would give a result far
from accurate. Before the famine, the great mass of agricultural wages were paid in kind, only the smallest part in
money; to-day, payment in money is the rule. From this it follows that, whatever the amount of the real wage, its



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (43 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

money rate must rise. "Previous to the famine, the labourer enjoyed his cabin ... with a rood, or half-acre or acre of
land, and facilities for ... a crop of potatoes. He was able to rear his pig and keep fowl.... But they now have to buy
bread, and they have no refuse upon which they can feed a pig or fowl, and they have consequently no benefit from
the sale of a pig, fowl, or eggs." f!281 In fact, formerly, the agricultural labourers were but the smallest of the small
farmers, and formed for the most part a kind of rear-guard of the medium and large farms on which they found
employment. Only since the catastrophe of 1846 have they begun to form a fraction of the class of purely
wage-labourers, a special class, connected with its wage-masters only by monetary relations.

We know what were the conditions of their dwellings in 1846. Since then they have grown yet worse. A part of the
agricultural labourers, which, however, grows less day by day, dwells still on the holdings of the farmers in
over-crowded huts, whose hideousness far surpasses the worst that the English agricultural labourers offered us in this
way. And this holds generally with the exception of certain tracts of Ulster; in the south, in the counties of Cork,
Limerick, Kilkenny, &c; in the east, in Wicklow, Wexford, &c; in the centre of Ireland, in King's and Queen's
County,, Dublin, &c; in the west, in Sligo, Roscommon, Mayo, Galway, &c. "The agricultural labourers' huts," an
inspector cries out, "are a disgrace to the Christianity and to the civilisation of this country." [1291 In order to increase
the attractions of these holes for the labourers, the pieces of land belonging thereto from time immemorial, are
systematically confiscated. "The mere sense that they exist subject to this species of ban, on the part of the landlords
and their agents, has ... given birth in the minds of the labourers to corresponding sentiments of antagonism and
dissatisfaction towards those by whom they are thus led to regard themselves as being treated as ... a proscribed race."
[1301

The first act of the agricultural revolution was to sweep away the huts situated on the field of labour. This was done on
the largest scale, and as if in obedience to a command from on high. Thus many labourers were compelled to seek
shelter in villages and towns. There they were thrown like refuse into garrets, holes, cellars and comers, in the worst
back slums. Thousands of Irish families, who according to the testimony of the English, eaten up as these are with
national prejudice, are notable for their rare attachment to the domestic hearth, for their gaiety and the purity of their
home-life, found themselves suddenly transplanted into hotbeds of vice. The men are now obliged to seek work of the
neighbouring farmers and are only hired by the day, and therefore under the most precarious form of wage. Hence
"they sometimes have long distances to go to and from work, often get wet, and suffer much hardship, not
unfrequently ending in sickness, disease and want." [131]

"The towns have had to receive from year to year what was deemed to be the surplus-labour of the rural division;"
[132] and then people still wonder "there is still a surplus of labour in the towns and villages, and either a scarcity or a
threatened scarcity in some of the country divisions." [1331 The truth is that this want only becomes perceptible "in
harvest-time, or during spring, or at such times as agricultural operations are carried on with activity; at other periods
of the year many hands are idle;" [1341 that "from the digging out of the main crop of potatoes in October until the
early spring following ... there is no employment for them;" [1351 and further, that during the active times they "are
subject to broken days and to all kinds of interruptions." [1361

These results of the agricultural revolution — i.e., the change of arable into pasture land, the use of machinery, the
most rigorous economy of labour, &c, are still further aggravated by the model landlords, who, instead of spending
their rents in other countries, condescend to live in Ireland on their demesnes. In order that the law of supply and
demand may not be broken, these gentlemen draw their "labour-supply ... chiefly from their small tenants, who are
obliged to attend when required to do the landlord's work, at rates of wages, in many instances, considerably under the
current rates paid to ordinary labourers, and without regard to the inconvenience or loss to the tenant of being obliged
to neglect his own business at critical periods of sowing or reaping." [1371

The uncertainty and irregularity of employment, the constant return and long duration of gluts of labour, all these
symptoms of a relative surplus-population, figure therefore in the reports of the Poor Law administration, as so many
hardships of the agricultural proletariat. It will be remembered that we met, in the English agricultural proletariat, with
a similar spectacle. But the difference is that in England, an industrial country, the industrial reserve recruits itself
from the country districts, whilst in Ireland, an agricultural country, the agricultural reserve recruits itself from the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (44 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

towns, the cities of refuge of the expelled agricultural, labourers. In the former, the supernumeraries of agriculture are
transformed into factory operatives; in the latter, those forced into the towns, whilst at the same time they press on the
wages in towns, remain agricultural labourers, and are constantly sent back to the country districts in search of work.

The official inspectors sum up the material condition of the agricultural labourer as follows: "Though living with the
strictest frugality, his own wages are barely sufficient to provide food for an ordinary family and pay his rent" and he
depends upon other sources for the means of clothing himself, his wife, and children.... The atmosphere of these
cabins, combined with the. other privations they are subjected to, has made this class particularly susceptible to low
fever and pulmonary consumption." f 1381 After this, it is no wonder that, according to the unanimous testimony of the
inspectors, a sombre discontent runs through the ranks of this class, that they long for the return of the past, loathe the
present, despair of the future, give themselves up "to the evil influence of agitators," and have only one fixed idea, to
emigrate to America. This is the land of Cockaigne, into which the great Malthusian panacea, depopulation, has
transformed green Erin.

What a happy life the Irish factory operative leads one example will show: "On my recent visit to the North of
Ireland," says the English Factory Inspector, Robert Baker, "I met with the following evidence of effort in an Irish
skilled workman to afford education to his children; and I give his evidence verbatim, as I took it from his mouth.
That he was a skilled factory hand, may be understood when I say that he was employed on goods for the Manchester
market. 'Johnson. — I am a beetler and work from 6 in the morning till 1 1 at night, from Monday to Friday. Saturday
we leave off at 6 p. m., and get three hours of it (for meals and rest). I have five children in all. For this work I get 10s.
6d. a week,; my wife works here also, and gets 5s. a week. The oldest girl who is 12, minds the house. She is also
cook, and all the servant we have. She gets the young ones ready for school. A girl going past the house wakes me at
half past five in the morning. My wife gets up and goes along with me. We get nothing (to eat) before we come to
work. The child of 12 takes dare of the little children all the day, and we get nothing till breakfast at eight. At eight we
go home. We get tea once a week; at other times we get stirabout, sometimes of oat-meal, sometimes of Indian meal,
as we are able to get it. In the winter we get a little sugar and water to our Indian meal. In the summer we get a few
potatoes, planting a small patch ourselves;, and when they are done we get back to stirabout. Sometimes we get a little
milk as it may be. So we go on from day to day, Sunday and week day, always the same the year round. I am
always very much tired when I have done at night. We may see a bit of flesh meat sometimes, but very seldom. Three
of our children attend school, for whom we pay Id. a week a head. Our rent is 9d. a week. Peat for firing costs Is. 6d.
a fortnight at the very lowest.'" [T391 Such are Irish wages, such is Irish life!

In fact the misery of Ireland is again the topic of the day in England. At the end of 1866 and the beginning of 1867,
one of the Irish land magnates, Lord Dufferin, set about its solution in The Times. "Wie menschlich von solch grossem
Herrn!"

From Table E. we saw that, during 1864, of £4,368,610 of total profits, three surplus-value makers pocketed only
£262,819; that in 1865, however, out of £4,669,979 total profits, the same three virtuosi of "abstinence" pocketed
£274,528; in 1864, 26 surplus-value makers reached to £646,377; in 1865, 28 surplus-value makers reached to
£736,448; in 1864, 121 surplus-value makers, £1,076,912; in 1865, 150 surplus-value makers, £1,320,906; in 1864,
1,131 surplus-value makers £2,150,818, nearly half of the total annual profit; in 1865, 1,194 surplus-value makers,
£2,418,833, more than half of the total annual profit. But the lion's share, which an inconceivably small number of
land magnates in England, Scotland and Ireland swallow up of the yearly national rental, is so monstrous that the
wisdom of the English State does not think fit to afford the same statistical materials about the distribution of rents as
about the distribution of profits. Lord Dufferin is one of those land magnates. That rent-rolls and profits can ever be
"excessive," or that their plethora is in any way connected with plethora of the people's misery is, of course, an idea as
"disreputable" as "unsound." He keeps to facts. The fact is that, as the Irish population diminishes, the Irish rent-rolls
swell; that depopulation benefits the landlords, therefore also benefits the soil, and, therefore, the people, that mere
accessory of the soil. He declares, therefore, that Ireland is still over-populated, and the stream of emigration still
flows too lazily. To be perfectly happy, Ireland must get rid of at least one-third of a million of labouring men. Let no
man imagine that this lord, poetic into the bargain, is a physician of the school of Sangrado, who as often as he did not
find his patient better, ordered phlebotomy and again phlebotomy, until the patient lost his sickness at the same time



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (45 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

as his blood. Lord Dufferin demands a new blood-letting of one-third of a million only, instead of about two millions;
in fact, without the getting rid of. these, the millennium in Erin is not to be. The proof is easily given.





NUMBER AND EXTENT OF FARMS IN IRELAND IN 1864 [140]




No.


Acres


(1) Farms not
over 1 acre.


48,653


25,394


(2) Farms over 1 ,
not over 5 acres.


82,037


288,916


(3) Farms over 5,
not over 15 acres.


176,368


1,836,310


(4) Farms over 15,
not over 30 acres.


136,578


3,051,343


(5) Farms over 30,
not over 50 acres.


71,961


2,906,274


(6) Farms over 50,
not over 100 acres.


54,247


3,983,880


(7) Farms over
100 acres.


31,927


8,227,807


(8) TOTAL AREA.


—


26,319,924



Centralisation has from 1851 to 1861 destroyed principally farms of the first three categories, under 1 and not over 15
acres. These above all must disappear. This gives 307,058 "supernumerary" farmers, and reckoning the families the
low average of 4 persons, 1,228,232 persons. On the extravagant supposition that, after the agricultural revolution is
complete one-fourth of these are again absorbable, there remain for emigration 921,174 persons. Categories 4, 5, 6, of
over 15 and not over 100 acres, are, as was known long since in England, too small for capitalistic cultivation of corn,
and for sheep-breeding are almost vanishing quantities. On the same supposition as before, therefore, there are further
788,761 persons to emigrate; total, 1,709,532. And as I'appetit vient en mangeant, Rentroll's eyes will soon discover
that Ireland, with 3 1/2 millions, is still always miserable, and miserable because she is over-populated. Therefore her
depopulation must go yet further, that thus she may fulfil her true destiny, that of an English sheep-walk and
cattle-pasture." [1411

Like all good things in this bad world, this profitable method has its drawbacks. With the accumulation of rents in
Ireland, the accumulation of the Irish in America keeps pace. The Irishman, banished by sheep and ox, re-appears on
the other side of the ocean as a Fenian, and face to face with the old queen of the seas rises, threatening and more
threatening, the young giant Republic:

Acerba fata Romanos agunt
Scelusque fraternae necis.



Footnotes

[11 Karl Marx, 1. c, "A egalite d'oppression des masses, plus un pays a de proletaries et plus il est riche." (Colins,
"L'Economie Politique. Source des Revolutions et des Utopies, pretendues Socialistes." Paris, 1857, t. III., p. 331.)
Our "proletarian" is economically none other than the wage-labourer, who produces and increases capital, and is
thrown out on the streets, as soon as he is superfluous for the needs of aggrandigement of "Monsieur capital," as



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (46 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Pecqueur calls this person. "The sickly proletarian of the primitive forest", is a pretty Roscherian fancy. The primitive
forester is owner of the primitive forest, and uses the primitive forest as his property with the freedom of an
orang-outang. He is not, therefore, a proletarian. This would only be the case, if the primitive forest exploited him,
instead of being exploited by him. As far as his health is concerned, such a man would well bear comparison, not only
with the modern proletarian, but also with the syphilitic and scrofulous upper classes. But, no doubt, Herr Wilhelm
Roscher, by "primitive forest" means his native heath of Luneburg.

[21 John Bellers, 1. c, p. 2.

[31 Bernard de Mandeville: "The Fable of the Bees," 5th edition, London, 1728. Remarks, pp. 212, 213, 328.
"Temperate living and constant employment is the direct road, for the poor, to rational happiness" [by which he most
probably means long working-days and little means of subsistence], "and to riches and strength for the state" (viz., for
the landlords, capitalists, and their political dignitaries and agents). ("An Essay on Trade and Commerce," London,
1770, p. 54.)

[41 Eden should have asked, whose creatures then are "the civil institutions"? From his standpoint of juridical illusion,
he does not regard the law as a product of the material relations of production, but conversely the relations of
production as products of the law. Linguet overthrew Montesquieu's illusory "Esprit des lois" with one word: "
L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete."

[51 Eden, 1. c, Vol. 1, book I., chapter 1, pp. 1,2, and preface, p. xx.

[61 If the reader reminds me of Malthus, whose "Essay on Population" appeared in 1798, 1 remind him that this work
in its first form is nothing more than a schoolboyish, superficial plagiary of De Poe, Sir James Steuart, Townsend,
Franklin, Wallace, &c, and does not contain a single sentence thought out by himself. The great sensation this
pamphlet caused, was due solely to party interest. The French Revolution had found passionate defenders in the
United Kingdom; the "principle of population," slowly worked out in the eighteenth century, and then, in the midst of
a great social crisis, proclaimed with drums and trumpets as the infallible antidote to the teachings of Condorcet, &c,
was greeted with jubilance by the English oligarchy as the great destroyer of all hankerings after human development.
Malthus, hugely astonished at his success, gave himself to stuffing into his book materials superficially compiled, and
adding to it new matter, not discovered but annexed by him. Note further: Although Malthus was a parson of the
English State Church, he had taken the monastic vow of celibacy — one of the conditions of holding a Fellowship in
Protestant Cambridge University: "Socios collegiorum maritos esse non permittimus, sed statim postquam quis
uxorem duxerit socius collegii desinat esse." ("Reports of Cambridge University Commission," p. 172.) This
circumstance favourably distinguishes Malthus from the other Protestant parsons, who have shuffled off the command
enjoining celibacy of the priesthood and have taken, "Be fruitful and multiply," as their special Biblical mission in
such a degree that they generally contribute to the increase of population to a really unbecoming extent, whilst they
preach at the same time to the labourers the "principle of population." It is characteristic that the economic fall of man,
the Adam's apple, the urgent appetite, "the checks which tend to blunt the shafts of Cupid," as Parson Townsend
waggishly puts it, that this delicate question was and is monopolised by the Reverends of Protestant Theology, or
rather of the Protestant Church. With the exception of the Venetian monk, Ortes, an original and clever writer, most of
the population-theory teachers are Protestant parsons. For instance, Bruckner, "Theorie du Systeme animal," Leyde,
1767, in which the whole subject of the modern population theory is exhausted, and to which the passing quarrel
between Quesnay and his pupil, the elder Mirabeau, furnished ideas on the same topic; then Parson Wallace, Parson
Townsend, Parson Malthus and his pupil, the arch-Parson Thomas Chalmers, to say nothing of lesser reverend
scribblers in this line. Originally, Political Economy was studied by philosophers like Hobbes, Locke, Hume; by
businessmen and statesmen, like Thomas More, Temple, Sully, De Witt, North, Law, Vanderlint, Cantillon, Franklin;
and especially, and with the greatest success, by medical men like Petty, Barbon, Mandeville, Quesnay. Even in the
middle of the eighteenth century, the Rev. Mr. Tucker, a notable economist of his time, excused himself for meddling
with the things of Mammon. Later on, and in truth with this very "Principle of population," struck the hour of the
Protestant parsons. Petty, who regarded the population as the basis of wealth, and was, like Adam Smith, an outspoken
foe to parsons, says, as if he had a presentiment of their bungling interference, "that Religion best flourishes when the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (47 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Priests are most mortified, as was before said of the Law, which best flourisheth when lawyers have least to do." He
advises the Protestant priests, therefore, if they, once for all, will not follow the Apostle Paul and "mortify" themselves
by celibacy, "not to breed more Churchmen than the Benefices, as they now stand shared out, will receive, that is to
say, if there be places for about twelve thousand in England and Wales, it will not be safe to breed up 24,000
ministers, for then the twelve thousand which are unprovided for, will seek ways how to get themselves a livelihood,
which they cannot do more easily than by persuading the people that the twelve thousand incumbents do poison or
starve their souls, and misguide them in their way to Heaven." (Petty: "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions,"
London, 1667, p. 57.) Adam Smith's position with the Protestant priesthood of his time is shown by the following. In
"A Letter to A. Smith, L.L.D. On the Life, Death, and Philosophy of his Friend, David Hume. By one of the People
called Christians," 4th Edition, Oxford, 1784, Dr. Home, Bishop of Norwich, reproves Adam Smith, because in a
published letter to Mr. Strahan, he "embalmed his friend David" (sc. Hume); because he told the world how "Hume
amused himself on his deathbed with Lucian and Whist," and because he even had the impudence to write of Hume: "I
have always considered him, both in his life-time and since his death, as approaching as nearly to the idea of a
perfectly wise and virtuous man, as, perhaps, the nature of human frailty will permit." The bishop cries out, in a
passion: "Is it right in you, Sir, to hold up to our view as 'perfectly wise and virtuous,' the character and conduct of
one, who seems to have been possessed with an incurable antipathy to all that is called Religion; and who strained
every nerve to explode, suppress and extirpate the spirit of it among men, that its very name, if he could effect it,
might no more be had in remembrance?" (1. c, p. 8.) "But let not the lovers of truth be discouraged. Atheism cannot be
of long continuance." (P. 17.) Adam Smith, "had the atrocious wickedness to propagate atheism through the land (viz.,
by his "Theory of Moral Sentiments"). Upon the whole, Doctor, your meaning is good; but I think you will not
succeed this time. You would persuade us, by the example of David Hume, Esq., that atheism is the only cordial for
low spirits, and the proper antidote against the fear of death.... You may smile over Babylon in ruins and congratulate
the hardened Pharaoh on his overthrow in the Red Sea." (1. c, pp. 21, 22.) One orthodox individual, amongst Adam
Smith's college friends, writes after his death: "Smith's well-placed affection for Hume ... hindered him from being a
Christian.... When he met with honest men whom he liked ... he would believe almost anything they said. Had he been
a friend of the worthy ingenious Horrox he wouid have believed that the moon some times disappeared in a clear sky
without the interposition of a cloud.... He approached to republicanism in his political principles." ("The Bee." By
James Anderson, 18 Vols., Vol. 3, pp. 166, 165, Edinburgh, 1791-93.) Parson Thomas Chalmers has his suspicions as
to Adam Smith having invented the category of "unproductive labourers," solely for the Protestant parsons, inspite of
their blessed work in the vineyard of the Lord.

£72 "The limit, however, to the employment of both the operative and the labourer is the same; namely, the possibility
of the employer realising a profit on the produce of their industry. If the rate of wages is such as to reduce the master's
gains below the average profit of capital, he will cease to employ them, or he will only employ them on condition of
submission to a reduction of wages." (John Wade, 1. c, p. 241.)

[81 Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism to the Russian edition: The MS in the first case says "little" and in the
second case "much"; the correction has been introduced according to the authorised French translation.

[91 Cf. Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," pp. 166, seq.

[101 "If we now return to our first inquiry, wherein it was shown that capital itself is only the result of human labour...
it seems quite incomprehensible that man can have fallen under the domination of capital, his own product; can be
subordinated to it; and as in reality this is beyond dispute the case, involuntarily the question arises: How has the
labourer been able to pass from being master of capital — as its creator — to being its slave?" (Von Thiinen, "Der
isolierte Staat" Part ii., Section ii., Rostock, 1863, pp. 5, 6.) It is Thiinen's merit to have asked this question. His
answer is simply childish.

[121 Note in the 4th German edition. — The latest English and American "trusts" are already striving to attain this
goal by attempting to unite at least all the large-scale concerns in one branch of industry into one great joint- stock
company with a practical monopoly. F. E.

[131 Note in the 3rd German edition. — In Marx's copy there is here the marginal note: "Here note for working out

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (48 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

later; if the extension is only quantitative, then for a greater and a smaller capital in the same branch of business the
profits are as the magnitudes of the capitals advanced. If the quantitative extension induces qualitative change, then
the rate of profit on the larger capital rises simultaneously." F. E.

[141 The census of England and Wales shows: all persons employed in agriculture (landlords, farmers, gardeners,
shepherds, &c, included): 1851, 2,011,447; 1861, 1,924,110. Fall, 87,337. Worsted manufacture: 1851, 102,714
persons; 1861, 79,242. Silk weaving: 1851, 111,940; 1861, 101,678. Calico-printing: 1851, 12,098; 1861, 12,556. A
small rise that, in the face of the enormous extension of this industry and implying a great fall proportionally in the
number of labourers employed. Hat-making: 1851, 15,957; 1861, 13,814. Straw-hat and bonnet- making: 1851,
20,393; 1861, 18,176. Malting: 1851, 10,566; 1861, 10,677. Chandlery, 1851, 4,949; 1861, 4,686. This fall is due,
besides other causes, to the increase in lighting by gas. Comb-making — 1851, 2,038; 1861, 1,478. Sawyers: 1851,
30,552; 1861, 31,647 — a small rise in consequence of the increase of sawing-machines. Nail-making: 1851, 26,940;
1861, 26,130 — fall in consequence of the competition of machinery. Tin and copper-mining: 1851, 31,360; 1861,
32,041. On the other hand: Cotton- spinning and weaving: 1851, 371,777; 1861, 456,646. Coal-mining: 1851, 183,389,
1861, 246,613, "The increase of labourers is generally greatest, since 1851, in such branches of industry in which
machinery has not up to the present been employed with success." (Census of England and Wales for 1861. Vol. 111.
London, 1863, p. 36.)

\ 15] Added in the 4th German edition. — The law of progressive diminution of the relative magnitude of variable
capital and its effect on the condition of the class of wage-workers is conjectured rather than understood by some of
the prominent economists of the classical school. The greatest service was rendered here by John Barton, although he,
like all the rest, lumps together constant and fixed capital, variable and circulating capital. He says:

"The demand for labour depends on the increase of circulating, and not of fixed capital. Were it true that the
proportion between these two sorts of capital is the same at all times, and in all circumstances, then, indeed, it follows
that the number of labourers employed is in proportion to the wealth of the state. But such a proposition has not the
semblance of probability. As arts are cultivated, and civilisation is extended, fixed capital bears a larger and larger
proportion to circulating capital. The amount of fixed capital employed in the production of a piece of British muslin
is at least a hundred, probably a thousand times greater than that employed in a similar piece of Indian muslin. And
the proportion of circulating capital is a hundred or thousand times less ... the whole of the annual savings, added to
the fixed capital, would have no effect in increasing the demand for labour." (John Barton, "Observations on the
Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes of Society." London, 1817, pp. 16, 17.) "The
same cause which may increase the net revenue of the country may at the same time render the population redundant,
and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 469.) With increase of capital, "the demand [for
labour] will be in a diminishing ratio." (Ibid., p. 480, Note.) "The amount of capital devoted to the maintenance of
labour may vary, independently of any changes in the whole amount of capital.... Great fluctuations in the amount of
employment, and great suffering may become more frequent as capital itself becomes more plentiful." (Richard Jones,
"An Introductory Lecture on Pol. Econ.," Lond. 1833, p. 13) "Demand [for labour] will rise... not in proportion to the
accumulation of the general capital.... Every augmentation, therefore, in the national stock destined for reproduction,
comes, in the progress of society, to have less and less influence upon the condition of the labourer." (Ramsay, 1. c,
pp. 90, 91.)

[16] H. Merivale. "Lectures on Colonisation and Colonies," 1841, Vol. I , p. 146.

[17] Malthus, "Principles of Political Economy," pp. 215, 319, 320. In this work, Malthus finally discovers, with the
help of Sismondi, the beautiful Trinity of capitalistic production: over-production, over-population, over-consumption
— three very delicate monsters, indeed. Cf. F. Engels, "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," 1. c, p, 107,
et seq.

[18] Harriet Martineau, "A Manchester Strike," 1832, p. 101.

[19] Even in the cotton famine of 1863 we find, in a pamphlet of the operative cottonspinners of Blackburn, fierce
denunciations of over-work, which, in consequence of the Factory Acts, of course only affected adult male labourers.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (49 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

"The adult operatives at this mill have been asked to work from 12 to 13 hours per day, while there are hundreds who
are compelled to be idle who would willingly work partial time, in order to maintain their families and save their
brethren from a premature grave through being overworked.... We," it goes on to say, "would ask if the practice of
working over-time by a number of hands, is likely to create a good feeling between masters and servants. Those who
are worked over-time feel the injustice equally with those who are condemned to forced idleness. There is in the
district almost sufficient work to give to all partial employment if fairly distributed. We are only asking what is right
in requesting the masters generally to pursue a system of short hours, particularly until a better state of things begins
to dawn upon us, rather than to work a portion of the hands over-time, while others, for want of work, are compelled
to exist upon charity." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 31, 1863," p. 8.) The author of the "Essay on Trade and
Commerce" grasps the effect of a relative surplus-population on the employed labourers with his usual unerring
bourgeois instinct. "Another cause of idleness in this kingdom is the want of a sufficient number of labouring hands
.... Whenever from an extraordinary demand for manufactures, labour grows scarce, the labourers feel their own
consequence, and will make their masters feel it likewise — it is amazing; but so depraved are the dispositions of
these people, that in such cases a set of workmen have combined to distress the employer by idling a whole day
together." ("Essay, &c," pp. 27, 28.) The fellows in fact were hankering after a rise in wages.

[201 Economist, Jan. 21. 1860.

[211 Whilst during the last six months of 1866, 80-90,000 working people in London were thrown out of work, the
Factory Report for that same half year says: "It does not appear absolutely true to say that demand will always produce
supply just at the moment when it is needed. It has not done so with labour, for much machinery has been idle last
year for want of hands." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. 81.)

[221 Opening address to the Sanitary Conference, Birmingham, January 15th, 1875, by J. Chamberlain, Mayor of the
town, now (1883) President of the Board of Trade.

[231 781 towns given in the census for 1861 for England and Wales "contained 10,960,998 inhabitants, while the
villages and country parishes contained 9,105,226. In 1851, 580 towns were distinguished, and the population in them
and in the surrounding country was nearly equal. But while in the subsequent ten years the population in the villages
and the country increased half a million, the population in the 580 towns increased by a million and a half (1,554,067).
The increase of the population of the country parishes is 6.5 per cent., and of the towns 17.3 per cent. The difference
in the rates of increase is due to the migration from country to town. Three-fourths of the total increase of population
has taken place in the towns." ("Census. &c," pp. 11 and 12.)

[241 "Poverty seems favourable to generation." (A. Smith.) This is even a specially wise arrangement of God,
according to the gallant and witty Abbe Galiani "Iddio af che gli uomini che esercitano mestieri di prima utiliti
nascono abbondantemente." (Galiani, 1. c, p. 78.) "Misery up to the extreme point of famine and pestilence, instead of
checking, tends to increase population." (S. Laing, "National Distress," 1844, p. 69.) After Laing has illustrated this by
statistics, he continues: "If the people were all in easy circumstances, the world would soon be depopulated."

[251 "De jour en jour il deviant done plus clair que les rapports de production dans lesquels se meut la bourgeoisie
n'ont pas un caractere un, un catactere simple, mais un caractere de duplicite; que dans les memes rapports dans
lesquels se produit la richesse, la misere se produit aussi; que dans les memes rapports dans lesquels il y a
developpement des forces productives, il y a une force productive de repression; que ces rapports ne produisent la
richesse bourgeoise, e'est-a-dire la richesse de la classe bourgeoise, qu'en aneantissant continuellement la richesse des
membres integrants de cette classe et en produisant un proletariat toujours croissant." (Karl Marx: "Misere de la
Philosophic" p. 116.)

[261 G. Ortes: "Delia Economia Nazionale libri sei, 1777," in Custodi, Parte Moderna, t. xxi, pp. 6, 9, 22, 25, etc.
Ortes says, 1. c, p. 32: "In luoco di progettar sistemi inutili per la felicita de'popoli, mi limitero a investigate la region
delta loro infelicita."

[271 "A Dissertation on the Poor Laws. By a Well-wisher of Mankind. (The Rev. J. Townsend) 1786," republished



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (50 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Lond. 1817, pp. 15, 39, 41. This "delicate" parson, from whose work just quoted, as well as from his "Journey through
Spain," Malthus often copies whole pages, himself borrowed the greater part of his doctrine from Sir James Steuart,
whom he however alters in the borrowing. E.g., when Steuart says: "Here, in slavery, was a forcible method of making
mankind diligent," [for the non-workers] ... "Men were then forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for others], "because
they were slaves of others; men are now forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for non-workers] "because they are the
slaves of their necessities," he does not thence conclude, like the fat holder of benefices, that the wage-labourer must
always go fasting. He wishes, on the contrary, to increase their wants and to make the increasing number of their
wants a stimulus to their labour for the "more delicate."

[28] Storch, 1. c, t. iii, p. 223.

[291 Sismondi, 1. c, pp. 79, 80, 85.

[30] Destutt de Tracy, 1. c, p. 231: "Les nations pauvres, c'est la ou le peuple est a son aise; et les nations riches, c'est
la ou il est ordinairement pauvre."

[31] "Tenth Report of the Commissioners of H. M. Inland Revenue." Lond., 1866. p. 38.

[321 Ibidem.

[33] These figures are sufficient for comparison, but, taken absolutely, are false, since, perhaps, £100,000,000 of
income are annually not declared. The complaints of the Inland Revenue Commissioners of systematic fraud,
especially on the part of the commercial and industrial classes, are repeated in each of their reports. So e.g., "A
Joint-stock company returns £6,000 as assessable profits, the surveyor raises the amount to £88,000, and upon that
sum duty is ultimately paid. Another company which returns £190,000 is finally compelled to admit that the true
return should be £250,000." (Ibid., p, 42.)

[34] "Census, &c," 1. c, p. 29. John Bright's assertion that 150 landlords own half of England, and 12 half the Scotch
soil, has never been refuted.

135] "Fourth Report, &c, of Inland Revenue." Lond., 1860, p. 17.

f36] These are the net incomes after certain legally authorised abatements.

[37] At this moment, March, 1867, the Indian and Chinese market is again overstocked by the consignments of the
British cotton manufacturers. In 1866 a reduction in wages of 5 per cent, took place amongst the cotton operatives. In
1867, as consequence of a similar operation, there was a strike of 20,000 men at Preston. [Added in the 4th German
edition. — That was the prelude to the crisis which broke out immediately afterwards. — F. E.]

[38] "Census, &C," 1. c, P. 11.

f39] Gladstone in the House of Commons, Feb. 13th, 1843. Times, Feb. 14th, 1843 — "It is one of the most
melancholy features in the social state of this country that we see, beyond the possibility of denial, that while there is
at this moment a decrease in the consuming powers of the people, an increase of the pressure of privations and
distress; there is at the same time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, an increase of the
luxuriousness of their habits, and of their means of enjoyment." (Hansard, 13th Feb.)

[40] Gladstone in the House of Commons, April 16th, 1863. Morning Star, April 17th.

[41] See the official accounts in the Blue book: "Miscellaneous Statistics of the United Kingdom," Part vi., London,
1866, pp. 260-273, passim. Instead of the statistics of orphan asylums, &c, the declamations of the ministerial
journals in recommending dowries for the Royal children might also serve. The greater dearness of the means of
subsistence is never forgotten there.

[42] Gladstone, House of Commons, 7th April, 1864. — "The Hansard version runs: Again, and yet more at large —
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (51 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

what is human life, but, in the majority of cases, a struggle for existence.' The continual crying contradictions in
Gladstone's Budget speeches of 1863 and 1864 were characterised by an English writer by the following quotation
from Boileau:

"Voila I'homme en effet. II va du blanc au noir,
II condamne au matin ses sentiments du soir.
Importun a tout autre, a soi-meme incommode,
II change a tout moment d' esprit comme de mode. "

("The Theory of Exchanges, &c," London, 1864, p. 135.)

[431 H. Fawcett, 1. c, pp. 67-82. As to the increasing dependence of labourers on the retail shopkeepers, this is the
consequence of the frequent oscillations and interruptions of their employment.

[441 Wales here is always included in England.

[451 A peculiar light is throwm on the advance made since the time of Adam Smith, by the fact that by him the word
"workhouse" is still occasionally used as synonymous with "manufactory"; e.g., the opening of his chapter on the
division of labour; "those employed in every different branch of the work can often be collected into the same
workhouse."

I46J "Public Health. Sixth Report, 1864," p. 13.

147] I.e., p. 17.

148J I.e., p. 13.

[491 1. c, Appendix, p. 232.

15011. c, pp. 232, 233.

£511 I.e., pp. 14, 15.

[521 "In no particular have the rights of persons been so avowedly and shamefully sacrificed to the rights of property
as in regard to the lodging of the labouring class. Every large town may be looked upon as a place of human sacrifice,
a shrine where thousands pass yearly through the fire as offerings to the moloch of avarice," S. Laing, 1. c, p. 150.

[531 "Public Health, Eighth Report. 1866." p. 14, note.

[541 1. c, p. 89. With reference to the children in these colonies, Dr. Hunter says: "People are not now alive to tell us
how children were brought up before this age of dense agglomerations of poor began, and he would be a msh prophet
who should tell us what future behaviour is to be expected from the present growth of children, who, under
circumstances probably never before paralleled in this country, are now completing their education for future practice,
as 'dangerous classes' by sitting up half the night with persons of every age, half naked, drunken, obscene, and
quarrelsome." (1. c, p. 56.)

[551 1. a, p. 62.

[561 "Report of the Officer of Health of St. Martins-in-the-Fields, 1865.

[571 Public Health, Eighth Report, 1866," p. 91.

15811. c, p. 88.

[591 I.e., p. 88.

[601 I.e., p. 89.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (52 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five
[61] 1. c, p. 55 and 56.
£621 I.e., p. 149.
1631 I.e., p. 50.
I64J



COLLECTING AGENTS LIST (BRADFORD) .

Houses

Vulcan Street, No. 122 1 room

Lumiev Street, No. 13 1 room

Bower Street, No. 41 1 room

Portland Street. No. 112 1 room

Hardy Street, No. 17 1 room

North Street, No. 18 1 room

North Street, No. 17 1 room

Wymer Street, No. 19 1 room

Jowett Street, No. 56 1 room

George Street, No. 150 1 room

Rifle Court Marygate, No. 11 1 room

Marshall Street, No. 28 1 room

Marshall Street, No. 49 1 room

George Street, No. 128 1 room

George Street, No. 130 1 room

Edward Street, No. 4 1 room

George Street, No. 49 1 room

York Street, No. 34, 1 room

Salt Pie Street (bottom) 2 room

Cellars

Regent Square 1 cella

Acre Street 1 cella

33 Roberts Court 1 cella

Back Pratt Street 1 cella

used as a brazier's shop

27 Ebenezer Street 1 cella

1. c., p. 111. (no male



16 persons

11 persons

11 persons
10 persons

10 persons
16 persons
13 persons

8 adults

12 persons
3 families

11 persons
10 persons

3 families

18 persons

16 persons

17 persons
2 families
2 families

26 persons

r 8 persons

r 7 persons

r 7 persons

r 7 persons

r 6 persons
above 18 ) .



I65J I.e., p. 114.

[66J I.e., p. 50.

[671 "Public Health. Seventh Report. 1865," p. 18.

I68J I.e., p. 165.

f691 1. c., p. 18, Note. — The Relieving Officer of the Chapel-en-le-Frith Union reported to the Registar-General as
follows: — "At Doveholes, a number of small excavations have been made into a large hillock of lime ashes (the
refuse of lime-kilns), and which are used as dwellings, and occupied by labourers and others employed in the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (53 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

construction of a railway now in course of construction through that neighbourhood. The excavations are small and
damp, and have no drains or privies about them, and not the slightest means of ventilation except up a hole pulled
through the top, and used for a chimney. In consequence of this defect, small-pox has been raging for some time, and
some deaths [amongst the troglodytes] have been caused by it." (1. c, note 2.)

[701 The details given at the end of Part IV. refer especially to the labourers in coal mines. On the still worse condition
in metal mines, see the very conscientious Report of the Royal Commission of 1864.

£711 I.e., pp. 180, 182.

[721 I.e., pp. 515, 517.

£7311. c, p. 16.

[741 "Wholesale starvation of the London Poor.... Within the last few days the walls of London have been placarded
with large posters, bearing the following remarkable announcement: — 'Fat oxen! Starving men! The fat oxen from
their palace of glass have gone to feed the rich in their luxurious abode, while the starving men are left to rot and die
in their wretched dens.' The placards bearing these ominous words are put up at certain intervals. No sooner has one
set been defaced or covered over, than a fresh set is placarded in the former, or some equally public place.... This ...
reminds one of the secret revolutionary associations which prepared the French people for the events of 1789.... At
this moment, while English workmen with their wives and children are dying of cold and hunger, there are millions of
English gold — the produce of English labour — being invested in Russian, Spanish, Italian, and other foreign
enterprises." — Reynolds' Newspaper, January 20th, 1867.

[751 James E. Thorold Rogers. (Prof, of Polit. Econ. in the University of Oxford.) "A History of Agriculture and
Prices in England." Oxford, 1866, v. 1, p. 690. This work, the fruit of patient and diligent labour, contains in the two
volumes that have so far appeared, only the period from 1259 to 1400. The second volume contains simply statistics.
It is the first authentic "History of Prices" of the time that we possess.

[761 "Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor-Rates: or a comparative view of the prices of labour and provisions."
Lond., 1777, pp. 5, 7 1.

[771 Dr. Richard Price: "Observations on Reversionary Payments," 6th Ed. By W. Morgan, Lond., 1803, v. 11., pp.
158, 159. Price remarks on p. 159: "The nominal price of daylabour is at present no more than about four times, or, at
most, five times higher than it was in the year 1514. But the price of corn is seven times, and of flesh-meat and
raiment about fifteen times higher. So far, therefore, has the price of labour been even from advancing in proportion to
the increase in the expenses of living, that it does not appear that it bears now half the proportion to those expenses
that it did bear."

[781 Barton, 1. c, p. 26. For the end of the 18th century cf. Eden, 1. c.

T791 Parry, 1. c, p. 86.

I80J id., p. 213.

I8JJ S. Laing, 1. c, p. 62.

£821 "England and America." Lond., 1833, Vol. 1, p. 47.

[831 The landed aristocracy advanced themselves to this end, of course per Parliament, funds from the State Treasury,
at a very low rate of interest, which the farmers have to make good at a much higher rate.

[841 London Economist, May 29th, 1845, p. 290.

[851 The decrease of the middle-class farmers can be seen especially in the census category: "Farmer's son, grandson,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (54 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

brother, nephew, daughter, granddaughter, sister, niece"; in a word, the members of his own family, employed by the
farmer. This category numbered, in 1851, 216,851 persons; in 1861, only 176,151. From 1851 to 1871, the farms
under 20 acres fell by more than 900 in number; those between 50 and 75 acres fell from 8,253 to 6,370; the same
thing occurred with all other farms under 100 acres. On the other hand, during the same twenty years, the number of
large farms increased; those of 300-500 acres rose from 7,771 to 8,410, those of more than 500 acres from 2,755 to
3,914, those of more than 1,000 acres from 492 to 582.

[861 The number of shepherds increased from 12,517 to 25,559.

[871 Census, 1. c, p. 36.

[881 Rogers, 1. c, p. 693, p. 10. Mr. Rogers belongs to the Liberal School, is a personal friend of Cobden and Bright,
and therefore no laudator temporis acti.

[891 "Public Health. Seventh Report," 1865, p. 242. It is therefore nothing unusual either for the landlord to raise a
labourer's rent as soon as he hears that he is earnitig a little more, or for the farmer to lower the wage of the labourer,
"because his wife has found a trade," 1. c.

[90J I.e., p. 135.

191] I.e., p. 134.

[921 "Report of the Commissioners ... relating to Transportation and Penal Servitude," Lond., 1863, pp. 42, 50.

[931 1- c., p. 77. "Memorandum by the Lord Chief Justice."

[941 1. c, Vol. 11, Minutes of Evidence.

[95] 1. c, Vol. 1. Appendix, p. 280.

[961 1. c, PP. 274, 275.

[971 "Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, pp. 238, 249, 261, 262.

[98] 1. a, p. 262.

[991 1- c., p. 17. The English agricultural labourer receives only 1/4 as much milk, and 1/2 as much bread as the Irish.
Arthur Young in his "Tour in Ireland," at the beginning of this century, already noticed the better nourishment of the
latter. The reason is simply this, that the poor Irish farmer is incomparably more humane than the rich English. As
regards Wales, that which is said in the text holds only for the southwest. All the doctors there agree that the increase
of the death-rate through tuberculosis, scrofula, etc., increases in intensity with the deterioration of the physical
condition of the population, and all ascribe this deterioration to poverty. "His (the farm labourer's) keep is reckoned at
about five pence a day, but in many districts it was said to be of much less cost to the farmer" [himself very poor]....
"A morsel of the salt meat or bacon, ... salted and dried to the texture of mahogany, and hardly worth the difficult
process of assimilation ... is used to flavour a large quantity of broth or gruel, of meal and leeks, and day after day this
is the labourer's dinner." The advance of industry resulted for him, in this harsh and damp climate, in "the
abandonment of the solid homespun clothing in favour of the cheap and so-called cotton goods," and of stronger
drinks for so-called tea. "The agriculturist, after several hours' exposure to wind and rain, pins his cottage to sit by a
fire of peat or of balls of clay and small coal kneaded together, from which volumes of carbonic and sulphurous acids
are poured forth. His walls are of mud and stones, his floor the bare earth which was there before the hut was built, his
roof a mass of loose and sodden thatch. Every crevice is topped to maintain warmth, and in an atmosphere of diabolic
odour, with a mud fioor, with his only clothes drying on his back, he often sups and sleeps with his wife and children.
Obstetricians who have passed parts of the night in such cibins have described how they found their feet sinking in the
mud of the floor, and they were forced (easy task) to drill a hole through the wall to effect a little private respiration. It
was attested by numerous witnesses in various grades of life, that to these insanitary influences, and many more, the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (55 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

underfed peasant was nightly exposed, and of the result, a debilitated and scrofulous people, there was no want of
evidence.... The statements of the relieving officers of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire show in a striking way the
same state of things. There is besides "a plague more horrible still, the great number of idiots." Now a word on the
climatic conditions. "A strong south-west wind blows over the whole country for 8 or 9 months in the year, bringing
with it torrents of rain, which discharge principally upon the western slopes of the hills. Trees are rare, except in
sheltered places, and where not protected, are blown out of all shape. The cottages generally crouch under some bank,
or often in a ravine or quarry, and none but the smallest sheep and native cattle can live on the pastures.... The young
people migrate to the eastern mining districts of Glamorgan and Monmouth. Carmarthenshire is the breeding ground
of the mining population and their hospital. The population can therefore barely maintain its numbers." Thus in
Cardiganshire:

1851 1861



Males 45,155 44,446

Females 52,459 52,955



97,614 97,401
Dr. Hunter's Report in "Public Health, Seventh Report. 1865," pp. 498-502, passim.

[1001 In 1865 this law was improved to some extent. It will soon be learnt from experience that tinkering of this sort is
of no use.

[1011 In order to understand that which follows, we must remember that "Close Villages" are those whose owners are
one or two large landlords. "Open villages," those whose soil belongs to many smaller landlords. It is in the latter that
building speculators can build cottages and lodging-houses.

[1021 A show-village of this kind looks very nice, but is as unreal as the villages that Catherine II. saw on her journey
to the Crimea. In recent times the shepherd, also has often been banished from these show- villages; e.g., near Market
Harboro is sheep-farm of about 500 acres, which only employs the labour of one man. To reduce the long trudges over
these wide plains, the beautiful pastures of Leicester and Northampton, the shepherd used to get a cottage on the farm.
Now they give him a thirteenth shilling a week for lodging, that he must find far away in an open village.

[1031 "The labourers' houses (in the open villages, which, of course, are always overcrowded) are usually in rows,
built with their backs against the extreme edge of the plot of land which the builder could call his, and on this account
are not allowed light and air, except from the front." (Dr. Hunter's Report, 1. c, p. 135.) Very often the beerseller or
grocer of the village is at the same time the letter of its houses. In this case the agricultural labourer finds in him a
second master, besides the farmer. He must be his customer as well as his tenant. "The hind with his 10s. a week,
minus a rent of £4 a year ... is obliged to buy at the seller's own terms, his modicum of tea, sugar, flour, soap, candies,
and beer." (1. c, p. 132.) These open villages form, in fact, the "penal settlements" of the English agricultural
proletariat. Many of the cottages are simply lodging-houses, through which all the rabble of the neighbourhood passes.
The country labourer and his family who had often, in a way truly wonderful, preserved, under the foulest conditions,
a thoroughness and purity of character, go, in these, utterly to the devil. It is, of course, the fashion amongst the
aristocratic shylocks to shrug their shoulders pharisaically at the building speculators, the small landlords, and the
open villages. They know well enough that their "close villages" and "show- villages" are the birth-places of the open
villages, and could not exist without them. "The labourers ... were it not for the small owners, would, for by far the
most part, have to sleep under the trees of the farms on which they work." (1. c, p. 135.) The system of "open" and
"closed" villages obtains in all the Midland counties and throughout the East of England.

[1041 "The employer ... is ... directly or indirectly securing to himself the profit on a man employed at 10s. a week,
and receiving from this poor hind £4 or £5 annual rent for houses not worth £20 in a really free market, but maintained
at their artificial value by the power of the owner to say 'Use my house, or go seek a hiring elsewhere without a
character from me....' Does a man wish to better himself, to go as a plate-layer on the railway, or to begin quarry- work,
the same power is ready with 'Work for me at this low rate of wages or begone at a week's notice; take your pig with

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (56 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

you, and get what you can for the potatoes growing in your garden.' Should his interest appear to be better served by
it, an enhanced rent is sometimes preferred in these cases by the owner (i.e., the farmer) as the penalty for leaving his
service." (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 132.)

[1051 "New married couples are no edifying study for grown-up brothers and sisters: and though instances must not be
recorded, sufficient data are remembered to warrant the remark, that great depression and sometimes death are the lot
of the female participator in the offence of incest." (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 137.) A member of the rural police who had
for many years been a detective in the worst quarters of London, says of the girls of his village: "their boldness and
shamelessness I never saw equalled during some years of police life and detective duty in the worst parts of London
.... They live like pigs, great boys and girls, mothers and fathers, all sleeping in one room, in many instances." ("Child.
Empl. Com. Sixth Report, 1867," p. 77 sq. 155.)

ri061 "Public Health. Seventh Report, 1865," pp. 9, 14 passim.

[1071 "The heaven-bom employment of the hind gives dignity even to his position. He is not a slave, but a soldier of
peace, and deserves his place in married men's quarters to be provided by the landlord, who has claimed a power of
enforced labour similar to that the country demands of the soldier. He no mote receives market-price for his work than
does the soldier. Like the soldier he is caught young, ignorant, knowing only his own trade, and his own locality.
Early marriage and. the operation of the various laws of settlement affect the one as enlistment and the Mutiny Act
affect the other." (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 132.) Sometimes an exceptionally soft-hearted landlord relents as the solitude he
has created. "It is a melancholy thing to stand alone in one's country," said Lord Leicester, when complimented on the
completion of Hookham. "I look around and not a house is to be seen but mine. I am the giant of Giant Castle, and
have eat up all my neighhours."

[1081 A similar movement is seen during the last ten years in France; in proportion as capitalist production there takes
possession of agriculture, it drives the "surplus" agricultural population into the towns. Here also we find deterioration
in the housing and other conditions at the source of the surplus-population. On the special "proletariat foncier," to
which this system of parcelling out the land has given rise, see, among others, the work of Colins, already quoted, and
Karl Marx "Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte." 2nd edition. Hamburg, 1869, pp. 56, &c. In 1846, the
town population in France was represented by 24.42, the agricultural by 75.58; in 1861, the town by 28.86, the
agricultural by 71.14 per cent. During the last 5 years, the diminution of the agricultural percentage of the population
has been yet more marked. As early as 1846, Pierre Dupont in his "Ouvriers" sang:

Mai vetus, logos dans des trous,
Sous les combles, dans les decombres,
Nous vivons avoc les hiboux
Et les laffons, amis des ombres.

[1091 "Sixth and last Report of the Children's Employment Commission," published at the end of March, 1867. It
deals solely with the agricultural gang-system.

rilOl "Child. Emp. Comm., VI. Report." Evidence 173, p. 37.

[1111 Some gang-masters, however, have worked themselves up to the position of farmers of 500 acres, or proprietors
of whole rows of houses.

[1121 "Half the girls of Ludford have been ruined by going out" (in gangs). 1. c, p. 6, § 32.

[1131 "They (gangs) have greatly increased of late years. In some places they are said to have been introduced at
comparatively late dates; in others where gangs ... have been known for many years ... more and younger children are
employed in them." (1. c, p. 79, § 174).

[1141 "Small farmers never employ gangs." "It is not on poor land, but on land which affords rent of from 40 to 50
shillings, that women and children are employed in the greatest numbers." (1. c, pp. 17, 14.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (57 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

[1151 To one of these gentlemen the taste of his rent was so grateful that he indignantly declared to the Commission of
Inquiry that the whole hubbub was only due to the name of the system. If instead of "gang" it were called "the
Agricultural Juvenile Industrial Self-supporting Association," everything would be all right.

[1161 "Gang work is cheaper than other work; that is why they are employed," says a former gang-master (1. c, p. 17,
§ 14 )."The gang-system is decidedly the cheapest for the farmer, and decidedly the worst for the children," says a
farmer (1. c, p. 16, § 3.)

[1171 "Undoubtedly much of the work now done by children in gangs used to be done by men and women. More men
are out of work now where children and women are employed than formerly." (1. c, p. 43, n. 202.) On the other hand,
"the labour question in some agricultural districts, particularly the arable, is becoming so serious in consequence of
emigration, and the facility afforded by railways for getting to large towns that I (the "I" is the steward of a great lord)
think the services of children are most indispensable," (1. c, p. 80, n. 180.) For the "labour question" in English
agricultural districts, differently from the rest of the civilised world, means the landlords' and farmers' question, viz.,
how is it possible, despite an always increasing exodus of the agricultural folk, to keep up a sufficient relative
surplus-population in the country, and by means of it keep the wages of the agricultural labourer at a minimum?

[1181 The "Public Health Report," where in dealing with the subject of children's mortality, the gang-system is treated
in passing, remains unknown to the press, and, therefore, to the English public. On the other hand, the last report of
the "Child. Empl. Comm." afforded the press sensational copy always welcome. Whilst the Liberal press asked how
the fine gentlemen and ladies, and the well-paid clergy of the State Church, with whom Lincolnshire swarms, could
allow such a system to arise on their estates, under their very eyes, they who send out expressly missions to the
Antipodes, "for the improvement of the morals of South Sea Islanders" — the more refined press confined itself to
reflections on the coarse degradation of the agricultural population who are capable of selling their children into such
slavery! Under the accursed conditions to which these "delicate" people condemn the agricultural labourer, it would
not be surprising if he ate his own children. What is really wonderful is the healthy integrity of character, he has, in
great part, retained. The official reports prove that the parents, even in the gang districts, loathe the gang-system.
"There is much in the evidence that shows that the parents of the children would, in many instances, be glad to be
aided by the requirements of a legal obligation, to resist the pressure and the temptations to which they are often
subject. They are liable to be urged, at times by the parish officers, at times by employers, under threats of being
themselvat discharged, to be taken to work at an age when ... school attendance ... would be manifestly to their greater
advantage.... All that time and strength wasted; all the suffering from extra and unprofitable fatigue produced to the
labourer and to his children; every instance in which the parent may have traced the moral ruin of his child to fhe
undermining of delicacy by the over-crowding of cottages, or to the contaminating influences of the public gang, must
have been so many incentives to feelings in the minds of the labouring poor which can be well understood, and which
it would be needless to particularise. They must be conscious that much bodily and mental pain has thus been inflicted
upon them from causes for which they were in no way answerable; to which, had it been in their power, they would
have in no way consented; and against which they were powerless to struggle." (1. c, p. xx., § 82, and xxiii., n. 96.)

ri!91 Population of Ireland, 1801, 5,319,867 persons; 1811, 6,084,996; 1821, 6,869,544; 1831, 7,828,347; 1841,
8,222,664.

[1201 The result would be found yet more unfavourable if we went further back. Thus: Sheep in 1865, 3,688,742, but
in 1856, 3,694,294. Pigs in 1865, 1,299,893, but in 1858, 1,409,883.

[1211 The data of the text are put together from the materials of the "Agricultural Statistics, Ireland, General Abstracts,
Dublin," for the years 1860, el seq., and "Agricultural Statistics, Ireland. Tables showing the estimated average
produce, &c, Dublin, 1866." These statistics are official, and laid before Parliament annually.

Note to 2nd edition. The official statistics for the year 1872 show, as compared with 1871, a decrease in area under
cultivation of 134,915 acres. An increase occurred in the cultivation of green crops, turnips, mangold-wurzel, and the
like; a decrease in the area under cultivation for wheat of 16,000 acres; oats, 14,000; barley and rye, 4,000; potatoes,
66,632; flax, 34,667; grass, clover, vetches, rape-seed, 30,000. The soil under cultivation for wheat shows for the last

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (58 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

5 years the following stages of decrease: — 1868, 285,000 acres; 1869, 280,000; 1870, 259,000; 1871, 244,000; 1872,
228,000. For 1872 we find, in round numbers, an increase of 2,600 horses, 80,000 horned cattle, 68,609 sheep, and a
decrease of 236,000 pigs.

11221 The total yearly income under Schedule D. is different in this table from that which appears in the preceding
ones, because of certain deductions allowed by law.

[1231 If the product also diminishes relatively per acre, it must not be forgotten that for a century and a half England
has indirectly exported the soil of Ireland, without as much as allowing its cultivators the means for making up the
constituents of the soil that had been exhausted.

IT 241 As Ireland is regarded as the promised land of the "principle of population," Th. Sadler, before the publication
of his work on population, issued his famous book, "Ireland, its Evils and their Remedies." 2nd edition, London, 1829.
Here, by comparison of the statistics of the individual provinces, and of the individual counties in each province, he
proves that the misery there is not, as Malthus would have it, in proportion to the number of the population, but in
inverse ratio to this.

1T251 Between 1851 and 1874, the total number of emigrants amounted to 2,325,922.

|T261 According to a table in Murphy's "Ireland Industrial, Political and Social," 1870, 94.6 per cent, or the holdings
do not reach 100 acres, 5.4 exceed 100 acres.

[1271 "Reports from the Poor Law Inspectors on the Wages of Agricultural Labourers in Dublin," 1870. See also
"Agricultural labourers (Ireland). Return, etc." 8 March, 1861, London, 1862.

[128] 1. c, pp. 29, 1.

£12911. a, p. 12.

JT30J I.e., p. 12.

£1311 I.e., p. 25.

£1321 I.e., p. 27.

£13311. a, p. 25.

£13411. c, p. 1.

JT35J1. c, pp. 31,32.

JT36J I.e., p.. 25.

[1371 1. c, p. 30.

£13811. c, pp. 21, 13.

ri391 "Rept. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. 96.

[1401 The total area includes also peat, bogs, and waste land.

[1411 How the famine and its consequences have been deliberately made the most of, both by the individual landlords
and by the English legislature, to forcibly carry out the agricultural revolution and to thin the population of Ireland
down to the proportion satisfactory to the landlords, I shall show more fully in Vol. III. of this work, in the section on
landed property. There also I return to the condition of the small farmers and the agricultural labourers. At present,
only one quotation. Nassau W. Senior says, with other things, in his posthumous work, "Journals, Conversations and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (59 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Essays relating to Ireland." 2 vols. London, 1868; Vol. II., p. 282. "Well," said Dr. G., "we have got our Poor Law and
it is a great instrument for giving the victory to the landlords. Another, and a still more powerful instrument is
emigration.... No friend to Ireland can wish the war to be prolonged [between the landlords and the small Celtic
farmers] — still less, that it should end by the victory of the tenants. The sooner it is over — the sooner Ireland
becomes a grazing country, with the comparatively thin population which a grazing country requires, the better for all
classes." The English Corn Laws of 1815 secured Ireland the monopoly of the free importation of corn into Great
Britain. They favoured artificially, therefore, the cultivation of corn. With the abolition of the Corn Laws in 1846, this
monopoly was suddenly removed. Apart from all other circumstances, this event alone was sufficient to give a great
impulse to the turning of Irish arable into pasture land, to the concentration of arms, and to the eviction of small
cultivators. After the fruitfulness of the Irish soil had been praised from 1815 to 1846, and proclaimed loudly as by
Nature herself destined for the cultivation of wheat, English agronomists, economists, politicians, discover suddenly
that it is good for nothing but to produce forage. M. Leonce de Lavergne has hastened to repeat this on the other side
of the Channel. It takes a "serious" man, a la Lavergne, to be caught by such childishness.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-Six: The Secret of Primative Accumulation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (60 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Six

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIII:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX:

THE SECRET OF PRIMATIVE ACCUMULATION



We have seen how money is changed into capital; how through capital surplus-value is made, and from
surplus-value more capital. But the accumulation of capital pre-supposes surplus-value; surplus-value
pre-supposes capitalistic production; capitalistic production presupposes the pre-existence of
considerable masses of capital and of labor-power in the hands of producers of commodities. The whole
movement, therefore, seems to turn in a vicious circle, out of which we can only get by supposing a
primitive accumulation (previous accumulation of Adam Smith) preceding capitalistic accumulation; an
accumulation not the result of the capitalistic mode of production, but its starting point.

This primitive accumulation plays in Political Economy about the same part as original sin in theology.
Adam bit the apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human race. Its origin is supposed to be explained when
it is told as an anecdote of the past. In times long gone-by there were two sorts of people; one, the
diligent, intelligent, and, above all, frugal elite; the other, lazy rascals, spending their substance, and
more, in riotous living. The legend of theological original sin tells us certainly how man came to be
condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow; but the history of economic original sin reveals to
us that there are people to whom this is be no means essential. Never mind! Thus it came to pass that the
former sort accumulated wealth, and the latter sort had at last nothing to sell except their own skins. And
from this original sin dates the poverty of the great majority that, despite all its labor, has up to now
nothing to sell but itself, and the wealth of the few that increases constantly although they have long
ceased to work. Such insipid childishness is every day preached to us in the defence of property. M.
Thiers, e.g., had the assurance to repeat it with all the solemnity of a statesman to the French people,
once so spirituel. But as soon as the question of property crops up, it becomes a sacred duty to proclaim
the intellectual food of the infant as the one thing fit for all ages and for all tages of development. In
actual history it is notorious that conquest, enslavement, robbery, murder, briefly force, play the great
part. In the tender annals of Political Economy, the idyllic reigns from time immemorial. Right and
"labor" were from all time the sole means of enrichment, the present year of course always excepted. As
a matter of fact, the methods of primitive accumulation are anything but idyllic.

In themselves money and commodities are no more capital than are the means of production and of
subsistence. They want transforming into capital. But this transformation itself can only take place under



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch26.htm (1 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:45]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Six

certain circumstances that centre in this, viz., that two very different kinds of commodity-possessors
must come face to face and into contact, on the one hand, the owners of money, means of production,
means of subsistence, who are eager to increase the sum of values they possess, by buying other people's
labor-power; on the other hand, free laborers, the sellers of their own labor-power, and therefore the
sellers of labor. Free laborers, in the double sense that neither they themselves form part and parcel of the
means of production, as in the case of slaves, bondsmen, &c, nor do the means of production belong to
them, as in the case of peasant-proprietors; they are, therefore, free from, unencumbered by, any means
of production of their own. With this polarization of th e market for commodities, the fundamental
conditions of capitalist production are given. The capitalist system pre-supposes the complete separation
of the laborers from all property in the means by which they can realize their labor. As soon as capitalist
production is once on its own legs, it not only maintains this separation, but reproduces it on a
continually extending scale. The process, therefore, that clears the way for the capitalist system, can be
none other than the process which takes away from the laborer the possession of his means of
production; a process that transforms, on the one hand, the social means of subsistence and of production
into capital, on the other, the immediate producers into wage-laborers. The so-called primitive
accumulation, therefore, is nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer from the
means of production. It appears as primitive, because it forms the pre-historic stage of capital and of the
mode of production corresponding with it.

The economic structure of capitalist society has grown out of the economic structure of feudal society.
The dissolution of the latter set free the elements of the former.

The immediate producer, the laborer, could only dispose of his own person after he had ceased to be
attached to the soil and ceased to be the slaver, serf, or bondsman of another. To become a free seller of
labor-power, who carries his commodity wherever he finds a market, he must further have escaped from
the regime of the guilds, their rules for apprentices and journeymen, and the impediments of their labor
regulations. Hence, the historical movement which changes the producers into wage-workers, appears, on
the one hand, as their emancipation from serfdom and from the fetters of the guilds, and this side alone
exists for our bourgeois historians. But, on the other hand, these new freedmen became sellers of
themselves only after they had been robbed of all their own means of production, and of all the
guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal arrangements. And the history of this, their
expropriation, is written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and fire.

The industrial capitalists, these new potentates, had on their part not only to disgrace the guild maters of
handicrafts, but also the feudal lords,the possessors of the sources of wealth. In this respect, their
conquest of social power appears as the fruit of a victorious struggle both against feudal lordship and its
revolting prerogatives, and against the guilds and the fetters they laid on the free development of
production and the free exploitation of man by man. The chevaliers d'industrie, however, only succeeded
in supplanting the chevaliers of the sword by making use of events of which they themselves were
wholly innocent. They have risen by means as vile as those by which the Roman freedman once on a
time made himself the master of his patronus.

The starting-point of the development that gave rise to the wage-laborer as well as to the capitalist, was
the servitude of the laborer. The advance consisted in a change of form of this servitude, in the
transformation of feudal exploitation into capitalist exploitation. To understand its march, we need not go
back very far. Although we come across the first beginnings of capitalist production as early as the 14th
or 15th century, sporadically, in certain towns of the Mediterranean, the capitalistic era dates from the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch26.htm (2 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:45]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Six

16th century. Wherever it appears, the abolition of serfdom has been long effected, and the highest
development of the middle ages, the existence of sovereign towns, has been long on the wane.

In the history of primitive accumulation, all revolutions are epoch-making that act as levers for the
capital class in course of formation; but, above all, those moments when great masses of men are
suddenly and forcibly torn from their means of subsistence, and hurled as free and "unattached"
proletarians on the labor market. The expropriation of the agricultural producer, of the peasant, from the
soil, is the basis of the whole process. The history of this expropriation, in different countries, assumes
different aspects, and runs through its various phases in different orders of succession, nd at different
periods. In England alone, which we take as our example, has it the classic form. \l]



Footnotes

T 1 1 In Italy, where capitalistic production developed earliest, the dissolution of serfdom also took place
earlier than elsewhere. The serf was emancipated in that country before he had acquired any prescriptive
right to the soil. His emancipation at once transformed him into a free proletarian, who, moreover, found
his master ready and waiting for him in the towns, for the most part handed down as legacies from the
Roman time. When the revolution of the world-market, about the end of the 15th century, annihilated
Northern Italy's commercial supremacy, a movement in the reverse direction set in. The laborers of the
towns were driven en masse into the country, and gave an impulse, never before seen, to the petite
culture, carried on in the form of gardening.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Seven: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch26.htm (3 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:45]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIM:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN:

EXPROPRIATION OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION FROM THE

LAND



In England, serfdom had practically disappeared in the last part of the 14th century. The immense
majority of the population [11 consisted then, and to a still larger extent, in the 15th century, of free
peasant proprietors, whatever was the feudal title under which their right of property was hidden. In the
larger seignorial domains, the old bailiff, himself a serf, was displaced by the free farmer. The
wage-labourers of agriculture consisted partly of peasants, who utilised their leisure time by working on
the large estates, partly of an independent special class of wage-labourers, relatively and absolutely few
in numbers. The latter also were practically at the same, time peasant farmers, since, besides their wages,
they had allotted to them arable land to the extent of 4 or more acres, together with their cottages,
Besides they, with the rest of the peasants, enjoyed the usufruct of the common land, which gave pasture
to their cattle, furnished them with timber, fire-wood, turf, &c. [2] In all countries of Europe, feudal
production is characterised by division of the soil amongst the greatest possible number of
sub-feudatories. The might of the feudal lord, like that of the sovereign, depended not on the length of his
rent-roll, but on the number of his subjects, and the latter depended on the number of peasant proprietors.
[31 Although, therefore, the English land, after the Norman Conquest, was distributed in gigantic
baronies, one of which often included some 900 of the old Anglo-Saxon lordships, it was bestrewn with
small peasant properties, only here and there interspersed with great seignorial domains. Such conditions,
together with the prosperity of the towns so characteristic of the 15th century, allowed of that wealth of
the people which Chancellor Fortescue so eloquently paints in his "Laudes legum Angliae"; but it
excluded the possibility of capitalistic wealth.

The prelude of the revolution that laid the foundation of the capitalist mode of production, was played in
the last third of the 15th, and the first decade of the 16th century. A mass of free proletarians was hurled
on the labour-market by the breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers, who, as Sir James Steuart well
says, "everywhere uselessly filled house and castle." Although the royal power, itself a product of
bourgeois development, in its strife after absolute sovereignty forcibly hastened on the dissolution of
these bands of retainers, it was by no means the sole cause of it. In insolent conflict with king and
parliament, the great feudal lords created an incomparably larger proletariat by the forcible driving of the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (1 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

peasantry from the land, to which the latter had the same feudal right as the lord himself, and by the
usurpation of the common lands. The rapid rise of the Flemish wool manufactures, and the corresponding
rise in the price of wool in England, gave the direct impulse to these evictions. The old nobility had been
devoured by the great feudal wars. The new nobility was the child of its time, for which money was the
power of all powers. Transformation of arable land into sheep-walks was, therefore, its cry. Harrison, in
his "Description of England, prefixed to Holinshed's Chronicles," describes how the expropriation of
small peasants is ruining the country. "What care our great encroachers?" The dwellings of the peasants
and the cottages of the labourers were razed to the ground or doomed to decay. "If," says Harrison, "the
old records of euerie manour be sought it will soon appear that in some manour seventeene, eighteene, or
twentie houses are shrunk ... that England was neuer less furnished with people than at the present.... Of
cities and townes either utterly decaied or more than a quarter or half diminished, though some one be a
little increased here or there; of townes pulled downe for sheepe-walks, and no more but the lordships
now standing in them.... I could saie somewhat." The complaints of these old chroniclers are always
exaggerated, but they reflect faithfully the impression made on contemporaries by the revolution in the
conditions of production. A comparison of the writings of Chancellor Fortescue and Thomas More
reveals the gulf between the 15th and 16th century. As Thornton rightly has it, the English working-class
was precipitated without any transition from its golden into its iron age.

Legislation was terrified at this revolution. It did not yet stand on that height of civilization where the
"wealth of the nation" (i.e., the formation of capital, and the reckless exploitation and impoverishing of
the mass of the people) figure as, the ultima Thule of all state-craft. In his history of Henry VII., Bacon
says: "Inclosures at that time (1489) began to be more frequent, whereby arable land (which could not be
manured without people and families) was turned into pasture, which was easily rid by a few herdsmen;
and tenancies for years, lives, and at will (whereupon much of the yeomanry lived) were turned into
demesnes. This bred a decay of people, and (by consequence) a decay of towns, churches, tithes, and the
like... . In remedying of this inconvenience the king's wisdom was admirable, and the parliament's at that
time ... they took a course to take away depopulating enclosures, and depopulating pasturage." An Act of
Henry VII., 1489, cap. 19, forbad the destruction of all "houses of husbandry" to which at least 20 acres
of land belonged. By an Act, 25 Henry VIII., the same law was renewed, it recites, among other things,
that many farms and large flocks of cattle, especially of sheep, are concentrated in the hands of a few
men, whereby the rent of land has much risen and tillage has fallen off, churches and houses have been
pulled down, and marvellous numbers of people have been deprived of the means wherewith to maintain
themselves and their families. The Act, therefore, ordains the rebuilding of the decayed farmsteads, and
fixes a proportion between corn land and pasture land, &c. An Act of 1533 recites that some owners
possess 24,000 sheep, and limits the number to be owned to 2,000. [4J The cry of the people and the
legislation directed, for 150 years after Henry VII., against the expropriation of the small farmers and
peasants, were alike fruitless. The secret of their inefficiency Bacon, without knowing it, reveals to us.
"The device of King Henry VII.," says Bacon, in his "Essays, Civil and Moral," Essay 29, "was profound
and admirable, in making farms and houses of husbandry of a standard; that is, maintained with such a
proportion of land unto them as may breed a subject to live in convenient plenty, and no servile
condition, and to keep the plough in the hands of the owners and not mere hirelings." [5] What the
capitalist system demanded was, on the other hand, a degraded and almost servile condition of the mass
of the people, the transformation of them into mercenaries, and of their means of labour into capital.
During this transformation period, legislation also strove to retain the 4 acres of land by the cottage of the
agricultural wage-labourer, and forbad him to take lodgers into his cottage. In the reign of James L, 1627,
Roger Crocker of Front Mill, was condemned for having built a cottage on the manor of Front Mill

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (2 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

without 4 acres of land attached to the same in perpetuity. As late as Charles I.'s reign, 1638, a royal
commission was appointed to enforce the carrying out of the old laws, especially that referring to the 4
acres of land. Even in Cromwell's time, the building of a house within 4 miles of London was forbidden
unless it was endowed with 4 acres of land. As late as the first half of the 1 8th century complaint is made
if the cottage of the agricultural labourer has not an adjunct of one or two acres of laud. Nowadays he is
lucky if it is furnished with a little garden, or if he may rent, far away from his cottage, a few roods.
"Landlords and farmers," says Dr. Hunter, "work here hand in hand. A few acres to the cottage would
make the labourers too independent." \6]

The process of forcible expropriation of the people received in the ]6th century a new and frightful
impulse from the Reformation, and from the consequent colossal spoliation of the church property. The
Catholic church was, at the time of the Reformation, feudal proprietor of a great part of the English land.
The suppression of the monasteries, &c, hurled their inmates into the proletariat. The estates of the
church were to a large extent given away to rapacious royal favourites, or sold at a nominal price to
speculating farmers and citizens, who drove out, en masse, the hereditary sub-tenants and threw their
holdings into one. The legally guaranteed property of the poorer folk in a part of the church's tithes was
tacitly confiscated. [7] "Pauper ubique jacet," cried Queen Elizabeth, after a journey through England. In
the 43rd year of her reign the nation was obliged to recognise pauperism officially by the introduction of
a poor-rate. "The authors of this law seem to have been ashamed to state the grounds of it, for [contrary
to traditional usage] it has no preamble whatever." [8} By the 16th of Charles I., ch. 4, it was declared
perpetual, and in fact only in 1834 did it take a new and harsher form. [9] These immediate results of the
Reformation were not its most lasting ones. The property of the church formed the religious bulwark of
the traditional conditions of landed property. With its fall these were no longer tenable. |T01

Even in the last decade of the 17th century, the yeomanry, the class of independent peasants, Were more
numerous than the class of farmers. They had formed the backbone of Cromwell's strength, and, even
according to the confession of Macaulay, stood in favourable contrast to the drunken squires and to their
servants, the country clergy, who had to marry their masters' cast-off mistresses. About 1750, the
yeomanry had disappeared, fill and so had, in the last decade of the 18th century, the last trace of the
common land of the agricultural labourer. We leave on one side here the purely economic causes of the
agricultural revolution. We deal only with the forcible means employed.

After the restoration of the Stuarts, the landed proprietors carried, by legal means, an act of usurpation,
effected everywhere on the Continent without any legal formality. They abolished the feudal tenure of
land, i.e., they got rid of all its obligations to the State, "indemnified" the State by taxes on the peasantry
and the rest of the mass of the people, vindicated for themselves the rights of modem private property in
estates to which they had only a feudal title, and, finally, passed those laws of settlement, which, mulatis
mutandis, had the same effect on the English agricultural labourer, as the edict of the Tartar Boris
Godunof on the Russian peasantry.

The "glorious Revolution" brought into power, along with William of Orange, the landlord and capitalist
appropriators of surplus- value. \\2\ They inaugurated the new era by practising on a colossal scale thefts
of state lands, thefts that had been hitherto managed more modestly. These estates were given away, sold
at a ridiculous figure, or even annexed to private estates by direct seizure. |T31 All this happened without
the slightest observation of legal etiquette. The Crown lands thus fraudulently appropriated, together with
the robbery of the Church estates, as far as these had not been lost again during the republican revolution,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (3 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

form the basis of the to-day princely domains of the English oligarchy. |T41 The bourgeois capitalists
favoured the operation with the view, among others, to promoting free trade in land, to extending the
domain of modern agriculture on the large farm-system, and to increasing their supply of the free
agricultural proletarians ready to hand. Besides, the new landed aristocracy was the natural ally of the
new bankocracy, of the newly-hatched haute finance, and of the large manufacturers, then depending on
protective duties. The English bourgeoisie acted for its own interest quite as wisely as did the Swedish
bourgeoisie who, reversing the process, hand in hand with their economic allies, the peasantry, helped
the kings in the forcible resumption of the Crown lands from the oligarchy. This happened since 1604
under Charles X. and Charles XL

Communal property — always distinct from the State property just dealt with — was an old Teutonic
institution which lived on under cover of feudalism. We have seen how the forcible usurpation of this,
generally accompanied by the turning of arable into pasture land, begins at the end of the 15th and
extends into the 16th century. But, at that time, the process was carried on by means of individual acts of
violence against which legislation, for a hundred and fifty years, fought in vain. The advance made by
the 18th century shows itself in this, that the law itself becomes now the instrument of the theft of the
people's land, although the large farmers make use of their little independent methods as well. f!51 The
parliamentary form of the robbery is that of Acts for enclosures of Commons, in other words, decrees by
which the landlords grant themselves the people's land as private property, decrees of expropriation of
the people. Sir F. M. Eden refutes his own crafty special pleading, in which he tries to represent
communal property as the private property of the great landlords who have taken the place of the feudal
lords, when he, himself, demands a "general Act of Parliament for the enclosure of Commons"
(admitting thereby that a parliamentary coup d'etat is necessary for its transformation into private
property), and moreover calls on the legislature for the indemnification for the expropriated poor. |T61

Whilst the place of the independent yeoman was taken by tenants at will, small farmers on yearly leases,
a servile rabble dependent on the pleasure of the landlords, the systematic robbery of the Communal
lands helped especially, next to the theft of the State domains, to swell those large farms, that were called
in the 18th century capital farms f!71 or merchant farms, fl81 and to "set free" the agricultural population
as proletarians for manufacturing industry.

The 18th century, however, did not yet recognise as fully as the 19th, the identity between national
wealth and the poverty of the people. Hence the most vigorous polemic, in the economic literature of that
time, on the "enclosure of commons." From the mass of materials that lie before me, I give a few extracts
that will throw a strong light on the circumstances of the time. "In several parishes of Hertfordshire,"
writes one indignant person, "24 farms, numbering on the average 50-150 acres, have been melted up
into three farms." f!91 "In Northamptonshire and Leicestershire the enclosure of common lands has taken
place on a very large scale, and most of the new lordships, resulting from the enclosure, have been turned
into pasturage, in consequence of which many lordships have not now 50 acres ploughed yearly, in
which 1,500 were ploughed formerly. The ruins of former dwelling-houses, barns, stables, &c," are the
sole traces of the former inhabitants. "An hundred houses and families have in some open-field villages
dwindled to eight or ten.... The landholders in most parishes that have been enclosed only 15 or 20 years,
are very few in comparison of the numbers who occupied them in their open-field state. It is no
uncommon thing for 4 or 5 wealthy graziers to engross a large enclosed lordship which was before in the
hands of 20 or 30 farmers, and as many smaller tenants and proprietors. All these are hereby thrown out
of their livings with their families and many other families who were chiefly employed and supported by



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (4 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

them." r201 It was not only the land that lay waste, but often land cultivated either in common or held
under a definite rent paid to the community, that was annexed by the neighbouring landlords under
pretext of enclosure. "I have here in view enclosures of open fields and lands already improved. It is
acknowledged by even the writers in defence of enclosures that these diminished villages increase the
monopolies of farms, raise the prices of provisions, and produce depopulation ... and even the enclosure
of waste lands (as now carried on) bears hard on the poor, by depriving them of a part of their
subsistence, and only goes towards increasing farms already too large." f211 "When," says Dr. Price,
"this land gets into the hands of a few great farmers, the consequence must be that the little farmers"
(earlier designated by him "a multitude of little proprietors and tenants, who maintain themselves and
families by the produce of the ground they occupy by sheep kept on a common, by poultry, hogs, &c,
and who therefore have little occasion to purchase any of the means of subsistence") "will be converted
into a body of men who earn their subsistence by working for others, and who will be under a necessity
of going to market for all they want.... There will, perhaps, be more labour, because there will be more
compulsion to it.... Towns and manufactures will increase, because more will be driven to them in quest
of places and employment. This is the way in which the engrossing of farms naturally operates. And this
is the way in which, for many years, it has been actually operating in this kingdom." f221 He sums up the
effect of the enclosures thus: "Upon the whole, the circumstances of the lower ranks of men are altered in
almost every respect for the worse. From little occupiers of land, they are reduced to the state of
day-labourers and hirelings; and, at the same time, their subsistence in that state has become more
difficult." [231 In fact, usurpation of the common lands and the revolution in agriculture accompanying
this, told so acutely on the agricultural labourers that, even according to Eden, between 1765 and 1780,
their wages began to fall below the minimum, and to be supplemented by official poor-law relief. Their
wages, he says, "were not more than enough for the absolute necessaries of life."

Let us hear for a moment a defender of enclosures and an opponent of Dr. Price. "Not is it a consequence
that there must be depopulation, because men are not seen wasting their labour in the open field.... If, by
converting the little farmers into a body of men who must work for others, more labour is produced, it is
an advantage which the nation" (to which, of course, the "converted" ones do not belong) "should wish
for ... the produce being greater when their joint labours are employed on one farm, there will be a
surplus for manufactures, and by this means manufactures, one of the mines of the nation, will increase,
in proportion to the quantity of corn produced." f241

The stoical peace of mind with which the political economist regards the most shameless violation of the
"sacred rights of property" and the grossest acts of violence to persons, as soon as they are necessary to
lay the foundations of the capitalistic mode of production, is shown by Sir F. M. Eden, philanthropist and
tory to boot. The whole series of thefts, outrages, and popular misery, that accompanied the forcible
expropriation of the people, from the last third of the 15th to the end of the 18th century, lead him merely
to the comfortable conclusion: "The due proportion between arable land and pasture had to be
established. During the whole of the 14th and the greater part of the 15th century, there was one acre of
pasture to 2, 3, and even 4 of arable land. About the middle of the 16th century the proportion was
changed of 2 acres of pasture to 2, later on, of 2 acres of pasture to one of arable, until at last the just
proportion of 3 acres of pasture to one of arable land was attained."

In the 19th century, the very memory of the connexion between the agricultural labourer and the
communal property had, of course, vanished. To say nothing of more recent times, have the agricultural
population received a farthing of compensation for the 3,51 1,770 acres of common land which between



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (5 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

1801 and 1831 were stolen from them and by parliamentary devices presented to the landlords by the
landlords?

The last process of wholesale expropriation of the agricultural population from the soil is, finally, the
so-called clearing of estates, i.e., the sweeping men off them. All the English methods hitherto
considered culminated in "clearing." As we saw in the picture of modern conditions given in a former
chapter, where there are no more independent peasants to get rid of, the "clearing" of cottages begins; so
that the agricultural labourers do not find on the soil cultivated by them even the spot necessary for their
own housing. But what "clearing of estates" really and properly signifies, we learn only in the promised
land of modern romance, the Highlands of Scotland. There the process is distinguished by its systematic
character, by the magnitude of the scale on which it is carried out at one blow (in Ireland landlords have
gone to the length of sweeping away several villages at once; in Scotland areas as large as German
principalities are dealt with), finally by the peculiar form of property, under which the embezzled lands
were held.

The Highland Celts were organised in clans, each of which was the owner of the land on which it was
settled. The representative of the clan, its chief or "great man," was only the titular owner of this
property, just as the Queen of England is the titular owner of all the national soil. When the English
government succeeded in suppressing the intestine wars of these "great men," and their constant
incursions into the Lowland plains, the chiefs of the clans by no means gave up their time-honored trade
as robbers; they only changed its form. On their own authority they transformed their nominal right into a
right of private property, and as this brought them into collision with their clansmen, resolved to drive
them out by open force. "A king of England might as well claim to drive his subjects into the sea," says
Professor Newman. f251 This revolution, which began in Scotland after the last rising of the followers of
the Pretender, can be followed through its first phases in the writings of Sir James Steuart \26\ and James
Anderson. \21~\ In the 18th century the hunted-out Gaels were forbidden to emigrate from the country,
with a view to driving them by force to Glasgow and other manufacturing towns. f281 As an example of
the method f291 obtaining in the 19th century, the "clearing" made by the Duchess of Sutherland will
suffice here. This person, well instructed in economy, resolved, on entering upon her government, to
effect a radical cure, and to turn the whole country, whose population had already been, by earlier
processes of the like kind, reduced to 15,000, into a sheep-walk. From 1814 to 1820 these 15,000
inhabitants, about 3,000 families, were systematically hunted and rooted out. All their villages were
destroyed and burnt, all their fields turned into pasturage. British soldiers enforced this eviction, and
came to blows with the inhabitants. One old woman was burnt to death in the flames of the hut, which
she refused to leave. Thus this fine lady appropriated 794,000 acres of land that had from time
immemorial belonged to the clan. She assigned to the expelled inhabitants about 6,000 acres on the
sea-shore — 2 acres per family. The 6,000 acres had until this time lain waste, and brought in no income
to their owners. The Duchess, in the nobility of her heart, actually went so far as to let these at an average
rent of 2s. 6d. per acre to the clansmen, who for centuries had shed their blood for her family. The whole
of the stolen clanland she divided into 29 great sheep farms, each inhabited by a single family, for the
most part imported English farm-servants. In the year 1835 the 15,000 Gaels were already replaced by
131,000 sheep. The remnant of the aborigines flung on the sea-shore tried to live by catching fish. They
became amphibious and lived, as an English author says, half on land and half on water, and withal only
half on both. £301

But the brave Gaels must expiate yet more bitterly their idolatry, romantic and of the mountains, for the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (6 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

"great men" of the clan. The smell of their fish rose to the noses of the great men. They scented some
profit in it, and let the sea-shore to the great fishmongers of London. For the second time the Gaels were
hunted out. f3 11

But, finally, part of the sheep-walks are turned into deer preserves. Every one knows that there are no
real forests in England. The deer in the parks of the great are demurely domestic cattle, fat as London
aldermen. Scotland is therefore the last refuge of the "noble passion." "In the Highlands," says Somers in
1848, "new forests are springing up like mushrooms. Here, on one side of Gaick, you have the new forest
of Glenfeshie; and there on the other you have the new forest of Ardverikie. In the same line you have
the Black Mount, an immense waste also recently, erected. From east to west — from the neighbourhood
of Aberdeen to the crags of Oban — you have now a continuous line of forests; while in other parts of
the Highlands there are the new forests of Loch Archaig, Glengarry, Glenmoriston, &c. Sheep were
introduced into glens which had been the seats of communities of small farmers; and the latter were
driven to seek subsistence on coarser and more sterile tracks of soil. Now deer are supplanting sheep; and
these are once more dispossessing the small tenants, who will necessarily be driven down upon still
coarser land and to more grinding penury. Deer-forests f321 and the people cannot co-exist. One or other
of the two must yield. Let the forests he increased in number and extent during the next quarter of a
century, as they have been in the last, and the Gaels will perish from their native soil.... This movement
among the Highland proprietors is with some a matter of ambition ... with some love of sport ... while
others, of a more practical cast, follow the trade in deer with an eye solely to profit. For it is a fact, that a
mountain range laid out in forest is, in many cases, more profitable to the proprietor than when let as a
sheep-walk.... The huntsman who wants a deer-forest limits his offers by no other calculation than the
extent of his purse.... Sufferings have been inflicted in the Highlands scarcely less severe than those
occasioned by the policy of the Norman kings. Deer have received extended ranges, while men have
been hunted within a narrower and still narrower circle.... One after one the liberties of the people have
been cloven down.... And the oppressions are daily on the increase.... The clearance and dispersion of the
people is pursued by the proprietors as a settled principle, as an agricultural necessity, just as trees and
brushwood are cleared from the wastes of America or Australia; and the operation goes on in a quiet,
businesslike way, &c." f331

The spoliation of the church's property, the fraudulent alienation of the State domains, the robbery of the
common lands, the usurpation of feudal and clan property, and its transformation into modern private
property under circumstances of reckless terrorism, were just so many idyllic methods of primitive
accumulation. They conquered the field for capitalistic agriculture, made the soil part and parcel of
capital, and created for the town industries the necessary supply of a "free" and outlawed proletariat.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "The petty proprietors who cultivated their own fields with their own hands, and enjoyed a modest
competence... then formed a much more important part of the nation than at present. If we may trust the
best statistical writers of that age, not less than 160,000 proprietors who, with their families, must have
made up more than a seventh of the whole population, derived their subsistence from little freehold
estates. The average income of these small landlords ... was estimated at between £60 and £70 a year. It
was computed that the number of persons who tilled their own land was greater than the number of those

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (7 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

who farmed the land of others." Macaulay: "History of England," 10th ed, 1854, 1, pp. 333, 334'. Even in
the last third of the 17th century, 4/5 of the English people were agricultural. (1. c, p. 413.) I quote
Macaulay, because as systematic falsifier of history he minimises as much as possible facts of this kind.

\2] We must never forget that even the serf was not only the owner, if but a tribute-paying owner, of the
piece of land attached to his house, but also a co-possessor of the common land. "Le paysan (in Silesia,
under Frederick II.) est serf." Nevertheless, these serfs possess common lands, "on n'a pas pu encore
engager les Silesiens au partage des communes, tandis que dans la Nouvelle Marche, ii n'y a guare de
village ou ce partage ne soit execute avec le plus grand succes." (Mirabeau: "De la Monarchic
Prussienne." Londres, 1788, t. ii, pp. 125, 126.)

\3] Japan, with its purely feudal organisation of landed property and its developed petite culture, gives a
much truer picture of the European middle ages than all our history books, dictated as these are, for the
most part, by bourgeois prejudices. It is very convenient to be "liberal" at the expense of the middle ages.

[4J In his "Utopia," Thomas More says, that in England "your shepe that were wont to be so meke and
tame, and so smal eaters, now, as I heare saye, become so great devourers and so wylde that they eate up,
and swallow downe, the very men themselfes." "Utopia," transl. by Robinson, ed., Arber, Lond., 1869, p.
41.

[51 Bacon shows the connexion between a free, well-to-do peasantry and good infantry. "This did
wonderfully concern the might and mannerhood of the kingdom to have farms as it were of a standard
sufficient to maintain an able body out of penury, and did in effect amortise a great part of the lands of
the kingdom unto the hold and occupation of the yeomanry or middle people, of a condition between
gentlemen, and cottagers and peasants.... For it hath been held by the general opinion of men of best
judgment in the wars ... that the principal strength of an army consisteth in the infantry or foot. And to
make good infantry it requireth men bred, not in a servile or indigent fashion, but in some free and
plentiful manner. Therefore, if a state run most to noblemen and gentlemen, and that the husbandman and
ploughmen be but as their workfolk and labourers, or else mere cottagers (which are but hous'd beggars),
you may have a good cavalry, but never good stable bands of foot.... And this is to be seen in France, and
Italy, and some other parts abroad, where in effect all is noblesse or peasantry ... insomuch that they are
inforced to employ mercenary bands of Switzers and the like, for their battalions of foot; whereby also it
comes to pass that those nations have much people and few soldiers." ("The Reign of Henry Vll."
Verbatim reprint from Kennet's England. Ed. 1719. Lond., 1870, p. 308.)

\6\ Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 134. "The quantity of land assigned (in the old laws) would now be judged too
great for labourers, and rather as likely to convert them into small farmers." (George Roberts: "The
Social History of the People of the Southern Counties of England in Past Centuries." Lond., 1856, pp.
184-185.)

[7] "The right of the poor to share in the tithe, is established by the tenour of ancient statutes." (Tuckett, 1.
c, Vol. II., pg. 804-805.)

[81 William Cobbett: "A History of the Protestant Reformation," § 471.

[9J The "spirit" of Protestantism may be seen from the following, among other things. In the south of
England certain landed proprietors and well-to-do farmers put their heads together and propounded ten
questions as to the right interpretation of the poor-law of Elizabeth. These they laid before a celebrated

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (8 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

jurist of that time, Sergeant Snigge (later a judge under James I.) for his opinion. "Question 9 — Some of
the more wealthy farmers in the parish have devised a skilful mode by which all the trouble of executing
this Act (the 43rd of Elizabeth) might be avoided. They have proposed that we, shall erect a prison in the
parish, and then give notice to the neighbourhood, that if any persons are disposed to farm the poor of
this parish, they do give in sealed proposals, on a certain day, of the lowest price at which they will take
them off our hands; and that they will be authorised to refuse to any one unless he be shut up in the
aforesaid prison. The proposers of this plan conceive that there will be found in the adjoining counties,
persons, who, being unwilling to labour and not possessing substance or credit to take a farm or ship, so
as to live without labour, may be induced to make a very advantageous offer to the parish. If any of the
poor perish under the contractor's care, the sin will lie at his door, as the parish will have done its duty by
them. We are, however, apprehensive that the present Act (43 rd of Elizabeth) will not warrant a
prudential measure of this kind; but you are to learn that the rest of the freeholders, of the county, and of
the adjoining county of B, will very readily join in instructing their members to propose an Act to enable
the parish to contract with a person to lock up and work the poor; and to declare that if any person shall
refuse to be so locked up and worked, he shall be entitled to no relief. This, it is. hoped, will prevent
persons in distress from wanting relief, and be the means of keeping down parishes." (R. Blakey: "The
History of Political Literature from the Earliest Times.". Lond., 1855, Vol. II., pp. 84-85.) In, Scotland,
the abolition of serfdom took place some centuries later than in England. Even in 1698, Fletcher of
Saltoun, declared in the Scotch parliament, "The number of beggars in Scotland is reckoned at not less
than 200,000. The only remedy that I, a republican on principle, can suggest, is to restore the old state of
serfdom, to make slaves of all those who are unable to provide for their own subsistence." Eden, 1. c,
Book I., ch. 1, pp. 60-61, says, "The decrease of villenage seems necessarily to have been the era of the
origin of the poor. Manufactures and commerce are the two parents of our national poor." Eden, like our
Scotch republican on principle, errs only in this: not the abolition of villenage, but the abolition of the
property of the agricultural labourer in the soil made him a proletarian, and eventually a pauper. In
France, where the expropriation was effected in another way, the ordonnance of Moulins, 1566, and the
Edict of 1656, correspond to the English poor-laws.

f 101 Professor Rogers, although formerly Professor of Political Economy in the University of Oxford, the
hotbed of Protestant orthodoxy, in his preface to the "History of Agriculture" lays stress on the fact of the
pauperisation of the mass of the people by the Reformation.

fill "A Letter to Sir. T. C. Bunbury, Bart., on the High Price of Provisions. By a Suffolk Gentleman."
Ipswich, 1795, p. 4. Even the fanatical advocate of the system of large farms, the author of the "Inquiry
into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions," London, 1773, p. 139, says: "I most lament
the loss of our yeomanry, that set of men who really kept up the independence of this nation; and sorry I
am to see their lands now in the hands of monopolising lords, tenanted out to small farmers, who hold
their leases on such conditions as to be little better than vassals ready to attend a summons on every
mischievous occasion."

fl21 On the private moral character of this bourgeois hero, among other things: "The large grant of lands
in Ireland to Lady Orkney, in 1695, is a public instance of the king's affection, and the lady's influence ....
Lady Orkney's endearing offices are supposed to have been — foeda labiorum ministerial (In the Sloane
Manuscript Collection, at the British Museum, No. 4224. The Manuscript is entitled: "The character and
behaviour of King William, Sunderland, etc., as represented in Original Letters to the Duke of
Shrewsbury from Somers Halifax, Oxford, Secretary Vernon, etc." It is full of curiosa.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (9 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

f 131 "The illegal alienation of the Crown Estates, partly by sale and partly by gift, is a scandalous chapter
in English history ... a gigantic fraud on the nation." (F. W. Newman, "Lectures on Political Economy."
London, 1851, pp. 129, 130.) [For details as to how the present large landed proprietors of England came
into their possessions see "Our Old Nobility. By Noblesse Oblige." London, 1879. — F. E.

f 141 Read, e.g., E. Burke's Pamphlet on the ducal house of Bedford, whose offshoot was Lord John
Russell, the "tomtit of Liberalism."

[151 "The farmers forbid cottagers to keep any living creatures besides themselves and children, under
the pretence that if they keep any beasts or poultry, they will steal from the farmers' barns for their
support; they also say, keep the cottagers poor and you will keep them industrious, &c, but the real fact I
believe, is that the farmers may have the whole right of common to themselves." ("A Political Inquiry
into the Consequences of Enclosing Waste Lands." London, 1785, p. 75.)

ri61 Eden, 1. c, preface.

f 171 "Capital Farms." Two letters on the Flour Trade and the Dearness of Corn. By a person in business.
London, 1767, pp. 19, 20.

f 181 "Merchant Farms." "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions." London,
1767, p. 1 1. Note.-This excellent work, that was published anonymously, is by the Rev. Nathaniel
Forster.

f 191 Thomas Wright: "A Short Address to the Public on the Monopoly of Large Farms," 1779, pp. 2, 3.

f201 Rev. Addington: "Inquiry into the Reasons for or against Enclosing Open Fields," London, 1772, pp.
37, 43 passim.

f211 Dr. R. Price, 1. c, v. ii., p. 155, Forster, Addington, Kent, Price, and James Anderson, should be read
and compared with the miserable prattle of Sycophant MacCulloch in his catalogue: "The Literature of
Political Economy," London, 1845.

[22J Price, 1. c, p. 147.

f231 Price, 1. c, p. 159. We are reminded of ancient. Rome. "The rich had got possession, of the greater
part of the undivided land. They trusted in the conditions of the time, that these possessions would not be
again taken from them, and bought, therefore, some of the pieces of land lying near theirs, and belonging
to the poor, with the acquiescence of their owners, and took some by force, so that they now were
cultivating widely extended domains, instead of isolated fields. Then they employed slaves in agriculture
and cattle-breeding, because freemen would have been taken from tabour for military service. The
possession of slaves brought them great gain, inasmuch as these, on account of their immunity from
military service, could freely multiply and have a multitude of children. Thus the powerful men drew all
wealth to themselves, and all the land swarmed with slaves. The Italians, on the other hand, were always
decreasing in number, destroyed as they were by poverty, taxes, and military service. Even when times of
peace came, they were doomed to complete inactivity, because the rich were in possession of the soil,
and used slaves instead of freemen in the tilling of it." (Appian: "Civil Wars," 1.7.) This passage refers to
the time before the Licinian rogations. Military service, which hastened to so great an extent the ruin of
the Roman plebeians, was also the chief means by which, as in a forcing-house, Charlemagne brought

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (10 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

about the transformation of free German peasants into serfs and bondsman.

f241 "An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions, &c," pp. 124, 129. To the
like effect, but with an opposite tendency: "Working-men are driven from their cottages and forced into
the towns to seek for employment; but then a larger surplus is obtained, and thus capital is augmented."
("The Perils of the Nation," 2nd ed. London, 1843, p. 14.)

[251 I.e., p. 132.

f261 Steuart says: "If you compare the rent of these lands" (he erroneously includes in this economic
category the tribute of the taskmen to the clanchief) "with the extent, it appears very small. If you
compare it with the numbers fed upon the farm, you will find that an estate in the Highlands maintains,
perhaps, ten times as many people as another of the same value in good and fertile province." (1. c, vol.
i., ch. xvi., p. 104.)

f271 James Anderson: "Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National Industry, &c,"
Edinburgh, 1777.

\2S] In 1860 the people expropriated by force were exported to Canada under false pretences. Some fled
to the mountains and neighbouring islands. They were followed by the police, came to blows with them
and escaped.

f291 "In the Highlands of Scotland," says Buchanan, the commentator on Adam Smith, 1814, "the
ancient state of property is daily subverted.... The landlord, without regard to the hereditary tenant (a
category used in error here), now offers his land to the highest bidder, who, if he is an improver, instantly
adopts a new system of cultivation. The land, formerly overspread with small tenants or labourers, was
peopled in proportion to its produce, but under the new system of improved cultivation and increased
rents, the largest possible produce is obtained at the least possible expense: and the useless hands being,
with this view, removed, the population is reduced, not to what the land will maintain, but to what it will
employ. The dispossessed tenants either seek a subsistence in the neighbouring towns," &c. (David
Buchanan — "Observations on, &c, A. Smith's Wealth of Nations." Edinburgh, 1814, vol. iv., p. 144.)
"The Scotch grandees dispossessed families as they would grub up coppice-wood, and they treated
villages and their people as Indians harassed with wild beasts do, in their vengeance, a jungle with
tigers.... Man is bartered for a fleece or a carcase of mutton, nay, held cheaper.... Why, how much worse
is it than the intention of the Moguls, who, when they had broken into the northern provinces of China,
proposed in council to exterminate the inhabitants, and convert the land into pasture. This proposal many
Highland proprietors have effected in their own country against their own countrymen." (George Ensor:
"An Inquiry Concerning the Population of Nations." Lond,. 1818, pp. 215, 216.)

r301 When the present Duchess of Sutherland entertained Mrs. Beecher Stowe, authoress of "Uncle
Tom's Cabin," with great magnificence in London to show her sympathy for the Negro slaves of the
American republics sympathy that she prudently forgot, with her fellow-aristocrats, during the civil war,
in which every "noble" English heart beat for the slave-owner — I gave in the New York Tribune the
facts about the Sutherland slaves. (Epitomised in part by Carey in "The Slave Trade." Philadelphia, 1853,
pp. 203, 204.) My article was reprinted in a Scotch newspaper, and led to a pretty polemic between the
latter and the sycophants of the Sutherlands.

f3 11 Interesting details on this fish trade will be found in Mr. David Urquhart's Portfolio, series. Nassau

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (11 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

W. Senior, in his posthumous work, already quoted, terms "the proceedings in. Sutherlandshire one of
the most beneficent clearings since the memory of man." (1. c.)

f321 The deer-forests of Scotland contain not a single tree. The sheep are driven from, and then the deer
driven to, the naked hills, and then it is called a deer-forest. Not even timber-planting and real forest
culture.

f331 Robert Somers: "Letters from the Highlands: or the Famine of 1847." London, 1848, pp. 12-28
passim. These letters originally appeared in The Times. The English economists of course explained the
famine of the Gaels in 1847, by their over-population. At all events, they "were pressing on their
food-supply." The "clearing of estates," or as it is called in Germany, "Bauernlegen," occurred in
Germany especially after the 30 years' war, and led to peasant-revolts as late as 1790 in Kursachsen. It
obtained especially in East Germany. In most of the Prussian provinces, Frederick II. for the first time
secured right of property for the peasants. After the conquest of Silesia he forced the landlords to rebuild
the huts, barns, etc., and to provide the peasants with cattle and implements. He wanted soldiers for his
army and tax-payers for his treasury. For the rest, the pleasant life that the t led under Frederick's system
of finance and hodgepodge rule of despotism, bureaucracy and feudalism, may be seen from the
following quotation from his admirer, Mirabeau: "Le lin fait done une des grandes richesses du
cultivateur dans le Nord de I'Allemagne. Malheureusement pour l'espece humaine, ce n'est qu'une
ressource contre la misere et non un moyen de bien-etre. Les impots directs, les corvees, les servitudes de
tout genre, ecrasent le cultivateur allemand, qui paie encore des impots indirects dans tout ce qu'il achete
... et pour comble de mine, il n'ose pas vendre sea productions ou et comme il le veut; it n'ose pas acheter
ce dont it a besoin aux marchands qui pourraieni le lui livrer au meilleur prix. Toutes ces causes le
ruinent insensiblement, et if se trouverait hors d'etat de payer les impots directs a l'echeance sans la
filerie; elle lui offre une ressource, en occupant utilement sa femme, ses enfants, ses servants, ses valets,
et lui-meme; mais quelle penible vie, meme aidee de ce secours. En ete, il travaille comme un forcat au
labourage et a la recolte; il se couche a 9 heures et se leve a deux, pour suffire aux travaux; en hiver il
devrait reparer ses forces par un plus grand repos; mais ii manquera de grains pour le pain et les
semailles, s'il se defait des denrees qu'il faudrait vendre pour payer les impots. II aut done filer pour
suppleer a ce vide .... ii faut y apporter la plus grande assiduite. Aussi le paysan se couche-t-ii en hiver a
minuit, une heure, et se leve a cinq on six; on bien il se couche a neuf, et se leve a deux, et cela tons les
jours de la vie si cc n'est le dimanche. Ces exces de veille et de travail usent la nature humaine, et de la
vien qu'hommes et femmes vieillissent beaucoup plutot dans les campagnes que dans les villes."
(Mirabeau, 1. c, t. III. pp. 212 sqq.)

Note to the second edition. In April 1866, 18 years after the publication of the work of Robert Somers
quoted above, Professor Leone Levi gave a lecture before the Society of Arts on the transformation of
sheep-walks into deer-forest, in which he depicts the advance in the devastation of the Scottish
Highlands. He says, with other things: "Depopulation and transformation into sheep-walks were the most
convenient means for getting an income without expenditure.... A deer-forest in place of a sheep-walk
was a common change in the Highlands. The landowners turned out the sheep as they once turned out the
men from their estates, and welcomed the new tenants-the wild beasts and the feathered birds.... One can
walk from the Earl of Dalhousie's estates in Forfarshire to John o'Groats, without ever leaving forest
land.... In many of these woods the fox, the wild cat, the marten, the polecat, the weasel and the Apline
hare are common; whilst the rabbit, the squirrel and the rat have lately made their way into the country.
Immense tracts of land, much of which is described in the statistical account of Scotland as having a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (12 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

pasturage in richness and extent of very superior description, are thus shut out from all cultivation and
improvement, and are solely devoted to the sport of a few persons for a very brief period of the year. "
The London Economist of June 2, 1866, says, "Amongst the items of news in a Scotch paper of last
week, we read.... 'One of the finest sheep farms in Sutherlandshire, for which a rent of £1,200 a year was
recently offered, on the expiry of the existing lease this year, is to be converted into a deer-forest.' Here
we see the modern instincts of feudalism ... operating pretty much as they did when the Norman
Conqueror ... destroyed 36 villages to create the New Forest.... Two millions of acres ... totally laid
waste, embracing within their area some of the most fertile lands of Scotland. The natural grass of Glen
Tilt was among the most nutritive in the country of Perth. The deer-forest of Ben Aulder was by far the
best grazing ground in the wide district of Badenoch; a part of the Black Mount forest was the best
pasture for black-faced sheep in Scotland. Some idea of the ground laid waste for purely sporting
purposes in Scotland may be formed from the fact that it embraced an area larger than the whole country
of Perth. The resources of the forest of Ben Aulder might give some idea of the loss sustained from the
forced desolations. The ground would pasture 15,000 sheep, and as it was not more than one-thirtieth
part of the old forest ground in Scotland ... it might, &c .... All that forest land is as totally
unproductive.... It might thus as well have been submerged under the waters of the German Ocean....
Such extemporised wildernesses or deserts ought to be put down by the decided interference of the
Legislature."



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Eight: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th
Century. Forcing Down of Wages by Acts of Parliament



Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (13 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIM:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT:

BLOODY LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED, FROM THE
END OF THE 15TH CENTURY. FORCING DOWN OF WAGES BY
ACTS OF PARLIAMENT



The proletariat created by the breaking up. of the bands of feudal retainers and by the forcible
expropriation of the people from the soil, this "free" proletariat could not possibly be absorbed by the
nascent manufactures as fast as it was thrown upon the world. On the other hand, these men, suddenly
dragged from their wonted mode of life, could not as suddenly adapt themselves to the discipline of their
new condition. They were turned en masse into beggars, robbers, vagabonds, partly from inclination, in
most cases from stress of circumstances. Hence at the end of the 15th and during the whole of the 16th
century, throughout Western Europe a bloody legislation against vagabondage. The fathers of the present
working-class were chastised for their enforced transformation into vagabonds and paupers. Legislation
treated them as "voluntary" criminals, and assumed that it depended on their own good will to go on
working under the old conditions that no longer existed.

In England this legislation began under Henry VII.

Henry VIII. 1530: Beggars old and unable to work receive a beggar's licence. On the other hand,
whipping and imprisonment for sturdy vagabonds. They are to be tied to the cart-tail and whipped until
the blood streams from their bodies, then to swear an oath to go back to their birthplace or to where they
have lived the last three years and to "put themselves to labour." What grim irony! In 27 Henry VIII. the
former statute is repeated, but strengthened with new clauses. For the second arrest for vagabondage the
whipping is to be repeated and half the ear sliced off; but for the third relapse the offender is to be
executed as a hardened criminal and enemy of the common weal.

Edward VI.: A statute of the first year of his reign, 1547, ordains that if anyone refuses to work, he shall
be condemned as a slave to the person who has denounced him as an idler. The master shall feed his
slave on bread and water, weak broth and such refuse meat as he thinks fit. He has the right to force him
to do any work, no matter how disgusting, with whip and chains. If the slave is absent a fortnight, he is
condemned to slavery for life and is to be branded on forehead or back with the letter S; if he runs away
thrice, he is to be executed as a felon. The master can sell him, bequeath him, let him out on hire as a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (1 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

slave, just as any other personal chattel or cattle. If the slaves attempt anything against the masters, they
are also to be executed. Justices of the peace, on information, are to hunt the rascals down. If it happens
that a vagabond has been idling about for three days, he is to be taken to his birthplace, branded with a
red-hot iron with the letter V on the breast and be set to work, in chains, in the streets or at some other
labour. If the vagabond gives a false birthplace, he is then to become the slave for life of this place, of its
inhabitants, or its corporation, and to be branded with an S. All persons have the right to take away the
children of the vagabonds and to keep them as apprentices, the young men until the 24th year, the girls
until the 20th. If they run away, they are to become up to this age the slaves of their masters, who can put
them in irons, whip them, &c, if they like. Every master may put an iron ring round the neck, arms or
legs of his slave, by which to know him more easily and to be more certain of him. £1} The last part of
this statute provides, that certain poor people may be employed by a place or by persons, who are willing
to give them food and drink and to find them work. This kind of parish-slaves was kept up in England
until far into the 19th century under the name of "roundsmen."

Elizabeth, 1572: Unlicensed beggars above 14 years of age are to be severely flogged and branded on
the left ear unless some one will take them into service for two years; in case of a repetition of the
offence, if they are over 18, they are to be executed, unless some one will take them into service for two
years; but for the third offence they are to be executed without mercy as felons. Similar statutes: 18
Elizabeth, c. 13, and another of 1597. \2]

James 1: Any one wandering about and begging is declared a rogue and a vagabond. Justices of the
peace in petty sessions are authorised to have them publicly whipped and for the first offence to imprison
them for 6 months, for the second for 2 years. Whilst in prison they are to be whipped as much and as
often as the justices of the peace think fit.... Incorrigible and dangerous rogues are to be branded with an
R on the left shoulder and set to hard labour, and if they are caught begging again, to be executed without
mercy. These statutes, legally binding until the beginning of the 18th century, were only repealed by 12
Anne, c. 23.

Similar laws in France, where by the middle of the 17th century a kingdom of vagabonds (truands) was
established in Paris. Even at the beginning of Louis XVI.'s reign (Ordinance of July 13th, 1777) every
man in good health from 16 to 60 years of age, if without means of subsistence and not practising a trade,
is to be sent to the galleys. Of the same nature are the statute of Charles V. for the Netherlands (October,
1537), the first edict of the States and Towns of Holland (March 10, 1614), the "Plakaat" of the United
Provinces (June 26, 1649), &c.

Thus were the agricultural people, first forcibly expropriated from the soil, driven from their homes,
turned into vagabonds, and then whipped, branded, tortured by laws grotesquely terrible, into the
discipline necessary for the wage system

It is not enough that the conditions of labour are concentrated in a mass, in the shape of capital, at the one
pole of society, while at the other are grouped masses of men, who have nothing to sell but their
labour-power. Neither is it enough that they are compelled to sell it voluntarily. The advance of capitalist
production develops a working-class, which by education, tradition, habit, looks upon the conditions of
that mode of production as self-evident laws of Nature. The organisation of the capitalist process of
production, once fully developed, breaks down all, resistance. The constant generation of a relative
surplus-population keeps the law of supply and demand of labour, and therefore keeps wages, in a rut
that corresponds with the wants of capital. The dull compulsion of economic relations completes the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (2 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

subjection of the labourer to the capitalist. Direct force, outside economic conditions, is of course still
used, but only exceptionally. In the ordinary run of things, the labourer can be left to the "natural laws of
production," i.e., to his dependence on capital, a dependence springing from, and guaranteed in
perpetuity by, the conditions of production themselves ' . It is otherwise during the historic genesis of
capitalist production. The bourgeoisie, at its rise, wants and uses the power of the state to "regulate"
wages, i.e., to force them within the limits suitable for surplus-value making, to lengthen the
working-day and to keep the labourer himself in the normal degree of dependence. This is an essential
element of the so-called primitive accumulation.

The class of wage-labourers, which arose in the latter half of the 14th century, formed then and in the
following century only a very small part of the population, well protected in its position by the
independent peasant proprietary in the country and the guild-organisation in the town. In country and
town master and workmen stood close together socially. The subordination of labour to capital was only
formal — i.e., the mode of production itself had as yet no specific capitalistic character. Variable capital
preponderated greatly over constant. The demand for wage-labour grew', therefore, rapidly with every
accumulation of capital, whilst the supply of wage-labour followed but slowly. A large part of the
national product, changed later into a fund of capitalist accumulation, then still entered into the
consumption-fund of the labourer.

Legislation on wage-labour (from the first, aimed at the exploitation of the labourer and, as it advanced,
always equally hostile to him), £31 is started in England by the Statute of Labourers, of Edward III., 1349.
The ordinance of 1350 in France, issued in the name of King John, corresponds with it. English and
French legislation run parallel and are identical in purport. So far as the labour-statutes aim at
compulsory extension of the working-day, I do not return to them, as this point was treated earlier ( Chap.
X., Section 5 ).

The Statute of Labourers was passed at the urgent instance of the House of Commons. A Tory says
naively: " Formerly the poor demanded such high wages as to threaten industry and wealth. Next, their
wages are so low as to threaten industry and wealth equally and perhaps more, but in another way." £4J A
tariff @f wages was fixed by law for town and country, for piece-work and day-work. The agricultural
labourers were to hire themselves out by the year, the town ones "in open market." It was forbidden,
under pain of imprisonment, to pay higher wages than those fixed by the statute, but the taking of higher
wages was more severely punished than the giving them. [So also in Sections 18 and 19 of the Statute of
Apprentices of Elizabeth, ten days' imprisonment is decreed for him that pays the higher wages, but
twenty-one days for him that receives them.] A statute of 1360 increased the penalties and authorised the
masters to extort labour at the legal rate of wages by corporal punishment. All combinations, contracts,
oaths, &c. by which masons and carpenters reciprocally bound themselves, were declared null and void.
Coalition of the labourers is treated as a heinous crime from the 14th century to 1825, the year of the
repeal of the laws against Trades' Unions. The spirit of the Statute of Labourers of 1349 and of its
offshoots, comes out clearly in the fact, that indeed a maximum of wages is dictated by the State, but on
no account a minimum.

In the 16th century, the condition of the labourers had, as we know, become much worse. The money
wage rose, but not in proportion to the depreciation of money and the corresponding rise in the prices of
commodities. Wages, therefore, in reality fell. Nevertheless, the laws for keeping them down remained in
force, together with the ear-clipping and branding of those "whom no one was willing to take into
service." By the Statute of Apprentices 5 Elizabeth, c. 3, the justices of the peace were empowered to fix

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (3 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

certain wages and to modify them according to the time of the year and the price of commodities. James
1. extended these regulations of labour also to weavers, spinners, and all possible categories of workers.
[51 George II. extended the laws against coalitions of labourers to manufacturers. In the manufacturing
period par excellence, the capitalist mode of production had become sufficiently strong to render legal
regulation of wages as impracticable as it was unnecessary; but the ruling classes were unwilling in case
of necessity to be without the weapons of the old arsenal. Still, 8 George II. forbade a higher day's wage
than 2s. 7 l/2d. for journeymen tailors in and around London, except in cases of general mourning; still,
13 George 111., c. 68, gave the regulation of the wages of silk-weavers to the justices of the peace; still, in
1706, it required two judgments of the higher courts to decide, whether the mandates of justices of the
peace as to wages held good also for non-agricultural labourers; still, in 1799, an act of Parliament
ordered that the wages of the Scotch miners should continue to be regulated by a statute of Elizabeth and
two Scotch acts of 1661 and 1671. How completely in the meantime circumstances had changed, is
proved by an occurrence unheard-of before in the English Lower House. In that place, where for more
than 400 years laws had been made for the maximum, beyond which wages absolutely must not rise,
Whitbread in 1796 proposed a legal minimum wage for agricultural labourers. Pitt opposed this, but
confessed that the "condition of the poor was cruel." Finally, in 1813, the laws for the regulation of
wages were repealed. They were an absurd anomaly, since the capitalist regulated his factory by his
private legislation,, and could by the poor-rates make up the wage of the agricultural labourer to the
indispensable minimum. The provisions of the labour statutes as to contracts between master and
workman, as to giving notice and the like, which only allow of a civil action against the
contract-breaking master, but on the contrary permit a criminal action against the contract-breaking
workman, are to this hour (1873) in full force. The barbarous laws against Trades' Unions fell, in 1825
before the threatening bearing of the proletariat. Despite this, they fell only in part. Certain beautiful
fragments of the old statute vanished only in 1859. Finally, the act of Parliament of June 29, 1871, made
a pretence of removing the last traces of this class of legislation by legal recognition of Trades' Unions.
But an act of Parliament of the same date (an act to amend the criminal law relating to violence, threats,
and molestation), re-established, in point of fact, the former state of things in a new shape. By this
Parliamentary escamotage the means which the labourers could use in a strike or lock-out were
withdrawn from the laws common to all citizens, and placed under exceptional penal legislation, the
interpretation of which fell to the masters themselves in their capacity as justices of the peace. Two years
earlier, the same House of Commons and the same Mr. Gladstone in the well-known straightforward
fashion brought in a bill for the abolition of all exceptional penal legislation against the working-class.
But this was never allowed to go beyond the second reading, and the matter was thus protracted until at
last the "great Liberal 'party," by an alliance with the Tories, found courage to turn against the very
proletariat that had carried it into power. Not content with this treachery, the "great Liberal party"
allowed the English judges, ever complaisant in the service of the ruling classes, to dig up again the
earlier laws against "conspiracy," and to apply them to coalitions of labourers. We see that only against
its will and under the pressure of the masses did the English Parliament give up the laws against Strikes
and Trades' Unions, after it had itself, for 500 years, held, with shameless egoism, the position of a
permanent Trades' Union of the capitalists against the labourers.

During the very first storms of the revolution, the French bourgeoisie dared to take away from the
workers the right of association but just acquired. By a decree of June 14, 1791, they declared all
coalition of the workers as "an attempt against liberty and the declaration of the rights of man,"
punishable by a fine of 500 livres, together with deprivation of the rights of an active citizen for one year.
[61 This law which, by means of State compulsion, confined the struggle between capital and labour

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (4 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

within limits comfortable for capital, has outlived revolutions and changes of dynasties. Even the Reign
of Terror left it untouched. It was but quite recently struck out of the Penal Code. Nothing is more
characteristic than the pretext for this bourgeois coup d'etat. "Granting," says Chapelier, the reporter of
the Select Committee on this law, "that wages ought to be a little higher than they are, ... that they ought
to be high enough for him that receives them, to be free from that state of absolute dependence due to the
want of the necessaries of life, and which is almost that of slavery," yet the workers must not be allowed
to come to any understanding about their own interests, nor to act in common and thereby lessen their
"absolute dependence, which is almost that of slavery;" because, forsooth, in doing this they injure "the
freedom of their cidevant masters, the present entrepreneurs," and because a coalition against the
despotism of the quondam masters of the corporations is — guess what! — is a restoration of the
corporations abolished by the French constitution. ]T[



Footnotes

JT[ The author of the "Essay on Trade, etc.," 1770, says, "In the reign of Edward VI. indeed the English
seem to have set, in good earnest, about encouraging manufactures and employing the poor. This we
learn from a remarkable statute which runs thus: 'That all vagrants shall be branded, &c...'" 1. c, p. 5.

\2] Thomas More says in his "Utopia": "Therfore that on covetous and unsatiable cormaraunte and very
plage of his native contrey maye compasse aboute and inclose many thousand akers of grounde together
within one pale or hedge, the husbandman be thrust owte of their owne, or els either by coneyne and
fraude, or by violent oppression they be put besydes it, or by wrongs and iniuries they be so weried that
they be compelled to sell all: by one meanes, therfore, or by other, either by hooke or crooke they muste
needes departe awaye, poore, selye, wretched soules, men, women, husbands, wiues, fatherlesse children,
widowes, wofull mothers with their yonge babes, and their whole households smal in substance, and
muche in numbre, as husbandrye requireth many handes, Awaye thei trudge, I say, owte of their knowen
accustomed houses, fyndynge no place to reste in. All their housholde stuffe, which is very little woorthe,
thoughe it might well abide the sale: yet beeynge sodainely thruste owte, they be constrayned to sell it for
a thing of nought. And when they haue wandered abrode tyll that be spent, what cant they then els doe
but steale, and then iustly pardy be hanged, or els go about beggyng. And yet then also they be caste in
prison as vagaboundes, because they go aboute and worke not: whom no man wyl set a worke though
thei neuer so willyngly profre themselues therto."

Of these poor fugitives of whom Thomas More says that they were forced to thieve, "7,200 great and
petty thieves were put to death," in the reign of Henry VIII. (Holinshed, "Description of England," Vol.
1, p. 186.) In Elizabeth's time, "rogues were trussed up apace, and that there was not one year commonly
wherein three or four hundred were not devoured and eaten up by the gallowes." (Strype's "Annals of the
Reformation and Establishment of Religion and other Various Occurrences in the Church of England
during Queen Elizabeth's Happy Reign." Second ed., 1725, Vol. 2.)

According to this same Strype, in Somersetshire, in one year, 40 persons were executed, 35 robbers burnt
in the hand, 37 whipped, and 183 discharged as "incottigible vagabonds." Nevertheless, he is of opinion
that this large number of prisoners does not comprise even a fifth of the actual criminals, thanks to the
negligence of the justices and the foolish compassion of the people; and the other counties of England



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (5 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

were not better off in this respect than Somersetshire, while some were even worse.

[3] "Whenever the legislature attempts to regulate the differences between masters and their workmen, its
counsellors are always the masters," says A. Smith. "L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete." says Linguet.

\4] "Sophisms of Free Trade." By a Barrister. Lond., 1850, p. 206. He adds maliciously: "We were ready
enough to interfere for the employer, can nothing now be done for the employed?"

\5] From a clause of Statute 2 James I., c. 6, we see that certain clothmakers took upon themselves to
dictate, in their capacity of justices of the peace, the official tariff of wages in their own shops. In
Germany, especially after the Thirty Years' War, statutes for keeping down wages were general. "The
want of servants and labourers was very troublesome to the landed proprietors in the depopulated
districts. All villagers were forbidden to let rooms to single men and women; all the latter were to be
reported to the authorities and cast into prison if they were unwilling to become servants, even if they
were employed at any other work, such as sowing seeds for the peasants at a daily wage, or even buying
and selling corn. (Imperial privileges and sanctions for Silesia, I., 25.) For a whole century in the decrees
of the small German potentates a bitter cry goes up attain and again about the wicked and impertinent
mbble that will not reconcile itself to its hard lot, will not be content with the legal wage; the individual
landed proprietors are forbidden to pay more than the State had fixed by a tariff. And yet the conditions
of service were at times better after war than 100 years later; the farm servants of Silesia had, in 1652,
meat twice a week, whilst even in our century, districts are known where they have it only three times a
year. Further, wages after the war were higher than in the following century." (G. Freytag.)

[61 Article I. of this law runs: "L'aneantissement de toute esp&e de corporations du meme etat et
profession etant l'une des bases fondamentales de la constitution francaise, ii est defendu de les retablir
de fait sous quelque pretexte et sous quelque forme que ce soit." Article IV. declares, that if "des citoyens
attaches aux memes professions, arts et metiers prenaient des deliberations, faisaient entre eux des
conventions tendantes i refuser de concert ou a n'accorder qu'a un prix determine le secours de leur
industrie ou de leurs travaux, les dites deliberations et conventions... seront declarees
inconstitutionnelles, attentatoires a la liberte et a la declaration des droits de I'homme, &c"; felony,
therefore, as in the old labour-statutes. ("Revolutions de Paris," Paris, 1791, t. Ill, p. 523.)

[71 Buchez et Roux: — "Histoire Parlementaire," t. x., p. 195.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Nine: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (6 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Nine

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIII:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE:

GENESIS OF THE CAPITALIST FARMER



Now that we have considered the forcible creation of a class of outlawed proletarians, the bloody
discipline that turned them into wage-laborers, the disgraceful action of the State which employed the
police to accelerate the accumulation of capital by increasing the degree of exploitation of labor, the
question remains: whence came the capitalists originally? For the expropriation of the agricultural
population creates, directly, none but the greatest landed proprietors. As far, however, as concerns the
genesis of the farmer, we can, so to say, put our hand on it, because it is a slow process evolving through
many centuries. The serfs, as well as the free small proprietors, held land under very different tenures,
and were therefore emancipated under very different economic conditions. In England the first form of
the farmer is the bailiff, himself a serf. His position is similar to that of the old Roman villicus, only in a
more limited sphere of action. During the second half of the 14th century he is replaced by a farmer,
whom the landlord provided with seed, cattle and implements. His condition is not very different from
that of the peasant. Only he exploits more wage-labor. Soon he becomes a metayer, a half-farmer. He
advances one part of the agricultural stock, the landlord the other. The two divide the total product in
proportions determined by contract. This form quickly disappears in England, to give the place to the
farmer proper, who makes his own capital breed by employing wage-laborers, and pays a part of the
surplus-product, in money or in kind, to the landlord as rent. So long, during the 15th century, as the
independent peasant and the farm-laborer working for himself as well as for wages, enriched themselves
by their own labor, the circumstances of the farmer, and his field of production, were equally mediocre.
The agricultural revolution which commenced in the last third of the 15 th century, and continued during
almost the whole of the 16th (excepting, however, its last decade), enriched him just as speedily as it
impoverished the mass of the agricultural people. £1}

The usurpation of the common lands allowed him to augment greatly his stock of cattle, almost without
cost, whilst they yielded him a richer supply of manure for the tillage of the soil. To this was added in the
16th century a very important element. At that time the contracts for farms ran for a long time, often for
99 years. The progressive fall in the value of the precious metals, and therefore of money, brought the
farmers golden fruit. Apart from all the other circumstances discussed above, it lowered wages. A portion
of the latter was now added to the profits of the farm. The continuous rise in the price of corn, wool,
meat, in a word of all agricultural produce, swelled the money capital of the farm without any action on

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch29.htm (1 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:59]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Nine

his part, whilst the rent he paid (being calculated on the old value of money) diminished in reality. [2]
Thus they grew rich at the expense both of their laborers and their landlords. No wonder, therefore, that
England, at the end of the 16th century, had a class of capitalist farmers, rich, considering the
circumstances of the time. [3]



Footnotes

T 1 1 Harrison in his "Description of England", says "although peradventure foure pounds of old rent be
improved to fortie, toward the end of his term, if he have not six or seven yeares rent lieng by him, fiftie
or a hundred pounds, yet will the farmer thinke his gaines verie small."

[21 On the influence of the depreciation of money in the 16th century, on the different classes of society,
see "A Compendium of Briefe Examination of Certayne Ordinary Complaints of Divers of our
Countrymen in these our Days", by W. S. Gentleman (London 1581). The dialogue form of this work led
people for a long time to ascribe it to Shakespeare, and even in 1751, it was published under his name. Its
author is William Stafford. In one place the knight reasons as follows: Knight: You, my neighbor, the
husbandman, you Maister Mercer, and you Goodman Cooper, with other artificers, may save yourselves
metely well. For as much as all things are dearer than they were, so much do you arise in the pryce of
your wares and occupations that ye sell agayne. But we have nothing to sell whereby we might advance
ye price there of, to countervaile those things that we must buy agayne." In another place, the knight asks
the doctor: I pray you, what be those sorts that ye meane. And first, of those that ye thinke should have
no losse thereby? Doctor: I mean all those that live by buying and selling, for as they buy deare, the sell
thereafter. Knight: What is the next sort that ye say would win by it? Doctor: Marry, all such as have
takings of fearmes in their owne manurance [cultivation] at the old rent, for where they pay after the olde
rate they sell after the newe — that is, they paye for theire lande good cheape, and sell all things growing
thereof deare. Knight: What sorte is that which, ye sayde should have greater losse hereby, than these
men had profit? Doctor: It is all noblemen, gentlemen, and all other that live either by a stinted rent or
stypend, or do not manure [cultivate] the ground, or doe occupy no buying and selling."

[3] In France, the regisseur, steward, collector of dues for the feudal lords during the earlier part of the
middle ages, soon became an homme d'affaires, who by extortion, cheating, &c, swindled himself into a
capitalist. These regisseurs themselves were sometimes noblemen. E.g., "C'est li compte que messire
Jacques de Thoraine, chevalier chastelain sor Besancon rent es-seigneur tenant les comptes a Dijon pour
monseigneur le due et comte de Bourgoigne, des rentes appartenant a la dite chastellenie, depuis xxve
jour de decembre MCCCLIX jusqu'au xxviiie jour de decembre MCCCLX." (Alexis Monteil: "Traite de
Materiaux Manuscrits etc.", pp. 234, 235.) Already it is evident here how in all spheres of social life the
lion's share falls to the middleman. In the economic domain, e.g., financiers, stock-exchange speculators,
merchants, shopkeepers skim the cream; in civil matters, the lawyer fleeces his clients; in politics the
representative is of more importance than the voters, the minister than the sovereign; in religion, God is
pushed into the background by the "Mediator", and the latter again is shoved back by the priests, the
inevitable middlemen between the good shepherd and his sheep. In France, as in England, the great
feudal territories were divided into innumerable small homesteads, but under conditions incomparably
more favorable for the people. During the 14th century arose the farms or terriers. Their number grew
constantly, far beyond 100,000. They paid rents varying from 1/12 to 1/5 of the product in money or in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch29.htm (2 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:59]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Nine

kind. These farms were fiefs, sub-fiefs, &c., according the value and extent of the domains, many of
them only containing a few acres. But these farmers had rights of jurisdiction in some degree over the
dwellers on the soil; there were four grades. The oppression of the agricultural population under all these
petty tyrants will be understood. Monteil says that there were once in France 160,000 judges, where
today, 4,000 tribunals, including justices of the peace, suffice.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirty: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market
for Industrial Capital



Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch29.htm (3 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:59]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIM:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER THIRTY:

REACTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION ON INDUSTRY.

CREATION OF THE HOME-MARKET FOR INDUSTRIAL CAPITAL



The expropriation and expulsion of the agricultural population, intermittent but renewed again and again,
supplied, as we saw, the town industries with a mass of proletarians entirely connected with the corporate
guilds and unfettered by them; a fortunate circumstance that makes old A. Anderson (not to be
confounded with James Anderson), in his "History of Commerce", believe in the direct intervention of
Providence. We must still pause a moment on this element of primitive accumulation. The thinning-out
of the independent, self-supporting peasants not only brought about the crowding together of the
industrial proletariat, in the way that Geoffrey Saint Hilaire explained the condensation of cosmical
matter at one place, by its rarefaction at another. JJJ In spite of the smaller number of its cultivators, the
soil brought forth as much or more produce, after as before, because the revolution in the conditions of
landed property was accompanied by improved methods of culture, greater co-operation, concentration
of the means of production, &c, and because not only were the agricultural wage-laborers put on the
strain more intensely [21, but the field of production on which they worked for themselves became more
and more contracted. With the setting free of a part of the agricultural population, therefore, their former
means of nourishment were also set free. They were now transformed into material elements of variable
capital. The peasant, expropriated and cast adrift, must buy their value in the form of wages, from his
new master, the industrial capitalist, that which holds good of the means of subsistence holds with the
raw materials of industry dependent upon home agriculture. They were transformed into an element of
constant capital. Suppose, e.g., a part of the Westphalian peasants, who, at the time of Frederick II, all
span flax, forcibly expropriated and hunted from the soil; and the other part that remained, turned into
day-laborers of large farmers. At the same time arise large establishments for flax-spinning and weaving,
in which the men "set free" now work for wages. The flax looks exactly as before. Not a fibre of it is
changed, but a new social soul has popped into its body. It forms now a part of the constant capital of the
master manufacturer. Formerly divided among a number of small producers, who cultivated it
themselves and with their families spun it in retail fashion, it is now concentrated in the hand of one
capitalist, who sets others to spin and weave it for him. The extra labor expended in flax-spinning
realized itself formerly in extra income to numerous peasant families, or maybe, in Frederick II's time, in
taxes pour le roi de Prusse. It realizes itself now in profit for a few capitalists, the spindles and looms,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch30.htm (1 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:20:02]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty

formerly scattered over the face of the country, are now crowded together in a few great labor-barracks,
together with the laborers and the raw material. And spindles, looms, raw material, are now transformed
from means of independent existence for the spinners and weavers, into means for commanding them
and sucking out of them unpaid labor. [3] One does not perceive, when looking at the large
manufactories and the large farms, that they have originated from the throwing into one of many small
centres of production, and have been built up by the expropriation of many small independent producers.
Nevertheless, the popular intuition was not at fault. In the time of Mirabeau, the lion of the Revolution,
the great manufactories were still called manufactures reunies, workshops thrown into one, as we speak
of field thrown into one. Says Mirabeau: "We are only paying attention to the grand manufactories, in
which hundreds of men work under a director and which are commonly called manufactures reunies.
Those where a very large number of laborers work, each separately and on his own account, are hardly
considered; they are placed at an infinite distance from the others. This is a great error, as the latter alone
make a really important object of national prosperity.... The large workshop (manufacture reunie) will
enrich prodigiously one or two entrepreneurs, but the laborers will only be journeymen, paid more or
less, and will not have any share in the success of the undertaking. In the discrete workshop (manufacture
separee), on the contrary, no one will become rich, but many laborers will be comfortable; the saving and
the industrious will be able to amass a little capital, to put by a little for a birth of a child, for an illness,
for themselves or their belongings. The number of saving and industrious laborers will increase, because
they will see in good conduct, in activity, a means of essentially bettering their condition, and not of
obtaining a small rise in wages that can never be of any importance of the future, and whose sole result is
to place men in the position to live a little better, but only from day to day.... The large workshops,
undertakings of certain private persons who pay laborers from day to day to work for their gain, may be
able to put these private individuals at their ease, but they will never be an object worth the attention of
governments. Discrete workshops, for the most part combined with cultivation of small holdings, are the
only free ones." [41 The expropriation and eviction of a part of the agricultural population not only set
free for industrial capital, the laborers, their means of subsistence, and material for labor; it also created
the home-market.

In fact, the events that transformed the small peasants into wage-laborers, and their means of subsistence
and of labor into material elements of capital, created, at the same time, a home-market for the latter.
Formerly, the peasant family produced the means of subsistence and the raw materials, which they
themselves, for the most part, consumed. These raw materials and means of subsistence have now
become commodities; the large farmer sells them, he finds his market in manufactures. Yarn, inen,
coarse woollen stuffs — things whose raw materials had been within the reach of every peasant family,
had been spun and woven by it for its own use — were now transformed into articles of manufacture, to
which the country districts at once served for markets. The many scattered customers, whom stray
artisans until now had found in the numerous small producers working on their own account, concentrate
themselves now into one great market provided for by industrial capital. [51 Thus, hand in hand with the
expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, with their separation from their means of production, goes
the destruction of rural domestic industry, the process of separation between manufacture and
agriculture. And only the destruction of rural domestic industry can give the internal market of country
that extension and consistence which the capitalist mode of production requires. Still the manufacturing
period, properly so called, does not succeed in carrying out this transformation radically and completely.
It will be remembered that manufacture, properly so called, conquers but partially the domain of national
production, and always rests on the handicrafts of the town and the domestic industry of the rural districts
as its ultimate basis. If it destroys these in one form, in particular branches, at certain points, it calls them

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch30.htm (2 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:20:02]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty

up again elsewhere, because it needs them for the preparation of raw material up to a certain point. It
produces, therefore, a new class of small villagers who, while following the cultivation of the soil as an
accessary calling, find their chief occupation in industrial labor, the products of which they sell to the
manufacturers directly, or through the medium of merchants. This is one, though not the chief, cause of a
phenomenon which, at first, puzzles the student of english history .[6] From the last third of the 15th
century he finds continually complaints, only interrupted at certain intervals, about the encroachment of
capitalist farming in the country districts, and the progressive destruction of the peasantry. On the other
hand, he always finds this peasantry turning up again, although in diminished number, and always under
worse conditions. The chief reason is: England is at one time chiefly a cultivator of corn, at another
chiefly a breeder of cattle, in alternate periods, and with these the extent, supplies, in machinery, the
lasting basis of capitalistic agriculture, expropriates radically the enormous majority of the agricultural
population, and completes the separation between agriculture and rural domestic industry, whose roots
— spinning and weaving — it tears up. £71 It therefore also, for the first tie, conquers for industrial
capital the entire home-market. £8£



Footnotes

m In his "Notions de Philosophic Naturelle". Paris, 1838.

[21 A point that Sir James Steuart emphasizes.

[3J "Je permettrai," says the capitalist, "que vous ayez l'honneur de me servir, a condition que vous me
donnez le peu qui vous la peine que je prends de vous commander." (J. J. Rousseau: "Discours sur
l'Economie Politique.")

[41 Mirabeau, I.e., till, pp.20- 109 passim. That Mirabeau considers the separate workshops more
economical and productive than the "combined", and sees in the latter merely artificial exotics under
government cultivation, is explained by the position at that time of a great part of the continental
manufactures.

[51 "Twenty pounds of wool converted unobtrusively into yearly clothing of a laborer's family by its own
industry in the intervals of other works — this makes no show; but bring it to market, send it to the
factory, thence to the broker, thence to the dealer, and you will have great commercial operations, and
nominal capital engaged to the amount of twenty times its value.... The working-class is thus emersed to
support a wretched factory population, a parastical shop-keeping class, and a fictitious commercial,
monetary, and financial system." (David Urquhart, I.e., p. 120.)

[61 Cromwell's time forms an exception. So long as the Republic lasted, the mass of the English people
of all grades rose from the degradation into which they had sunk under the Tudors.

[71 Tuckett is aware that the modern woollen industry has sprung, with the introduction of machinery,
from manufacture proper and from the destruction of rural and domestic industries.

"The plough, the yoke, were 'the invention of gods, and the occupation of heroes'; are the loom, the
spindle, the distaff, of less noble parentage. You sever the distaff and the plough, the spindle and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch30.htm (3 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:20:02]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty

the yoke, and you get factories and poor-houses, credit and panics, two hostile nations, agriculture
and commercial." (David Urquhart, I.e., p. 122.)

But now comes Carey, and cries out upon England, surely not with unreason, that it is trying to turn
every other country into a mere agricultural nation, whose manufacturer is to be England. He pretends
that in this way Turkey has been ruined, because "the owners and occupants of land have never been
permitted by England to strengthen themselves by the formation of that natural alliance between the
plough and the loom, the hammer and the harrow." ("The Slave Trade", p. 125.) According to him,
Urquhart himself is one of the chief agents in the ruin of Turkey, where he had made Free-trade
propaganda in the English interest. The best of it is that Carey, a great Russophile by the way, wants to
prevent the process of separation by that very system of protection which accelerates it.

\S] Philanthropic English economists, like Mill, Rogers, Goldwin Smith, Fawcett, &c, and liberal
manufacturers like John Bright & Co., ask the English landed proprietors, as God asked Cain after Abel,
Where are our thousands of freeholders gone? But where do you come from, then? From the destruction
of those freeholders. Why don't you ask further, where are the independent weavers, spinners, and
artisans gone?



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirty-One: Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch30.htm (4 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:20:02]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIII:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE:

GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST



The genesis of the industrial £1} capitalist did not proceed in such a gradual way as that of the farmer.
Doubtless many small guild-masters, and yet more independent small artisans, or even wage-labourers,
transformed themselves into small capitalists, and (by gradually extending exploitation of wage-labour
and corresponding accumulation) into full-blown capitalists. In the infancy of capitalist production,
things often happened as in the infancy of medieval towns, where the question, which of the escaped
serfs should be master and which servant, was in great part decided by the earlier or later date of their
flight. The snail's pace of this method corresponded in no wise with the commercial requirements of the
new world-market that the great discoveries of the end of the 15th century created. But the middle ages
had handed down two distinct forms of capital, which mature in the most different economic social
formations, and which before the era of the capitalist mode of production, are considered as capital quand
meme — usurer's capital and merchant's capital.

"At present, all the wealth of society goes first into the possession of the capitalist ... he pays the
landowner his rent, the labourer his wages, the tax and tithe gatherer their claims, and keeps a large,
indeed the largest, and a continually augmenting share, of the annual produce of labour for himself. The
capitalist may now be said to be the first owner of all the wealth of the community, though no law has
conferred on him the right to this property... this change has been effected by the taking of interest on
capital ... and it is not a little curious that all the law-givers of Europe endeavoured to prevent this by
statutes, viz., statutes against usury.... The power of the capitalist over all the wealth of the country is a
complete change in the right of property, and by what law, or series of laws, was it effected?" [2J The
author should have remembered that revolutions are not made by laws.

The money capital formed by means of usury and commerce was prevented from turning into industrial
capital, in the country by the feudal constitution, in the towns by the guild organisation. [3] These fetters
vanished with the dissolution of feudal society, with the expropriation and partial eviction of the country
population. The new manufactures were established at Weapons, or at inland points beyond the control
of the old municipalities and their guilds. Hence in England an embittered struggle of the corporate
towns against these new industrial nurseries.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of
the aboriginal population, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of
Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of
capitalist production. These idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of primitive accumulation. On
their heels treads the commercial war of the European nations, with the globe for a theatre. It begins with
the revolt of the Netherlands from Spain, assumes giant dimensions in England's Anti-Jacobin War, and
is still going on in the opium wars against China, &c.

The different momenta of primitive accumulation distribute themselves now, more or less in
chronological order, particularly over Spain, Portugal, Holland, France, and England. In England at the
end of the 17th century, they arrive at a systematical combination, embracing the colonies, the national
debt, the modern mode of taxation, and the protectionist system. These methods depend in part on brute
force, e.g., the colonial system. But, they all employ the power of the State, the concentrated and
organised force of society, to hasten, hot-house fashion, the process of transformation of the feudal mode
of production into the capitalist mode, and to shorten the transition. Force is the midwife of every old
society pregnant with a new one. It is itself an economic power.

Of the Christian colonial system, W. Howitt, a man who makes a speciality of Christianity, says: "The
barbarities and desperate outrages of the so-called Christian race, throughout every region of the world,
and upon every people they have been able to subdue, are not to be paralleled by those of any other race,
however fierce, however untaught, and however reckless of mercy and of shame, in any age of the earth."
\4] The history of the colonial administration of Holland — and Holland was the head capitalistic nation
of the 17th century — "is one of the most extraordinary relations of treachery, bribery, massacre, and
meanness" [5] Nothing is more characteristic than their system of stealing men, to get slaves for Java.
The men stealers were trained for this purpose. The thief, the interpreter, and the seller, were the chief
agents in this trade, native princes the chief sellers. The young people stolen, were thrown into the secret
dungeons of Celebes, until they were ready for sending to the slave-ships. An official report says: "This
one town of Macassar, e.g., is full of secret prisons, one more horrible than the other, crammed with
unfortunates, victims of greed and tyranny fettered in chains, forcibly torn from their families." To secure
Malacca, the Dutch corrupted the Portuguese governor. He let them into the town in 1641. They hurried
at once to his house and assassinated him, to "abstain" from the payment of £21,875, the price of his
treason. Wherever they set foot, devastation and depopulation followed. Banjuwangi, a province of Java,
in 1750 numbered over 80,000 inhabitants, in 1811 only 18,000. Sweet commerce!

The English East India Company, as is well known, obtained, besides the political rule in India, the
exclusive monopoly of the tea-trade, as well as of the Chinese trade in general, and of the transport of
goods to and from Europe. But the coasting trade of India and between the islands, as well as the internal
trade of India, were the monopoly of the higher employes of the company. The monopolies of salt,
opium, betel and other commodities, were inexhaustible mines of wealth. The employes themselves fixed
the price and plundered at will the unhappy Hindus. The Governor-General took part in this private
traffic. His favourites received contracts under conditions whereby they, cleverer than the alchemists,
made gold out of nothing. Great fortunes sprang up like mushrooms in a day; primitive accumulation
went on without the advance of a shilling. The trial of Warren Hastings swarms with such cases. Here is
an instance. A contract for opium was given to a certain Sullivan at the moment of his departure on an
official mission to a part of India far removed from the opium district. Sullivan sold his contract to one
Binn for £40,000; Binn sold it the same day for £60,000, and the ultimate purchaser who carried out the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

contract declared that after all he realised an enormous gain. According to one of the lists laid before
Parliament, the Company and its employes from 1757-1766 got £6,000,000 from the Indians as gifts.
Between 1769 and 1770, the English manufactured a famine by buying up all the rice and refusing to sell
it again, except at fabulous prices. \6]

The treatment of the aborigines was, naturally, most frightful in plantation-colonies destined for export
trade only, such as the West Indies, and in rich and well-populated countries, such as Mexico and India,
that were given over to plunder. But even in the colonies properly so called, the Christian character of
primitive accumulation did not belie itself. Those sober virtuosi of Protestantism, the Puritans of New
England, in 1703, by decrees of their assembly set a premium of £40 on every Indian scalp and every
captured red-skin: in 1720 a premium of £100 on every scalp; in 1744, after Massachusetts-Bay had
proclaimed a certain tribe as rebels, the following prices: for a male scalp of 12 years and upwards £100
(new currency), for a male prisoner £105, for women and children prisoners £50, for scalps of women
and children £50. Some decades later, the colonial system took its revenge on the descendants of the
pious pilgrim fathers, who had grown seditious in the meantime. At English instigation and for English
pay they were tomahawked by red-skins. The British Parliament proclaimed bloodhounds and scalping as
"means that God and Nature had given into its hand."

The colonial system ripened, like a hot-house, trade and navigation. The "societies Monopolia" of Luther
were powerful levers for concentration of capital. The colonies secured a market for the budding
manufactures, and, through the monopoly of the market, an increased accumulation. The treasures
captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, enslavement, and murder, floated back to the
mother-country and were there turned into capital. Holland, which first fully developed the colonial
system, in 1648 stood already in the acme of its commercial greatness. It was "in almost exclusive
possession of the East Indian trade and the commerce between the south-east and north-west of Europe.
Its fisheries, marine, manufactures, surpassed those of any other country. The total capital of the
Republic was probably more important than that of all the rest of Europe put together." Giilich forgets to
add that by 1648, the people of Holland were more over-worked, poorer and more brutally oppressed
than those of all the rest of Europe put together.

To-day industrial supremacy implies commercial supremacy. In the period of manufacture properly so
called, it is, on the other hand, the commercial supremacy that gives industrial predominance. Hence the
preponderant role that the colonial system plays at that time. It was "the strange God" who perched
himself on the altar cheek by jowl with the old Gods of Europe, and one fine day with a shove and a kick
chucked them all of a heap. It proclaimed surplus-value making as the sole end and aim of humanity.

The system of public credit, i.e., of national debts, whose origin we discover in Genoa and Venice as
early as the middle ages, took possession of Europe generally during the manufacturing period. The
colonial system with its maritime trade and commercial wars served as a forcing-house for it. Thus it first
took root in Holland. National debts, i.e., the alienation of the state- whether despotic, constitutional or
republican-marked with its stamp the capitalistic era. The only part of the so-called national wealth that
actually enters into the collective possessions of modern peoples is their national debt. J7] Hence, as a
necessary consequence, the modern doctrine that a nation becomes the richer the more deeply it is in
debt. Public credit becomes the credo of capital. And with the rise of national debt-making, want of faith
in the national debt takes the place of the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which may not be forgiven.

The public debt becomes one of the most powerful levers of primitive accumulation. As with the stroke



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

of an enchanter's wand, it endows barren money with the power of breeding and thus turns it into capital,
without the necessity of its exposing itself to the troubles and risks inseparable from its employment in
industry or even in usury. The state-creditors actually give nothing away, for the sum lent is transformed
into public bonds, easily negotiable, which go on functioning in their hands just as so much hard cash
would. But further, apart from the class of lazy annuitants thus created, and from the improvised wealth
of the financiers, middlemen between the government and the nation-as also apart from the tax-farmers,
merchants, private manufacturers, to whom a good part of every national loan renders the service of a
capital fallen from heaven-the national debt has given rise to joint-stock companies, to dealings in
negotiable effects of all kinds, and to agiotage, in a word to stock-exchange gambling and the modern
bankocracy.

At their birth the great banks, decorated with national titles, were only associations of private speculators,
who placed themselves by the side of governments, and, thanks to the privileges they received, were in a
position to advance money to the State. Hence the accumulation of the national debt has no more
infallible measure than the successive rise in the stock of these banks, whose full development dates from
the founding of the Bank of England in 1694. The Bank of England began with lending its money to the
Government at 8%; at the same time it was empowered by Parliament to coin money out of the same
capital, by lending it again to the public in the form of banknotes. It was allowed to use these notes for
discounting bills, making advances on commodities, and for buying the precious metals. It was not long
ere this credit-money, made by the bank itself, became, the coin in which the Bank of England made its
loans to the State, and paid, on account of the State, the interest on the public debt. It was not enough that
the bank gave with one hand and took back more with the other; it remained, even whilst receiving, the
eternal creditor of the nation down to the last shilling advanced. Gradually it became inevitably the
receptacle of the metallic hoard of the country, and the centre of gravity of all commercial credit. What
effect was produced on their contemporaries by the sudden uprising of this brood of bankocrats,
financiers, rentiers, brokers, stock-jobbers, &c, is proved by the writings of that time, e.g., by
Bolingbroke's. £8}

With the national debt arose an international credit system, which often conceals one of the sources of
primitive accumulation in this or that people. Thus the villainies of the Venetian thieving system formed
one of the secret bases of the capital-wealth of Holland to whom Venice in her decadence lent large sums
of money. So also was it with Holland and England. By the beginning of the 18th century the Dutch
manufactures were far outstripped. Holland had ceased to be the nation preponderant in commerce and
industry. One of its main lines of business, therefore, from 1701-1776, is the lending out of enormous
amounts of capital, especially to its great rival England. The same thing is going on to-day between
England and the United States. A great deal of capital, which appears to-day in the United States without
any certificate of birth, was yesterday, in England, the capitalised blood of children.

As the national debt finds its support in the public revenue, which must cover the yearly payments for
interest, &c, the modern system of taxation was the necessary complement of the system of national
loans. The loans enable the government to meet extraordinary expenses, without the tax-payers feeling it
immediately, but they necessitate, as. a consequence, increased taxes. On the other hand, the raising of
taxation caused by the accumulation of debts contracted one after another, compels the government
always to have recourse to new loans for new extraordinary expenses. Modern fiscality, whose pivot is
formed by taxes on the most necessary means of subsistence (thereby increasing their price), thus
contains within itself the germ of automatic progression. Over-taxation is not an incident, but rather a
principle. In Holland, therefore, where this system was first inaugurated, the great patriot, DeWitt, has in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

his "Maxims" extolled it as the best system for making the wage-labourer submissive, frugal, industrious,
and overburdened with labour. The destructive influence that it exercises on the condition of the
wage-labourer concerns us less however, here, than the forcible expropriation, resulting from it, of
peasants, artisans, and in a word, all elements of the lower middle-class. On this there are not two
opinions, even among the bourgeois economists. Its expropriating efficacy is still further heightened by
the system of protection, which forms one of its integral parts.

The great part that the public debt, and the fiscal system corresponding with it, has played in the
capitalisation of wealth and the expropriation of the masses, has led many writers, like Cobbett,
Doubleday and others, to seek in this, incorrectly, the fundamental cause of the misery of the modern
peoples.

The system of protection was an artificial means of manufacturing manufacturers, of expropriating
independent labourers, of capitalising the national means of production and subsistence, of forcibly
abbreviating the transition from the medieval to the modern mode of production. The European states
tore one another to pieces about the patent of this invention, and, once entered into the service of the
surplus-value makers, did not merely lay under contribution in the pursuit of this purpose their own
people, indirectly through protective duties, directly through export premiums. They also forcibly rooted
out, in their dependent countries, all industry, as, e.g., England did. with the Irish woollen manufacture.
On the continent of Europe, after Colbert's example, the process was much simplified. The primitive
industrial capital, here, came in part directly out of the state treasury. "Why," cries Mirabeau, "why go so
far to seek the cause of the manufacturing glory of Saxony before the war? 180,000,000 of debts
contracted by the sovereigns!" [9]

Colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, commercial wars, &c, these children of the true
manufacturing period, increase gigantically during the infancy of Modem Industry. The birth of the latter
is heralded by a great slaughter of the innocents. Like the royal navy, the factories were recruited by
means of the press-gang. Blase as Sir F. M. Eden is as to the horrors of the expropriation of the
agricultural population from the soil, from the last third of the 15th century to his own time; with all the
self-satisfaction with which he rejoices in this process, "essential" for establishing capitalistic agriculture
and "the due proportion between arable and pasture land" — he does not show, however, the same
economic insight in respect to the necessity of child-stealing and child-slavery for the transformation of
manufacturing exploitation into factory exploitation, and the establishment of the "true relation" between
capital and labour-power. He says: "It may, perhaps, be worthy the attention of the public to consider,
whether any manufacture, which, in order to be carried on successfully, requires that cottages and
workhouses should be ransacked for poor children; that they should be employed by turns during the
greater part of the night and robbed of that rest which, though indispensable to all, is most required by
the young; and that numbers of both sexes, of different ages and dispositions, should be collected
together in such a manner that the contagion of example cannot but lead to profligacy and debauchery;
will add to the sum of individual or national felicity?" flOl

"In the counties of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and more particularly in Lancashire," says Fielden, "the
newly-invented machinery was used in large factories built on the sides of streams capable of turning the
water-wheel. Thousands of hands were suddenly required in these places, remote from towns; and
Lancashire, in particular, being, till then, comparatively thinly populated and barren, a population was all
that she now wanted. The small and nimble fingers of little children being by very far the most in
request, the custom instantly sprang up of procuring apprentices from the different parish workhouses of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

London, Birmingham, and elsewhere. Many, many thousands of these little, hapless creatures were sent
down into the north, being from the age of 7 to the age of 13 or 14 years old. The custom was for the
master to clothe his apprentices and to feed and lodge them in an "apprentice house" near the factory;
overseers were appointed to see to the works, whose interest it was to work the children to the utmost,
because their pay was in proportion to the quantity of work that they could exact. Cruelty was, of course,
the consequence. ... In many of the manufacturing districts, but particularly, I am afraid, in the guilty
county to which I belong [Lancashire], cruelties the most heart-rending were practised upon the
unoffending and friendless creatures who were thus consigned to the charge of master-manufacturers;
they were harassed to the brink of death by excess of labour ... were flogged, fettered and tortured in the
most exquisite refinement of cruelty; ... they were in many cases starved to the bone while flogged to
their work and ... even in some instances ... were driven to commit suicide.... The beautiful and romantic
valleys of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Lancashire, secluded from the public eye, became the dismal
solitudes of torture, and of many a murder. The profits of manufacturers were enormous; but this only
whetted the appetite that it should have satisfied, and therefore the manufacturers had recourse to an
expedient that seemed to secure to them those profits without any possibility of limit; they began the
practice of what is termed "night-working," that is, having tired one set of hands, by working them
throughout the day, they had another set ready to go on working throughout the night; the day-set getting
into the beds that the night-set had just quilted, and in their turn again, the night-set getting into the beds
that the day-set quilted in the morning. It is a common tradition in Lancashire, that the beds never get
cold."

With the development of capitalist production during the manufacturing period, the public opinion of
Europe had lost the last remnant of shame and conscience. The nations bragged cynically of every
infamy that served them as a means to capitalistic accumulation. Read, e.g., the naive Annals of
Commerce of the worthy A. Anderson. Here it is trumpeted forth as a triumph of English statecraft that at
the Peace of Utrecht, England extorted from the Spaniards by the Asiento Treaty the privilege of being
allowed to ply the negro-trade, until then only carried on between Africa and the English West Indies,
between Africa and Spanish America as well. England thereby acquired the right of supplying Spanish
America until 1743 with 4,800 negroes yearly. This threw, at the same time, an official cloak over British
smuggling. Liverpool waxed fat on the slave-trade. This was its method of primitive accumulation. And,
even to the present day, Liverpool "respectability" is the Pindar of the slave-trade which — compare the
work of Aikin [1795] already quoted — "has coincided with that spirit of bold adventure which has
characterised the trade of Liverpool and rapidly carried it to its present state of prosperity; has occasioned
vast employment for shipping and sailors, and greatly augmented the demand for the manufactures of the
country" (p. 339). Liverpool employed in the slave-trade, in 1730, 15 ships; in 1751, 53; in 1760, 74; in
1770, 96; and in 1792, 132. f 121

Whilst the cotton industry introduced child-slavery in England, it gave in the United States a stimulus to
the transformation of the earlier, more or less patriarchal slavery, into a system of commercial
exploitation. In fact, the veiled slavery of the wage-workers in Europe needed, for its pedestal, slavery
pure and simple in the new world. '

Tantae molis erat, to establish the "eternal laws of Nature" of the capitalist mode of production, to
complete the process of separation between labourers and conditions of labour, to transform, at one
pole, the social means of production and subsistence into capital, at the opposite pole, the mass of the
population into wage-labourers, into "free labouring poor, " that artificial product of modern society.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

[13] If money, According to Augier, [14] "comes into the world with a congenita] Mood- stain on one
cheek, " capita] comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with Mood and dirt. [15]



Footnotes

[21 Industrial here in contradistinction to agricuUural In the "categoric" sense the farmer is an
industrial capitalist as much as the manufacturer.

[2] "The Natura] and Artificial Rights of Property Contrasted. " Lond., 1832, pp. 98-99. Author of the
anonymous work: "Th. Hodgskin. "

[3] Even as ]ate as 1 794, the smaU cloth-makers of Leeds sent a deputation to Parliament, with a petition
for a law to forbid any merchant from becoming a manufacturer. (Dr. Aikin, I. c.)

[4] William Howitt: "Colonisation and Christianity: A Popular History of the Treatment of the Natives
by the Europeans in all their Colonies. " London, 1838, p. 9. On the treatment of the slaves there is a
good compilation in Charles Comte, "Traite de la Legislation. " 3me ed. Bruxelles, 1837. This subject one
must study in detail, to see what the bourgeoisie makes of itself and of the labourer, wherever it can,
without restraint, model the world after its own image.

[51 Thomas Stamford Raffles, late Lieut-Gov. of that island: "The History of Java, "Lond., 1817.

[61 In the year 1866 more than a million Hindus died of hunger in the province of Orissa alone.
Nevertheless, the attempt was made to enrich the Indian treasury by the price at which the necessaries of
life were sold to the starving people.

[7] William Cobbett remarks that in England all public institutions are designated "royal"; as
compensation for this, however, there is the "national" debt.

[81 "Si les Tartares inondaient I'Europe aujourd'hui, ilfaudrait Men des affaires pour leurfaire entendre
ce que c'est qu'un financier parmi nous. " Montesquieu, "Esprit des lois, " t. iv., p. 33, ed. Londres, 1769.

[91 Mirabeau, I. c, t. vi., p. 101.

[101 Eden, I. c, Vol. I, Book II, Ch. 1., p. 421.

[Ill John Fielden, I. c, pp. 5, 6. On the earlier infamies of the factory system, cf Dr. Aikin (I 795), I. c,
p. 219. and Gisbome: "Enquiry into the Duties of Men, " 1795 Vol. II When the steam-engine
transplanted the factories from the country waterfalls to the middle of towns, the "abstemious"
surplus-value maker found the child-material ready to his hand, without being forced to seek slaves from
the workhouses. When Sir R. Peel (father of the "minister of plausibility"), brought in his bill for the
protection of children, in 1815, Francis Homer, lumen of the Billion Committee and intimate friend of
Ricardo, said in the House of Commons: "It is notorious, that with a bankrupt's effects, a gang, if he
might use the word, of these children had been put up to sale, and were advertised publicly as part of the
property. A most atrocious instance had been brought before the Court of King's Bench two years before,
in which a number of these boys, apprenticed by a parish in London to one manufacturer, had been

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

transferred to another, and had been found by some benevolent persons in a state of absolute famine.
Another case more horrible had come to his knowledge while on a [Parliamentary] Committee ... that
not many years ago, an agreement had been made between a London parish and a Lancashire
manufacturer, by which it was stipulated, that with every 20 sound children one idiot should be taken. "

[121 In 1790, there were in the English West Indies ten slaves for one free man, in the French fourteen

for one, in the Dutch twenty-three for one. (Henry Brougham: "An Inquiry into the Colonial Policy of the
European Powers. " Edin. 1803, vol. II., p. 74.)

[131 The phrase, "labouring poor, " is found in English legislation from the moment when the class of
wage-labourers becomes noticeable. This term is used in opposition, on the one hand, to the "idle poor, "
beggars, etc., on the other to those labourers, who, pigeons not yet plucked, are still possessors of their
own means of labour. From the Statute Book it passed into Political Economy, and was handed down by
Culpeper, J. Child, etc., to Adam Smith and Eden. After this, one can judge of the good faith of the
"execrable political cant-monger, " Edmund Burke, when he called the expression, "labouring poor, " —
"execrable political cant. " This sycophant who, in the pay of the English oligarchy, played the romantic
laudator temporis acti against the French Revolution, just as, in the pay of the North American Colonies,
at the beginning of the American troubles, he had played the Liberal against the English oligarchy, was
an out and out vulgar bourgeois. "The laws of commerce are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws
of God. " (E. Burke, I. c, pp. 31, 32.) No wonder that, true to the laws of God and of Nature, he always
sold himself in the best market. A very good portrait of this Edmund Burke, during his liberal time, is to
be found in the writings of the Rev. Mr. Tucker. Tucker was a parson and a Tory, but, for the rest, an
honourable man and a competent political economist. In face of the infamous cowardice of character
that reigns to-day, and believes most devoutly in "the laws of commerce, " it is our bounden duty again
and again to brand the Burkes, who only differ from their successors in one thing — talent.

[141 Marie Angier: "T>u Credit Public." Paris, 1842.

[151 "Capital is said by a Quarterly Reviewer to fly turbulence and strife, and to be timid, which is very
true; but this is very incompletely stating the question. Capital eschews no profit, or very small profit,
just as Nature was formerly said to abhor a vacuum. With adequate profit, capital is very bold. A certain
10 per cent, will ensure its employment anywhere; 20 per cent, certain will produce eagerness; 50 per
cent., positive audacity; 100 per cent, will make it ready to trample on all human laws; 300 per cent.,
and there is not a crime at which it will scruple, nor a risk it will not run, even to the chance of its owner
being hanged. If turbulence and strife will bring a profit, it will freely encourage both. Smuggling and
the slave-trade have amply proved all that is here stated. " (T J. Dunning, I. c, pp. 35, 36.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirty-Two: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty Two

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIII:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO:

HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION



What does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.e., its historical genesis, resolve itself into? In so far as
it is not immediate transformation of slaves and serfs into wage-laborers, and therefore a mere change of
form, it only means the expropriation of the immediate producers, i.e., the dissolution of private property
based on the labor of its owner. Private property, as the antithesis to social, collective property, exists
only where the means of labor and the external conditions of labor belong to private individuals. But
according as these private individuals are laborers or not laborers, private property has a different
character. The numberless shades, that it at first sight presents, correspond to the intermediate stages
lying between these two extremes. The private property of the laborer in his means of production is the
foundation of petty industry, whether agricultural, manufacturing, or both; petty industry, again, is an
essential condition for the development of social production and of the free individuality of the laborer
himself. Of course, this petty mode of production exists also under slavery, serfdom, and other states of
dependence. But it flourishes, it lets loose its whole energy, it attains its adequate classical form, only
where the laborer is the private owner of his own means of labor set in action by himself: the peasant of
the land which he cultivates, the artisan of the tool which he handles as a virtuoso. This mode of
production pre-supposes parcelling of the soil and scattering of the other means of production. As it
excludes the concentration of these means of production, so also it excludes co-operation, division of
labor within each separate process of production, the control over, and the productive application of the
forces of Nature by society, and the free development of the social productive powers. It is compatible
only with a system of production, and a society, moving within narrow and more or less primitive
bounds. To perpetuate it would be, as Pecqueur rightly says, "to decree universal mediocrity". At a
certain stage of development, it brings forth the material agencies for its own dissolution. From that
moment new forces and new passions spring up in the bosom of society; but the old social organization
fetters them and keeps them down. It must be annihilated; it is annihilated. Its annihilation, the
transformation of the individualized and scattered means of production into socially concentrated ones,
of the pigmy property of the many into the huge property of the few, the expropriation of the great mass
of the people from the soil, from the means of subsistence, and from the means of labor, this fearful and
painful expropriation of the mass of the people forms the prelude to the history of capital. It comprises a
series of forcible methods, of which we have passed in review only those that have been epoch-making
as methods of the primitive accumulation of capital. The expropriation of the immediate producers was

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch32.htm (1 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:20:09]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty Two

accomplished with merciless Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most infamous, the most
sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odious. Self-earned private property, that is based, so to say, on the
fusing together of the isolated, independent laboring-individual with the conditions of his labor, is
supplanted by capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally free labor of
others, i.e., on wage-labor. JJJ

As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently decomposed the old society from top to
bottom, as soon as the laborers are turned into proletarians, their means of labor into capital, as soon as
the capitalist mode of production stands on its own feet, then the further socialization of labor and further
transformation of the land and other means of production into socially exploited and, therefore, common
means of production, as well as the further expropriation of private proprietors, takes a new form. That
which is now to be expropriated is no longer the laborer working for himself, but the capitalist exploiting
many laborers. This expropriation is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalistic
production itself, by the centralization of capital. One capitalist always kills many. Hand in hand with
this centralization, or this expropriation of many capitalists by few, develop, on an ever-extending scale,
the co-operative form of the labor-process, the conscious technical application of science, the methodical
cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the instruments of labor into instruments of labor only usable
in common, the economizing of all means of production by their use as means of production of
combined, socialized labor, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world-market, and with this,
the international character of the capitalistic regime. Along with the constantly diminishing number of
the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolize all advantages of this process of transformation,
grows the mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with this too grows the
revolt of the working-class, a class always increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organized by
the very mechanism of the process of capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital becomes a
fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and under it.
Centralization of the means of production and socialization of labor at last reach a point where they
become incompatible with their capitalist integument. Thus integument is burst asunder. The knell of
capitalist private property sounds. The expropriators are expropriated.

The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capitalist mode of production, produces capitalist
private property. This is the first negation of individual private property, as founded on the labor of the
proprietor. But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. It
is the negation of negation. This does not re-establish private property for the producer, but gives him
individual property based on the acquisition of the capitalist era: i.e., on co-operation and the possession
in common of the land and of the means of production.

The transformation of scattered private property, arising from individual labor, into capitalist private
property is, naturally, a process, incomparably more protracted, violent, and difficult, than the
transformation of capitalistic private property, already practically resting on socialized production, into
socialized property. In the former case, we had the expropriation of the mass of the people by a few
usurpers; in the latter, we have the expropriation of a few usurpers by the mass of the people. \2]



Footnotes



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch32.htm (2 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:20:09]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty Two

T 1 1 "Nous sommes dans une condition tout-a-fait nouvelle de la societe... nous tendons a separer toute
espece de propriete d'avec toute espece de travail." (Sismondi: "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Polit." t.II,
p.434.)

\2] The advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the
laborers, due to competition, by their revolutionary combination, due to association. The development of
Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie
produces and appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above all, are its own
grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.... Of all the classes that
stand face-to-face with the bourgeoisie today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The
other classes perish and disappear in the face of Modern Industry, the proletariat is its special and
essential product.... The lower middle-classes, the small manufacturers, the shopkeepers, the artisan, the
peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as fractions of the
middle-class... they are reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei", London, 1848, pp. 9, 11.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirty-Three: The Modern Theory of Colonisation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch32.htm (3 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:20:09]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIM:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE:

THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION



III



Political economy confuses on principle two very different kinds of private property, of which one rests
on the producers' own labor, the other on the employment of the labor of others. It forgets that the latter
not only is the direct antithesis of the former, but absolutely grows on its tomb only. In Western Europe,
the home of Political Economy, the process of primitive accumulation is more of less accomplished.
Here the capitalist regime has either directly conquered the whole domain of national production, or,
where economic conditions are less developed, it, at least, indirectly controls those strata of society
which, though belonging to the antiquated mode of production, continue to exist side by side with it in
gradual decay. To this ready-made world of capital, the political economist applies the notions of law and
of property inherited from a pre-capitalistic world with all the more anxious zeal and all the greater
unction, the more loudly the facts cry out in the face of his ideology. It is otherwise in the colonies. There
the capitalist regime everywhere comes into collision with the resistance of the producer, who, as owner
of his own conditions of labor, employs that labor to enrich himself, instead of the capitalist. The
contradiction of these two diametrically opposed economic systems, manifest itself here practically in a
struggle between them. Where the capitalist has at his back the power of the mother-country, he tries to
clear out of his way by force the modes of production and appropriation based on the independent labor
of the producer. The same interest, which compels the sycophant of capital, the political economist, in
the mother-country, to proclaim the theoretical identity of the capitalist mode of production with its
contrary, that same interest compels him in the colonies to make a clean breast of it, and to proclaim
aloud the antagonism of the two modes of production. To this end, he proves how the development of the
social productive power of labor, co-operation, division of labor, use of machinery on a large scale, &c,
are impossible without the expropriation of the laborers, and the corresponding transformation of their
means of production into capital. In the interest of the so-called national wealth, he seeks for artificial
means to ensure the poverty of the people. Here his apologetic armor crumbles off, bit by bit, like rotten
touchwood. It is the great merit of E.G. Wakefield to have discovered, not anything new about the
Colonies [2]_, but to have discovered in the Colonies the truth as to the conditions of capitalist production
in the mother country. As the system of protection at its origin £3} attempted to manufacture capitalists
artificially in the mother-country, so Wakefield's colonization theory, which England tried for a time to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

enforce by Acts of Parliament, attempted to effect the manufacture of wage-workers in the Colonies.
This he calls "systematic colonization".

First of all, Wakefield discovered that in the Colonies, proper means of subsistence, machines, and other
means of production, does not as yet stamp a man as a capitalist if there be wanting the correlative — the
wage-worker, the other man who is compelled to sell himself of his own free-will. He discovered that
capital is not a thing, but a social relation between persons, established by the instrumentality of things.
\4] Mr. Peel, he moans, took him from England to Swan River, West Australia, means of subsistence and
of production to the amount of £50,000. Mr. Peel had the foresight to bring with him, besides, 3,000
persons of the working-class, men, women, and children. Once arrived at his destination, "Mr. Peel was
left without a servant to make his bed or fetch him water from the river." [51 Unhappy Mr. Peel who
provided for everything except the export of English modes of production to Swan River!

For the understanding of the following discoveries of Wakefield, two preliminary remarks: We know that
the means of production and subsistence, while they remain the property of the immediate producer, are
not capital. They become capital only under circumstances in which they serve at the same time as means
of exploitation and subjection of the laborer. But this capitalist soul of theirs is so intimately wedded, in
the head of the political economist, to their material substance, that he christens them capital under all
circumstances, even when they are its exact opposite. Thus is it with Wakefield. Further: the splitting up
of the means of production into the individual property of many independent laborers, working on their
own account, he calls equal division of capital. It is with the political economist as with the feudal jurist.
The latter stuck on to pure monetary relations the labels supplied by feudal law.

"If," says Wakefield, "all members of the society are supposed to possess equal portions of capital... no
man would have a motive for accumulating more capital than he could use with his own hands. This is to
some extent the case in new American settlements, where a passion for owning land prevents the
existence of a class of laborers for hire." [61 So long, therefore, as the laborer can accumulate for himself
— and this he can do so long as he remains possessor of his means of production — capitalist
accumulation and the capitalistic mode of production are impossible. The class of wage-laborers,
essential to these, is wanting. How, then, in old Europe, was the expropriation of the laborer from his
conditions of labor, i.e., the co-existence of capital and wage-labor, brought about? By a social contract
of a quite original kind. "Mankind have adopted a... simple contrivance for promoting the accumulation
of capital," which, of course, since the time of Adam, floated in their imagination, floated in their
imagination as the sole and final end of their existence: "they have divided themselves into owners of
capital and owners of labor.... The division was the result of concert and combination." [71 In one word:
the mass of mankind expropriated itself in honor of the "accumulation of capital". Now, one would think
that this instinct of self-denying fanaticism would give itself full fling especially in the Colonies, where
alone exist the men and conditions that could turn a social contract from a dream to a reality. But why,
then, should "systematic colonization" be called in to replace its opposite, spontaneous, unregulated
colonization? But - but- "In the Northern States of the American Union; it may be doubted whether so
many as a tenth of the people would fall under the description of hired laborers.... In England... the
laboring class compose the bulk of the people." [81 Nay, the impulse to self-expropriation on the part of
laboring humanity for the glory of capital, exists so little that slavery, according to Wakefield himself, is
the sole natural basis of Colonial wealth. His systematic colonization is a mere pis aller, since he
unfortunately has to do with free men, not with slaves. "The first Spanish settlers in Saint Domingo did
not obtain laborers from Spain. But, without laborers, their capital must have perished, or at least, must



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

soon have been diminished to that small amount which each individual could employ with his own
hands. This has actually occurred in the last Colony founded by England — the Swan River Settlement
— where a great mass of capital, of seeds, implements, and cattle, has perished for want of laborers to
use it, and where no settler has preserved much more capital than he can employ with his own hands." [9]

We have seen that the expropriation of the mass of the people from the soil forms the basis of the
capitalist mode of production. The essence of a free colony, on the contrary, consists in this — that the
bulk of the soil is still public property, and every settler on it therefore can turn part of it into his private
property and individual means of production, without hindering the later settlers in the same
operation, f 101 This is the secret both of the prosperity of the colonies and of their inveterate vice —
opposition to the establishment of capital. "Where land is very cheap and all men are free, where every
one who so pleases can easily obtain a piece of land for himself, not only is labor very dear, as respects
the laborer's share of the produce, but the difficulty is to obtain combined labor at any price." fill

As in the colonies the separation of the laborer from the conditions of labor and their root, the soil, does
not exist, or only sporadically, or on too limited a scale, so neither does the separation of agriculture from
industry exist, not the destruction of the household industry of the peasantry. Whence then is to come the
internal market for capital? "No part of the population of America is exclusively agricultural, excepting
slaves and their employers who combine capital and labor in particular works. Free Americans, who
cultivate the soil, follow many other occupations. Some portion of the furniture and tools which they use
is commonly made by themselves. They frequently build their own houses, and carry to market, at
whatever distance, the produce of their own industry. They are spinners and weavers; they make soap
and candles, as well as, in many cases, shoes and clothes for their own use. In America the cultivation of
land is often the secondary pursuit of a blacksmith, a miller or a shopkeeper." f!21 With such queer
people as these, where is the "field of abstinence" for the capitalists?

The great beauty of capitalist production consists in this — that it not only constantly reproduces the
wage-worker as wage-worker, but produces always, in production to the accumulation of capital, a
relative surplus-population of wage-workers. Thus the law of supply and demand of labor is kept in the
right rut, the oscillation of wages is penned within limits satisfactory to capitalist exploitation, and lastly,
the social dependence of the laborer on the capitalist, that indispensable requisite, is secured; an
unmistakable relation of dependence, which the smug political economist, at home, in the
mother-country, can transmogrify into one of free contract between buyer and seller, between equally
independent owners of commodities, the owner of the commodity capital and the owner of the
commodity labor. But in the colonies, this pretty fancy is torn asunder. The absolute population here
increases much more quickly than in the mother-country, because many laborers enter this world as
ready-made adults, and yet the labor-market is always understocked. The law of supply and demand of
labor falls to pieces. On the one hand, the old world constantly throws in capital, thirsting after
exploitation and "abstinence"; on the other, the regular reproduction of the wage-laborer as wage-laborer
comes into collision with impediments the most impertinent and in part invincible. What becomes of the
production of wage-laborers into independent producers, who work for themselves instead of for capital,
and enrich themselves instead of the capitalist gentry, reacts in its turn very perversely on the conditions
of the labor-market. Not only does the degree of exploitation of the wage-laborer remain indecently low.
The wage-laborer loses into the bargain, along with the relation of dependence, also the sentiment of
dependence on the abstemious capitalist. Hence all the inconveniences that our E. G. Wakefield pictures
so doughtily, so eloquently, so pathetically. The supply of wage-labor, he complains, is neither constant,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

nor regular, nor sufficient. "The supply of labor is always not only small but uncertain." f 131 "Though the
produce divided between the capitalist and the laborer be large, the laborer takes so great a share that he
soon becomes a capitalist.... Few, even those whose lives are unusually long, can accumulate great
masses of wealth." f!41 The laborers most distinctly decline to allow the capitalist to abstain from the
payment of the greater part of their labor. It avails him nothing, is he is so cunning as to import from
Europe, with his own capital, his own wage-workers. They soon "cease... to be laborers for hire; they...
become independent landowners, if not competitors with their former masters in the labor-market." |T51
Think of the horror! The excellent capitalist has imported bodily from Europe, with his own good money,
his own competitors ! The end of the world has come ! No wonder Wakefield laments the absence of all
dependence and of all sentiment of dependence on the part of the wage-workers in the colonies. On
account of the high wages, says his disciple, Merivale, there is in the colonies "the urgent desire for
cheaper and more subservient laborers — for a class to whom the capitalist might dictate terms, instead
of being dictated to by them.... In ancient civilized countries the laborer, though free, is by a law of
Nature dependent on capitalists; in colonies this dependence must be created by artificial means." f!61

What is now, according to Wakefield, the consequence of this unfortunate state of things in the colonies?
A "barbarising tendency of dispersion" of producers and national wealth. \ 171 The parcelling-out of the
means of production among innumerable owners, working on their own account, annihilates, along with
the centralization of capital, all the foundation of combined labor. Every long-winded undertaking,
extending over several years and demanding outlay of fixed capital, is prevented from being carried out.
In Europe, capital invests without hesitating a moment, for the working-class constitutes its living
appurtennce, always in excess, always at disposal. But in the colonies! Wakefield tells and extremely
doleful anecdote. He was talking with some capitalists of Canada and the state of New York, where the
immigrant wave often becomes stagnant and deposits a sediment of "supernumerary" laborers. "Our
capital," says one of the characters in the melodrama, "was ready for many operations which require a
considerable period of time for their completion; but we could not begin such operations with labor
which, we knew, would soon leave us. If we had been sure of retraining the labor of such emigrants, we
should have been glad to have engaged it at once, and for a high price: and we should have engaged it,
even though we had been sure it would leave us, provided we had been sure of a fresh supply whenever
we might need it." |T81

After Wakefield has constructed the English capitalist agriculture and its "combined" labor with the
scattered cultivation of American peasants, he unwittingly gives us a glimpse at the reverse of the medal.
He depicts the mass of the American people as well-to-do, independent, enterprising, and comparatively
cultured, whilst "the English agricultural laborer is miserable wretch, a pauper.... In what country, except
North America and some new colonies, do the wages of free labor employed in agriculture much exceed
a bare subsistence for the laborer? ... Undoubtedly , farm-horses in England, being a valuable property,
are better fed than English peasants." |191 But, never mind, national wealth is, once again, by its very
nature, identical with misery of the people.

How, then, to heal the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colonies? If men were willing, at a blow, to turn all
the soil from public into private property, they would destroy certainly the root of the evil, but also — the
colonies. The trick is how to kill two birds with one stone. Let the Government put upon the virgin soil
an artificial price, independent of the law of supply and demand, a price that compels the immigrant to
work a long time for wages before he can earn enough money to buy land, and turn himself into an
independent peasant. T201 The fund resulting from the sale of land at a price relatively prohibitory for the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

wage-workers, this fund of money extorted from the wages of labor by violation of the sacred law of
supply and demand, the Government is to employ, on the other hand, in proportion as it grows; to import
have-nothings from Europe into the colonies, and thus keep the wage-labor market full for the capitalists.
Under these circumstances, tout sera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles. This is the
great secret of "systematic colonization". By this plan, Wakefield cries in triumph, "the supply of labor
must be constant and regular, because, first, as no laborer would be able to procure land until he had
worked for money, all immigrant laborers, working for a time for wages and in combination, would
produce capital for the employment of more laborers; secondly, because every laborer who left off
working for wages and became a landowner would, by purchasing land, provide a fund for bringing fresh
labor to the colony." f211 The price of the soil imposed by the State must, of course, be a "sufficient
price" — i.e., so high "as to prevent the laborers from becoming independent landowners until others had
followed to take their place." f221 This "sufficient price for the land" is nothing but a euphemistic
circumlocution for the ransom which the laborer pays to the capitalist for leave to retire from the
wage-labor market to the land. First, he must create for the capitalist "capital", with which the latter may
be able to exploit more laborers; then he must place, at his own expense, a locum tenens on the
labor-market, whom the Government forwards across the sea for the benefit of his old master, the
capitalist.

It is very characteristic that the English Government for years practised this method of "primitive
accumulation" prescribed by Mr. Wakefield expressly for the use of the colonies. The fiasco was, of
course, as complete as that of Sir Robert Peel's Bank Act. The stream of emigration was only diverted
from the English colonies to the Untied States. Meanwhile, the advance of capitalistic production in
Europe, accompanied by increasing Government pressure, has rendered Wakefield's recipe superfluous.
On the one hand, the enormous and ceaseless stream of men, year after year driven upon America, leaves
behind a stationary sediment in the east of the United States, the wave of immigration from Europe
throwing men on the labor-market there more rapidly than the wave of emigration westwards can wash
them away. On the other hand, the American Civil War brought in its train a colossal national debt, and,
with it, pressure of taxes, the rise of the vilest financial aristocracy, the squandering of a huge part of the
public land on speculative companies for the exploitation of railways, mines, &c, in brief, the most rapid
centralization of capital. The great republic has, therefore, ceased to be the promised land for emigrant
laborers. Capitalistic production advances there with giant strides, even though the lowering of wages
and the dependence of the wage-worker are yet far from being brought down to the normal European
level. The shameless lavishing of uncultivated colonial land on aristocrats and capitalists by the
Government, so loudly denounced even by Wakefield, has produced, especially in Australia [23] , in
conjunction with the stream of men that the gold-diggings attract, and with the competition that the
importation of English-commodities causes even to the smallest artisan, an ample "relative surplus
laboring population", so that almost every mail brings the Job's news of a "glut of the Australia
labor-market", and the prostitution in some places flourishes as wantonly as in the London Hey market.

However, we are not concerned here with the conditions of the colonies. The only thing that interests us
is the secret discovered in the new world by the Political Economy of the old world, and proclaimed on
the housetops: that the capitalist mode of production and accumulation, and therefore capitalist private
property, have for their fundamental condition the annihilation of self-earned private property; in other
words, the expropriation of the laborer.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

Footnotes

T 1 1 We treat here of real Colonies, virgins soils, colonized by free immigrants. The United States are,
speaking economically, still only a Colony of Europe. Besides, to this category belong such old
plantations as those in which the abolition of slavery has completely altered the earlier conditions.

[21 Wakefield's few glimpses on the subject of Modern Colonization are fully anticipated by Mirabeau
Pere, the physiocrat, and even much earlier by English economists.

\3] Later, it became a temporary necessity in the international competititve struggle. But, whatever its
motive, the consequences remain the same.

\4] "A negro is a negro. In certain circumstances he becomes a slave. A mule is a machine for spinning
cotton. Only under certain circumstances does it become capital. Outside these circumstances, it is no
more capital than gold is intrinsically money, or sugar is the price of sugar.... Capital is a social relation
of production. It is a historical relation of production." (Karl Marx, "Lohnarbeit und Kapital", N. Rh. Z.,
No.266, April 7, 1849.)

[51 E. G. Wakefield: "England and America", vol.ii. p. 33.

[61 I.e., p. 17.

[71 I.e., vol.i, p.18.

[81 I.e., pp.42, 43, 44.

[9J I.e., vol.ii, p.5.

f 101 "Land, to be an element of colonization, must not only be waste, but it must be public property,
liable to be converted into private property." (I.e., Vol.ii, p. 125.)

[Ill l.c, Vol.1, p.247.

[12J I.e., pp.21, 22.

[131 I.e., Vol.ii, p. 11 6.

T141 I.e., Vol.1, p.131.

[151 I.e., Vol.ii, p.5.

fl61 Merivale, I.e., Vol.ii, pp.235-314 passim. Even the mild, Free-trade, vulgar economist, Molinari,
says: "Dans les colonies ou l'esclavage a ete aboli sans que le travail force se trouvait remplace par une
quantite equivalente de travail libre, on a vu s'operer la contre-partie du fait qui se realise tous les jours
sous nos yeux. On a vu les simples travailleurs exploiter a leur tour les entrepreneurs d'industrie, exiger
d'eux des salaires hors de toute proportion avec la part legitime qui leur revenait dans le produit. Les
planteurs, ne pouvant obtenir de leurs sucres un prix suffisant pour couvrir la hausse de salaire, ont ete
obliges de fournir l'excedant, d'abord sur leurs profits, ensuite sur leurs capitaux memes. Une foule de



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

planteurs ont ete mines de la sorte, d'autres ont ferme leurs ateliers our echapper a une ruine
imminente.... Sans doute, il vaut mieux voir perir des accumulations de capitaux que das generations
d'hommes [how generous Mr. Molinari!]: mais ne vaudrait-il pas mieux que ni les uns ni les autres
perissent? (Molinari, I.e., pp.5 1,52.) Mr. Molinari, Mr. Molinari! What then becomes of the ten
commandments, of Moses and the prophets, of the law of supply and demand, if in Europe the
"entrepreneur" can cut down the laborer's legitimate part, and in the West Indies, the laborer can cut
down the entrepreneur's? And what, if you please, is this "legitimate part", which on your own showing
the capitalist in Europe daily neglects to pay? Over yonder, in the colonies where the laborers are so
"simple" as to "exploit" the capitalist, Mr. Molinari feels a strong itching to set the law of supply and
demand, that works elsewhere automatically, on the right road by means of the police.

ri71 Wakefield, I.e., Vol.11, p.52.

£181 I.e., pp.191, 192.

£191 l.c, Vol.1, p.47, 246.

r201 "C'est, ajoutez-vous, grace a l'appropriation du sol et des capitaux que l'homme, qui n'a que ses bras,
trouve de l'occupation et se fait un revenu... c'est au contraire, grace a l'appropriation individuelle du sol
qu'il se trouve des hommes n'ayant que leurs bras.... Quand vous mettez un homme dans le vide, vous
vous emparez de l'atmosphere. Ainsi faites-vous, quand vous vous emparez du sol.... C'est le mettre dans
le vide de richesses, pour ne la laisser vivre qu'a votre volonte."

(Collins, l.c. t.III, pp.268-71, passim.)

£211 Wakefield, 1-C Vol.11, p. 192.

£22] I.e., p.45.

f231 As soon as Australia became her own law-giver, she passed, of course, laws favorable to the settlers,
but the squandering of the land, already accomplished by the English Government, stands in the way.
"The first and main object at which new Land Act of 1862 aims is to give increased facilities for the
settlement of the people." ("The Land Law of Victoria", by the Hon. C. G. Duffy, Minister of Public
Lands, Lond., 1862.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

The End

Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Full Contents Listing
CAPITAL

COMPLETE TABLE OF CONTENTS



PREFACES AND AFTERWORDS

1867: Dedication to Wilhelm Wolff
1867: Preface to the First German Edition
1872: Preface to the French Edition
1873: Afterword to the Second German Edition
1875: Afterword to the French Edition
1883: Preface to the Third German Edition
1 886: Preface to the English Edition
1890: Preface to the Fourth German Edition
7867: Marx's letter to Engels

Parti

COMMODITIES AND MONEY

Ch. 1: Commodities

Section 1 — The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use- Value and Value (the Substance of Value and the

Magnitude of Value)

Section 2 — The Two-fold Character of the Labour Embodied in Commodities

Section 3 — The Form of Value or Exchange-Value

A. Elementary or Accidental Form of Value

1. The Two Poles of the Expression of Value: Relative Form and Equivalent Form

2. The Relative Form of Value

a. The Nature and Import of this Form

b. Quantitative Determination of Relative Value

3. The Equivalent Form of Value

4. The Elementary Form of Value Considered as a Whole

B. Total or Expanded Form of Value



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (1 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

1. The Expanded Relative Form of Value

2. The Particular Equivalent Form

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded Form of Value

C. The General Form of Value

1. The Altered Character of the Form of Value

2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and of the Equivalent Form

3. Transition from the General Form of Value to the Money-Form

D. The Money-Form

Section 4 — The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof

Ch. 2: Exchange

Ch. 3: Money, or the Circulation of Commodities

Section 1 — The Measure of Values
Section 2 — The Medium of Circulation

A. The Metamorphosis of Commodities

B. The Currency of Money

C. Coin and Symbols of Value

Section 3 — Money

A. Hoarding

B. Means of Payment

C. Universal Money

Part II

THE TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO CAPITAL

Ch. 4: The General Formula for Capital

Ch. 5: Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital

Ch. 6: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power

Part III

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS-VALUE

Ch. 7: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus-Value

Section 1 — The Labour-Process or the Production of Use-Values
Section 2 — The Production of Surplus- Value

Ch. 8: Constant Capital and Variable Capital

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (2 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

Ch. 9: The Rate of Surplus-Value

Section 1 — The Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power

Section 2 — The Representation of the Components of the Value of the Product by Corresponding

Proportional Parts of the Product itself

Section 3 — Senior's "Last Hour"

Section 4 — Surplus-Produce

Ch. 10: The Working-Day

Section 1 — The Limits of the Working-Day

Section 2 — The Greed for Surplus-Labour. Manufacturer and Boyard

Section 3 — Branches of English Industry without Legal Limits to Exploitation

Section 4 — Day and Night Work. The Relay System

Section 5 — The Struggle for a Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Laws for the Extension of the

Working-Day from the Middle of the 14th to the End of the 17th Century

Section 6 — The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Limitation by Law of the

Working-Time. The English Factory Acts, 1833 to 1864

Section 7 — The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Reaction of the English Factory Acts on Other

Countries

Ch. 11: Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value

Part IV

PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE

Ch. 12: The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value

Ch. 13: Co-operation

Ch. 14: Division of Labour and Manufacture

Section 1 — Two-fold Origin of Manufacture

Section 2 — The Detail Labourer and his Implements

Section 3 — The Two Fundamental Forms of Manufacture: Heterogeneous Manufacture, Serial

Manufacture

Section 4 — Division of Labour in Manufacture, and Division of Labour in Society

Section 5 — The Capitalistic Character of Manufacture

Ch. 15: Machinery and Modern Industry

Section 1 — The Development of Machinery

Section 2 — The Value Transferred by Machinery to the Product

Section 3 — The Proximate Effects of Machinery on the Workman

A. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-Power by Capital. The Employment of Women and Children

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (3 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

B. Prolongation of the Working-Day

C. Intensification of Labour

Section 4 — The Factory

Section 5 — The Strife Between Workman and Machine

Section 6 — The Theory of Compensation as Regards the Workpeople Displaced by Machinery

Section 7 — Repulsion and Attraction of Workpeople by the Factory System. Crises in the Cotton Trade

Section 8 — Revolution Effected in Manufacture, Handicrafts, and Domestic Industry by Modern

Industry

A. Overthrow of Co-operation Based on Handicraft and on the Division of Labour

B. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries

C. Modern Manufacture

D. Modern Domestic Industry

E. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. The
Hastening of this Revolution by the Application of the Factory Acts to those Industries

Section 9 — The Factory Acts. Sanitary and Educational Clauses of the same. Their General Extension in

England

Section 10 — Modern Industry and Agriculture

PartV

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE AND OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE

Ch. 16: Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value

Ch. 1 7: Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value

Section 1. Length of the Working-Day and Intensity of Labour Constant. Productiveness of Labour

Variable

Section 2. Working-Day Constant. Productiveness of Labour Constant. Intensity of Labour Variable

Section 3. Productiveness and Intensity of Labour Constant. Length of the Working-Day Variable

Section 4. Simultaneous Variations in the Duration, Productiveness, and Intensity of Labour

A. Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with a Simultaneous Lengthening of the Working-Day

B. Increasing Intensity and Productiveness of Labour with Simultaneous Shortening of the Working-Day

Ch. 18: Various Formula for the Rate of Surplus-Value

Part VI
WAGES

Ch. 19: The Transformation of the Value (and Respective Price) of Labour-Power into Wages
Ch. 20: Time-Wages
Ch. 21: Piece-Wages

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (4 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

Ch. 22: National Differences of Wages

Part VII

THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL

Ch. 23: Simple Reproduction

Ch. 24: Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital

Section I — Capitalist Production on a Progressively Increasing Scale. Transition of the Laws of

Property that Characterise Production of Commodities into Laws of Capitalist Appropriation

Section 2 — Erroneous Conception, by Political Economy, of Reproduction on a Progressively

Increasing Scale

Section 3 — Separation of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue. The Abstinence Theory

Section 4 — Circumstances that, Independently of the Proportional Division of Surplus- Value into

Capital and Revenue, Determine the Amount of Accumulation. Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power.

Productivity of Labour. Growing Difference in Amount Between Capital Employed and Capital

Consumed. Magnitude of Capital Advanced

Section 5 — The So-Called Labour-Fund

Ch. 25: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation

Section I — The Increased Demand for Labour-Power that Accompanies Accumulation, the

Composition of Capital Remaining the same

Section 2 — Relative Diminution of the Variable Part of Capital Simultaneously with the Progress of

Accumulation and of the Concentration that Accompanies it

Section 3 — Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus-Population or Industrial Reserve Army

Section 4 — Different Forms of the Relative Surplus-Population. The General Law of Capitalistic

Accumulation

Section 5 — Illustrations of the General Law of Capitalist Accumulation

A. England from 1846-1866

B. The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class
C The Nomad Population

D. Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working-Class

E. The British Agricultural Proletariat

F. Ireland

Part VIII

PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION

Ch. 26: The Secret of Primitive Accumulation

Ch. 27: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land

Ch. 28: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing down of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (5 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

Wages by Acts of Parliament

Ch. 29: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer

Ch. 30: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial
Capital

Ch. 31: Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist

Ch. 32: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation

Ch. 33: The Modern Theory of Colonisation

Transcribed by Zodiac (1993)

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Capital Volume One- Index

Marx/Engels Works Index I Marxists Internet Archive



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (6 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Marx/Engels Library

Marx/Engels Library




Marx/KnyeJ* Library



(Mi and (E) denote author;
Marx and Engeis respectively



E,in.ks in bold indicate
more than one page




Selected Works

Early I 1840 I 1850 I I860 I 1870 I 1880 I 1890



Search



Selected Works



1846: \A Critique of] German Ideology (M/E)

1847: Principles of Communism (E)

1848: The Communist Manifesto (M/E)

1849: Wage-Labor and Capital (M)

1859: Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (M)



1867: Capital, Volume 1 (M)

1871: The Civil War in France (M)

1875: Critique of the Gotha Program (M)

1880: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (E)

See Also: A Subject Index On Historical Materialism



1840s



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/index.htm (1 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:20:25]



Marx/Engels Library

Pre- 1840: The writings of a young Karl Marx (M)

1841: Hegel on Schelling [Abstract] (E)

1842: Comments on the Latest Prussian Censorship Instruction (M)

1842: On Freedom of the Press (M)

1842-3: News articles from the Rheinische Zeitung (M)

1843: Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right (M)

1844: News articles from the Deutsche-Franzosische Jahrbilcher (M/E)

1844: On The Jewish Question (M)

1844: Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy (E)

1844: Review of Thomas Carlyle's book Past and Present (E)

1844: Critical Notes on "The King of Prussia" (M)

1844: Comments on James Mill's "Elements of Political Economy" (M)

1844: Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts (M)

1844-5: Condition of the Working Class in England (E)

1845: The Holy Family — or a Critique of Critical Critique (M)

1845: Theses on Feuerbach (M)

1845-6: The German Ideology (M/E)

1847: Communist League (M/E)

1847: Principles of Communism (E)

1847: The Poverty of Philosophy (M)

1848: Speech: On The Question of Free Trade (M)

1848: The Communist Manifesto (M/E)

1848: Speech: Communism, Revolution, and a Free Poland (M)

1848: Demands of the Communist Party in Germany (M/E)

1848-9: Articles in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (M/E)

1849: Wage-Labor and Capital (M)



1850s



1850: England's 17th c. Revolution (M/E)

1850: Reviews from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue (M/E)

1850: The Class Struggle in France, 1848 to 1850 (M)

1850: The Peasants' War in Germany (E)

1852: Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (M)

1852: The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (M)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/index.htm (2 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:20:25]



Marx/Engels Library

1852: The Heroes of the Exile! (M/E)

1852: Revelations on the Cologne Communist Trial (M)

1852-61: Articles in the New York Daily Tribune (M)

1853: The Duchess of Sutherland and Slavery (M)

1855: Anti-Church Movement: Demonstration in Hyde Park (M)

1856: Speech at the Anniversary of the People's Paper (M)

1857-60: Articles on the China War for the New York Daily Tribune (M/E)

1857: Introduction to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (M)

1857: Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations (M)

1857: The Grundrisse (M)

1859: A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (M)

1859: Engels review of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (E)



1860s



1861: Articles on the U.S. Civil War (M)

1861-3: Theories of Surplus Value , Vol. 1 (M)

1861-3: Theories of Surplus Value, Vol. 2 (M)

1861-3: Theories of Surplus Value, Vol. 3 (M)

1863: Proclamation on Poland (M)

1864: International Workingmen's Association (M/E)

1865: The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party (E)

1865: Address: Value, Price, and Profit (M)

1866: What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland? (E)

1867: Capital, Volume 1 (M)

1868: Synopsis of Marx's Capital (E)

1868-72: The conflict with Bakunin (M/E)

1869: The Abolition of Landed Property (M)



1870s



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/index.htm (3 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:20:25]



Marx/Engels Library



1870: The General Council to the Federal Council of French Switzerland (M)

1871: Jenny Marx's Articles on Ireland (Jenny Marx)

1871: New York World Interview with Marx

1871: Resolution of the London Conference on Working-Class Political Action (M/E)

1871: The Civil War in France (M)

1871: Escape from Post-Commune France ! (Jenny Marx)

1872: The Alleged Splits in the International (M/E)

1872: The Hague Congress of the International Workingmen's Association

1872: Report to the Hague Congress (M)

1872: On Authority (E)

1873: The Housing Question (E)

1874: Political Indifferentism (M)

1875: Conspectus of Bakunin's Book Statism and Anarchy (M)

1875: For Poland (M/E)

1875: Critique of the Gotha Program (M)

1876: Wilhelm Wolff biography (E)

1876: The Part Played by Labour in the Transition From Ape to Man (E)

1877: Anti-Duhring (E)

1879: Chicago Tribune Interview with Marx

1879: A letter to British Princess Victoria about Karl Marx

1879: Reformists in Germany's Social-Democratic party (M/E)



1880s



1880: Marginal Notes on Adolph Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen okonomie (M)

1880: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (E)

1880: A Workers' Inquiry (M)

1880: Introduction to the Programme of the French Workers' Party (M)

1881: Articles for The Labour Standard (E)

1882: Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity (E)

1883: The Dialectics of Nature (E)

1883: Articles on Karl Marx's Death (E)

1884: The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (E)

1885: Capital, volume 2 (M)

1885: History of the Communist League (E)
INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY
AND ITS FUTURE




J



The Unabomber's Manifesto



Aiui-Authorttartans Anonymous Po Box 11331 Eugene.Oregon 97440 U$.



Anti-Authoritarians AiioiiMiwus

TO Box 11331
Eugene, Oregon 9"-l4l)



Introduction

1. The Industrial Revolution and its consequences have been a disaster Tor the human race. They

have greatly increased the life-expectancy of those of us who live in "advanced" countries,
but they hitvc destabilized society, have made life unfulfilling, have subjected human beings
to indignities, have led to widespread psychological suffering (in the Third World to physical
suffering as well) and have inflicted severe damage on the natural world. The continued
development of technology will worsen the situation. Il will certainly subject human beings
lo greater indignities and inflict greater damage on the natural world, it will probably lead to
greater social disruption and psychological suffering, and it may lead to increased physical
suffering even in "advanced" countries.

2. The industrial-technological system may survive or it may break down. If it survives, it may

eventually achieve a low level of physical and psychological suffering, but only after passing
through a long and very painful period of adjustment and only at the cost of permanently
reducing human beings and many other living organisms lo engineered products and mere
cogs in the social machine. Furthermore, if the system survives, the consequences will be
inevitable; There is no way of reforming or modifying the system so as lo prevent it from
depriving people of dignity and autonomy.

3. If (lie system breaks down the consequences will still be very painful. But the bigger the
system grows the more disastrous the results of its breakdown will be, so if it is to break down
il had best break down sooner rather than later.

4. We therefore advocate a revolution against ihe industrial system. This revolution may or may

not make use of violence: il may he sudden or il may be a relatively gradual process spanning
a few decades. We can'l predict any of that. Bui we do outline in n very general way the
measures that those who hale the industrial system should take in order to prepare the way for
a revolution against that form or society. This is not lo be a political revolution. Its object will
be lo overt h ro w not governments but the economic and technological basis of Ihe present
society.

5. In this mliclc we give atlcnlion to only some of ihe negative developments Hurt have grown
out of llie industrial-technological system. Other such developments we mention only briefly
or ignore altogether. This docs not mean that we regard these other developments as unimpor-
tant, For practical reasons we have lo confine our discussion lo areas thai have received
insufficient public attention or in which we have something new lo say. For example, since
there arc well-developed environmental and wilderness movements, we have written very
little about environmental degradation or the destruction of wild nature, even though we con-
sider these lo be highly important. , - •



The Psychology
Of Modern Leftism

6. Almost everyone will agree that we live in a deeply troubled society. One of the most wide-

spread manifestations of thecraziness of our world is leftism, so a discussion of the psychol-
ogy of leftism can serve as an introduction to the discussion of ihe problems of modern soci-
ety in general.

7. But what is leftism? During the first half of ihe 20th ceolury leftism could have been practi-
cally identified with socialism. Today the movement is fragmented and il is not clear who can
properly be called a leftist. When we speak of leftists in this article we have in mind mainly
socialists, collectivism, "politically correct" types, feminists, gay and disability activists, ani-
mal rights activists and the like. But not everyone who is associated with one of these move- ,
mcnls is a leftist. What we are trying to gel at in discussing leftism is not so much a movement
or an ideology as a psychological type, Of rather a collection of related types. Thus, what we
mean by "leftism" will emerge more clearly in the course of our discussion of leftist psychol-
ogy (Also, see paragraphs 227-230).

8. Even so, our conception of leftism will remain a good deal less clear than we would wish, but
there doesn't seem lo be any remedy for this. All we arc trying to do is indicate in a rough and
approximate way the two psychological tendencies that wc believe arc the maiu driving force



of modern leflism. We by no incnns claim to be Idling the whole truth about leftist psychol-
ogy. Also.our discussion is meant to apply to modern leftism only. We leave open the ques-
tion of the extent lo which our discussion could be applied (o the leftists of (he 1 9lh and early
20th century.

9. The two psychological tendencies that underlie modern leftism wc call "feelings of inferior-
' it y" and "ovcrsocinlizaiion." Peelings of inferiority arc characteristic of modern leftism as a

whole, while ovcrsocialization is characteristic only of a certain segment of modern leftism;
but this segment is highly influential.

Feelings Of Inferiority

10. By "feelings of inferiority" we mean not only inferiority feelings in the strictest sense but a
whole spectrum of related traits: low self-esteem, feelings of powerlessness, depressive ten-
dencies, defeatism, guilt, self-hatred, etc. We argue that modem leftists tend to have such
feelings (possibly more or less repressed) and that these feelings are decisive in determining
the direction of modern leftism.

1 1. When someone interprets as derogatory almost anything that is said about him (or about
groups witli whom be identifies) wc conclude that he has Inferiority feelings or low self-
esteem. This tendency is pronounced among minority rights advocates, whether or not they
belong to the minority groups whose rights they defend. They arc hypersensitive about the
words used to designate minorities. The terms "negro," "oriental," "handicapped" or "cluck"
for an African, an Asian, a disabled person or a woman originally had no derogatory connota-
tion. "Broad" and "chick" were merely the feminine equivalents of "guy," "dude" or "fel-
low." The negative connotations have been attached in these terms by the activists them-
selves. Some animal rights advocates have gone so far us to reject the word "pel" and insist on
its replacement by "animal companion." Leftist anthropologists go to great lengths to avoid
saying anything about primitive peoples that could conceivably be interpreted as negative.
They want to replace the word "primitive" by "nonl iterate." They seem almost pmaunid about
anything that might suggest that any primitive culture is inferior to our own. (Wc do not mean
to imply that primitive cultures are inferior to ours. Wc merely point out the hypersensitivity
of leftist anthropologists.)

12. Those who arc most sensitive about "politically incorrect" terminology arc not the average
black ghcllo-dwcllcr, Asian immigrant, abused woman or disabled person, but a minority of
activists, many of whom do not even belong to any "oppressed" group but come from privi-
leged strata of society. Political correctness has its stronghold among university professors,
who have secure employment with comfortable salaries, and the majority of whom arc het-
erosexual, white males from middle-class families.

13. Many leftists have an intense identification with the problems of groups that have an image
of being weak (women), defeated (American Indians), repellent (homosexuals), or otherwise
inferior. The leftists themselves feel that these groups arc inferior. They would never admit it
to themselves that they have such feelings, but it is precisely because they do see these groups
as inferior that they identify with their problems, (Wc do not suggest that women, Indians,
etc., are inferior; we are only making a point about leftist psychology).

14. Feminists are desperately anxious to prove that women are M strong as capable as men.
Clearly they are nagged by a fear that women may not be as strong and as capable as men.

15. Leftists tend to hate anything that has an image of being strong, good and successful. They
hate America, they hate Western civilization, they hale white mates, they hate rationality. The
reasons that leftists give for haling the West, etc. clearly do not correspond with their real
motives. They say they hate the West because it is warlike, imperialistic, sexist, ethnocentric
and so forth, but where these same faults appear in socialist countries or in primitive cultures,
the leftist Finds excuses for them, or at best he grudgingly admits that they exist; whereas lie
enthusiastically points out (and often greatly exaggerates) these faults where they appear in
Western civilization. Thus it is clear that these faults are not the leftist's real motive for hating
America and the West, lie hales America ami the West because I hey are strong and successful

16. Words like "self-confidence," "self-reliance," "initiative", "enterprise," "optimism," clc. play
litlle role in the liberal and leftist vocabulary. The leftist is anti-individualistic, pro-collcctiv-






229. The leftist is oriented toward large scale collectivism. He emphasizes the duly of the indi-
vidual to serve society and the duly of society to take care of the individual. He has a negative
attitude toward individualism. He often takes a moralistic tone. Me lends to be for gun con-
trol, ftu sex education and other psychologically "enlightened** educational methods, lor plan-
ning, for affirmative action, for multictiltiiraiism. He tends to identify with victims. He tends
to be against competition and against violence, but he often finds excuses for those leftists
who do commit violence. He is fond of using the common catch-phrases of the left like
"racism, ""sexism, " "homophobia, " "capitalism," "imperialism," "neocolonialism " "geno-
cide," "social change," "social justice," "social responsibility." Maybe the best diagnostic ,
Irait of the leftist is his tendency lo sympathize with the following movements: feminism, gay
rights, ethnic rights, disability rights, animal rights, and political correctness. Anyone who
strongly sympathizes with all of these movements is almost certainly a leftist.'*

230. The more dangerous leftists, that is. those who are most power hungry, are often character-
ized by arrogance or by a dogmatic approach to ideology. However, the most dangerous
leftists of all may be certain oversocialized types who avoid irritating displays of aggressive-
ness and refrain from advertising their leftism, but work quietly and unobtrusively to promote
collcclivisl values, "enlightened" psychological techniques for socializing children, depen-
dence of the individual on the system, and so forth, These crypto- Icliisls (as wc may call
them) approximate certain bourgeois types as far as practical action is concerned, but differ
from them in psychology, ideology and motivation. The ordinary bourgeois tries lo bring
people under control of the system in order to protect his way of life, or he docs so simply
because his attitudes arc conventional. The crypto- leftist tries to bring people under control of
the system because he is a True Believer in a collcctivistic ideology. The crypto- leftist is
differentiated from the average leftist of the oversocialized type by the fact that his rebellious
impulse is weaker and he is more securely socialized. He is differentiated brim the ordinary
well-socialized bourgeois by the fact that ihcrc is some deep lack within him thai makes it
necessary for him to devote himself to a cause and Immerse Mntsetf in a collectivity. And
may he his (well-sublimated) drive fur power is stronger than that of the average bourgeois.



FINAL NOTE '



231 . Throughout this article we've made imprecise statements and statements that ought to have
had all sorts of qualifications and reservations attached to them; and some of our statements
may he flatly false. Lack of sufficient in formation and the need for brevity made it impossible
for us to fomulale our assertions more precisely or add all the necessary qualifications. And of
course in a discussion of this kind one must rely heavily on intuitive judgment, and that can
sometimes be wrong. So we don't claim that this article expresses more than a crude approxi-
mation to the truth.

232. AH the same wc arc reasonably confident that the general outlines of the picture we have
painted here arc roughly correct. Wc have portrayed leftism in its modern form as a phenom-
enon peculiar to our time and as a symptom of the disruption of the power process. But we
might possibly be wrong about this. Oversocialized types who try to satisfy their drive for
power by imposing their morality on everyone have certainly been around for a long time.
But wc think that the decisive role played by feelings of inferiority, low self-esteem, power-
lessness. identification with victims by people who are not themselves victims, is a peculiar-
ity of modern leftism. Identification with victims by people not themselves victims can be
seen lo some extent in 19th century leftism and early Christianity but as far as we can make
out, symptoms of low self-esteem, etc., were not nearly so evident in these movements, or in
any other movements, as they are in modem leftism. But we are not in a position to assert
confidently that no such movements have existed prior lo modern leftism. This is a significant
question to which historians ought to give their attention.



36. (Paragraph 229) tt is important In understand that we mean lameone who sympathize* with these movements
01 they exist today in our society One wlm believes that women, homosexuals, etc., shonUI have equal lights is
not necessarily a leftist. The feminist, gay rights, etc., movements thai exist in our society have the particular
ideological tone that characiemes leftism, and if one believes, for example, that women should have equal
tights it tines not necessarily fallow that one must sympathize with the feminist movement as it exists today.



is in die struggle lo impose their morality on everyone,

222. Leftists, especially lliuse of I lie ovcrsocinli/nl type, ate 'line Believers in llie sense of line
Holler's book. "The True Believer." Hut nol till 'line Believers are of lite same psychological
lypc as leftists. Presumably a liuc-belicving uazi, lor instance is very different psychologi-
cally from a iruc-believing Icftisl. Because of their capacity for single-minded devotion lo I
cause, True Believers arc a useful, perhaps a necessary, ingredient ninny revolutionary move-
ment. This presents a problem with which wc musl admit we don'l know how to deal. We
aren't sure how to harness lite energies of llie True Believer lo h revolution against technol-
ogy. Al present all we can say is thai no True Believer will make a safe recruit lo llie revolu-
tion unless his commitment is exclusively lo the destruction of technology. If he is committed
also lo another ideal, he may want to use technology as a lool for pursuing thai olhcr ideal (sec
paragraphs 220. 22 1 ).

223. Some readers may say, "This sluffuboui leftism is a lot of crap. I know John and June who
are lefiish types and (hey don'l have all these lotalitarian Icndcncics." Il's quite true lhat many
leftists, possibly even a numerical majority, are decenl people who sincerely believe in toler-
aiing others' values (up to a point) and wouldn't want lo use high-handed methods lo reach
iheir social goals. Our remarks about leftism are nol meant to apply to every individual lefiisi
but to describe ihe general character of leftism as a movement. And the general character or a
movement is not necessarily determined by the numerical proportions of the various kinds or
|ieople involved in Ihe movement.

224. The people who rise lo positions of power in leftist ntovcincnls lend to be leftists of ihe
most power-hungry lypc because power-hungry people arc those who si rive battiest lo gel
into positions of power. Once ihe power-hungry types have captured conlrol of ihe move-
ment, ihere arc many leftists of a genllcr breed who inwardly disapprove of many of the
actions of ihe lenders, but cannot bring themselves lo oppose them. They need their faith in
Ihe movement, and because they cannol give up litis failh ihcy go along with Ihe lenders,
True, SOttH leftists do have the guls lo oppose Ihe totalitarian tendencies thai emerge, hut Ihey
generally lose, because lite power-hungry types ate bciler oitiinizcd, aic more ruthless and
Machiavellian and have laken care to build themselves a strong power base.

225. These phenomena appeared clearly in Russia and olhcr countries lli.il were taken over by
leftists. Similarly, before Ihe breakdown of communism in the USSR, lefiish types in the
West would seldom criticize llial country. If prodded Ihcy would admil (hut llie UJj.SK did
many wrong tilings, but then ihey would try lo find excuses for l he communists and begin
talking about die faults of the West. They alwnys opposed Western military resistance to
communist aggression, Leftish lypes all over the world vigorously protested ihe U.S.! military
action in Vielnam, but when the USSR invaded Afghanistan Ihcy did nothing. Not thai ihey
approved of ihe Soviet actions; bul because of their leftist faith, they just couldn't bear lo put
themselves in opposition lo communism. Today, in those or our universities where "political
correctness" has become dominant, there are probably many leftist types who privately dis-
approve of the suppression of academic freedom, but ihcy go along with il anyway.^

226. Thus (he fact that many individual leftists are personally mild and fairly tolerant people by
no means prevents leftism as a whole form having a totalitarian tendency.

227. Our discussion of leftism has a serious weakness. It is still far from clear whal we mean by
the word "leftist." There doesn't seem to be much we can do about this. Today leftism is
fragmented into a whole spectrum of aclivisl movements. Yet not all activist movements arc
leftist, and some activist movements (e.g.., radical cnvironmenlalism) seem to include boih
personalities of Ihe leftist type and personalities of thoroughly un-lcftisl types who ought lo
know better than lo collaborate wilh leftists. Varieties of leftists fade out gradually inlo vari-
eties of non-leftists and we ourselves would often be hnrd-presscd to decide whether a given
individual is or is not a leftist. To the extent thai il is defined at all, our conception of leftism
is defined by the discussion of it lhat we have given in this article, and we can pnly advise Ihe
reader to use his own judgment in deciding who is a leftist.

228. But il will be helpful lo list some criteria for diagnosing leftism. These criteria cannot be
applied in a cut and dried manner. Some individuals may meet some of the criteria without
being leftists, some leftists may not mcel any of the crilcrin. Again, you just have lo use your
judgment.



ist. I Ic wants society lo solve everyone's needs for litem, take enre of them. He is not the soil
of pci son who has an inner sense ol confidence in his own ability to solve his own problems
and satisfy his own needs, flic leftist is anlagonislic to ihe concept of competition because,
deep inside, he feels like a loser.

17. Art forms lhat appeal to modern leftist intellectuals tend to focus on sordiilness. defeat and
despair, or else they lake an orgiastic tone, throwing off rational control as if there were no
hope of accomplishing anything through rational calculation and all that was lcfl\vas tp tin-'
mcrsc oneself in llie sensations of llie moment.

18. Modem leftist philosophers (end lo dismiss reason, science, objective reality and to insist
lhat everything is culturally relative. It is (rue that one can ask serious questions about Ihe
foundations of scientific knowledge and about how, if at all, ihe concept of objective reality
can be defined. Bul it is obvious that modern leftist philosophers arc not simply cool-headed
logicians systematically analyzing the foundations of knowledge. Ihcy arc deeply involved
emotionally in their attack on n nth and reality. They attack these concepts because of their
own psychological needs. For one thing, iheir attack is an outlet for hostility, and, to ihe
extent that it is successful, it satisfies the drive for power. More importantly, the leftist hates
science and rationality because they classify certain beliefs as true (i.e., successful, superior)
and other beliefs as false (i.e. failed, inferior). The leftist's feelings of inferiority run so deep
that he cannot tolerate any classification of some things as successful or superior and other
ihings as failed or inferior. This also underlies the rejection by many leftists of the concept of
menial illness and of ihe utility of IQ tests. Leftists arc antagonistic lo genetic explanations of
human abilities or behavior because such explanations tend to make some persons appear
superior or inferior lo others. Leftists prefer lo give society ihe credit or blame for an individual's
ability or lack of it. Thus if a person is "inferior" it is nol his fault, but society's, because he
has not been brought up properly.

19. The leftist is nol typically the kind of person whose feelings of inferiority make him a brng-
garl, an egotist, a bully, a self- pro molcr, a ruthless competitor. This kind of person has not
wholly lost failh in himself, lie has a deficit in his sense of power and self-worth, bul he can
Mill conceive of himself as having the capacity lo be strong, and his efforts to make himself
strong produce his unpleasant behavior. 1 But the lefiisi is too far gone for that. His feelings of
Inferiority arc so ingrained that he cannot conceive of himself ns individually strong and
v ul liable, llcncc the collectivism of the leftist. He can feci strong only ns a member of a large
organization or a mass movement wilh which he identifies himself.

20. Notice the masochistic tendency of leftist tactics, Leftists protest by lying down in front of
vehicles, they intentionally provoke police or racists to abuse them, etc. These tactics may
often be effective, but many leftists use (hem nol as a means lo an end but because they prefer
masochistic tactics. Self-halted is a leftist trait.

21. Lcftisls may claim lhat their activism is motivated by compassion or by moral principle, and
moral principle does play a role for the Icftisl of the ovcrsocialized type. But compassion and
moral principle cannot be the main motives for leftist activism. Hostility is loo promincul a
component of leftist behavior; so is the drive for power. Moreover, much leftist bchnvior is
not rationally calculated lo be of benefit lo the people whom the leftists claim to be trying lo
help. For example, tT one believes lhat affirmative action is good Tor black people, does it
make sense lo demand affirmative action in hostile or dogmatic terms? Obviously il would be
more productive to lake n diplomatic and conciliatory approach llml would make al Icasl
verbal and symbolic concessions to while people who think thai affirmative action discrimi-
nates against llicm, But lefiisi activists do nol lake such an approach because il would not
satisfy their emotional needs. Helping black people is not their real goal. Instead, race prob-
lems serve as an excuse for ihem to express Iheir own hostility and frustrated need for power.
In doing so they actually harm black people, because the activists' hostile attitude toward the
while majority tends lo intensify race hatred.

22. If our society had no social problems at all, the leftists would have to invent problems in
order lo provide themselves with an excuse for making a fuss.

 We are asserting that all, or even most, bullies and ruthless competitors suffer from feelings
ofinferiurity, <






23. We emphasize that tlie foregoing does not pretend to be an accurate description of everyone
who might be considered a leftist. It is only a rough indication of a general tendency of
leftism.



OVERSOCIALIZATION

24. Psychologists use the term "socialization" to designate the process by which children arc
trained to think and act as society demands. A person is said to be well socialized if he be-
lieves in and obeys the moral code of his society and fits in well as a functioning part of that
society. It may seem senseless to say that many leftists are over-socialized, since the leftist is
perceived as a rebel. Nevertheless, the position can be defended. Many leftists are not such
rebels as they seem.
25. The moral code of our society is so demanding that no one can think, feci and act in a
completely moral way. For example, wc are not supposed to hate anyone, yet almost every-
one hates somebody nt some lime or other, whether he admits H to himself or not. Some
people are so highly socialized thai the attempt to think, feel and act morally imposes a severe
burden on them. In order to avoid feelings of guilt, they continually have to deceive them-
selves about their own motives and find moral explanations for feelings and actions that in
reality have a non-moral origin. We use the term "oversocialized" to describe such people. 1

26. Ovcrsocializalion can lend to low self-esteem, a sense of powerlcssness, defeatism, guilt, etc.
One of the most important means by which our society socializes children is by making them
feci ashamed of behavior or speech that is contrary to society's expectations. If this is over-
done, or if a particular child is especially susceptible to such feelings, he ends by feeling
ashamed of himself. Moreover the thought and the behavior of the ovcrsocializcd person arc
more restricted by society's expectations than are those of the lightly socialized person. The
majority of people engage in a significant amount of naughty behavior. They lie, they commit
petty thefts, they break traffic laws, they goof off at work, they hale someone, they say spite-
ful tilings or they use some underhanded trick to get ahead olthc other guy. The ovei socialized
person cannot do these things, or if he docs do them he generates in himscirn sense of shame
and self-hatred. The ovcrsocializcd person cannot even experience, without guilt, thoughts or
feelings that are contrary to the accepted morality; he cannot think "unclean" ihoughls.And
socialization is not just a matter of morality; wc are socialized to confirm to many norms of
behavior that do not fall under the heading of morality. Thus the ovcrsocializcd person is kept
on a psychological leash and spends his life running on rails that society has laid down for
him. In many oversocializcd people this results in a sense of constraint and powerlcssness
that can be a severe hardship. We suggest that ovcrsocializalion is among the more serious
cruelties that human beings inflict on one another,

27. Wc argue that a very important and influential segment of the modern left is oversocializcd
and that their ovcrsocializalion is of great importance in determining the direction of modem
leftism. Leftists of the oversocialized type tend to be intellectuals or members of the upper-
middle class. Notice that university intellectuals 1 constitute the most highly socialized seg-
ment or our society and also the most left-wing segment.

28. The leftist of the oversocializcd type tries to gel off bis psychological leash and assert his
autonomy by rebelling. But usually lie is nol strong enough to rebel against the most basic
values of society. Generally speaking, the goals of today's leftists arc not in conflict 1 with the
accepted morality. On the contrary, the left lakes an accepted moral principle, adopts it as its
own, and then accuses mainstream society of violating that principle. Examples: racial equal-
ity, equality of the sexes, helping poor people, jicacc as opposed to war, nonviolence gener-
ally, freedom of expression, kindness to animals. More fundamentally, the duly oflhe indi-
vidual to serve society and the duty of society to take care of the individual. All these have
been deeply rooted values of our society (oral least of its middle and uppei classes* Tor a long
lime. These values are explicitly or implicitly expressed or presupposed in most of the inate-



2. (Paragraph 25) During the Victorian period many oversocialized people suffered from Striata psychologi-
cal problems at a result of repressing or trying to repress llteir sexual feelings, Freud apparently based his
theories on people of this type. Today the focus of socialization has shifted f torn sex to aggression.

3. (Paragraph 27J Not necessarily including specialists in engineering "hard" sciences.



dom, but today, in those universities where leftists have become dominant, they have shown
themselves ready to lake away from everyone else's academic freedom. (This is "political
correctness .") The same will happen with leftists and technology: They will use it to oppress
everyone else if they ever gel it under their own control.

217. In earlier revolutions, leftists oflhe most power-hungry type, repeatedly, have first cooper-
ated with non-leftist revolutionaries, as well as with leftists of a more libertarian inclination,
and later have double-crossed them to seize power for themselves. Robespierre did this in the
French Revolution, the Bolsheviks did it in the Russian Revolution, the communists did it in
Spain in 1938 and Castro and his followers did it in Cuba. Given the past history of leftism, it
would be utterly foolish for non-leftist revolutionaries today to collaborate with leftists.

218. Various thinkers have pointed out that leftism is a kind of religion. Leftism is nol a religion
in the strict sense because leftist doctrine docs not postulate the existence of any supernatural
hcing. But for the leftist, leftism plays a psychological role much like that which religion
plays for some people. The leftist needs to believe in leftism; it plays a vital role in his psy-
chological economy. His beliefs are not ensily modified by logic or facts. Me has a deep
conviction that leftism is morally Right with a capital R. and thai he has not only a right but a
duty 10 impose leftist morality on everyone. (1 lowcvcr, many oflhe people wc arc referring lo
as "leftists" do not think of themselves as leftists and would nol describe their system of
beliefs as leftism. We use the term "leftism" because we don't know of any belter words to
designate the spectrum of related creeds that includes the feminist, gay rights, pohticaf cor-
rectness, clc, movements, and because these movements have a strong affinity with the old
left. Sec paragraphs 227-230.)

219. Leftism is totalitarian force. Wherever leftism is in a position of power it tends to invade
every private corner and force every thought into a leftist mold. In pari this is because oflhe
quasi-religious character of leftism; everything contrary lo leftists beliefs represents Sin. More
i in porl ant ly. leftism is a totalitarian force because oflhe leftists' drive for power, The lcfti.il
seeks to satisfy his need for power through identification with n social movement and he tries
lo go through the power process by helping lo pursue and attain the goals of the movement
(see paragraph 83). But no mailer how far the movement has gone in attaining its goals the
leftist is never satisfied, because his activism is a surrogate activity (see paragraph 41). That
is, the leftist's real motive is not to allntn the ostensible goals of leftism; in reality he is
motivated by the sense of power he gets from struggling for and then reaching a social goal."
Consequently I he leftist is never satisfied with the goals he has already attained; his need for
the power process leads him always lo pursue some new goal. The leftist wants equal oppor-
tunities for minorities. When that is attained he instsls on statistical equality of achievement
by minorities. And as long as anyone harbors in some comer of his mind a negative attitude
toward some minority, the leftist has to reeducate him. And ethnic minorities are not enough;
no one can be allowed to have a negative altitude toward homosexuals, disabled people, fat
people, old people, ugly people, and on and on and on. It's not enough that the public should
be informed about the hazards of smoking; a warning has to be stamped on every package of
cigarcltcs. Then cigarette advertising has lo be restricted if not banned. The activists will
never be satisfied until lobacco is outlawed, and after that it will be alcohol, then junk food,
etc. Activists have fought gross child abuse, which is reasonable. But now Ihey want to stop
all spanking, When they have done that they will want to ban something else they consider
unwholesome, then another thing and then another. They will never be satisfied until they
have complete control over all child rearing practices. And then they will move on lo another cause.

220. Suppose you asked leftists to make a list or ALL the things thai were wrong with society,
and then suppose you instituted every social change that they demanded. It is safe lo say thai
within a couple of years the majority of leftists would find something new lo complain about,
some new social "evil" lo correct because, once again, the leftist is motivated less by distress
at society's ills than by Ihc need lo satisfy his drive for power by imposing his solutions on society.

221. Because of the restrictions placed on ihcir thoughts and behavior by their high level of
socialization, many leftists of the oversocialized lype cannot pursue power in the ways that
olhcr people do. For them the drive for power has only one morally acceptable outlet, and (tint

,\5. (Paragraph 219) Matty leftists ate motivated also by hostility, but the hostility probably results in part
from a frustrated need for power.



would be few and scattered. An industrial society, if built from scratch without outside help,
cim only be built in a series of stages: You need tools to make tools to make tools to make
tools ... . A long process of economic development and progress in social organization is
required. And, even in the absence of an ideology opposed to technology, there is no reason to
believe that anyone would be interested in rebuilding industrial society. The enthusiasm for
"progress" is a phenomenon particular to the modern form of society, and it seems not to have
existed prior to the 17th century or thereabouts.

211. In the laic Middle Ages there were four main civilizations that were about equally "ad-
vanced": Europe, the Islamic world, India, and the Far Fast (China, Japan, Korea). Three of
those civilizations remained more or less stable, and only Europe became dynamic. No one
knows why Europe became dynamic at (hat lime; historians have their thcoiics hut these arc
only speculation. At any rale, it is clear that rapid development toward a technological form
of society occurs only under special conditions. So there is no mason to assume thai long-
lasting technological regression cannot he brought about.

212. Would society eventually develop again toward an indusliiul-lcchtiological form? Maybe.
hut there is no use in worrying about it, since wc can't predict or control events 500 or 1,000
years in the future. Those problems must be dealt with by the people who will live al that lime.

THE DANGER OF LEFTISM

213. Because of their need for rebellion and for membership in a movement, leftists or persons
or similar psychological type are often unattracled to a rebellious or activist movement whose
goals and membership arc not initially leftist. The resulting influx of leftish types can easily
turn a non-leftist movement into a leftist one, so (hat leftist goals replace or distort the original
goals of the movement.

214. To avoid this, a movement that exalts nature and opposes technology must take a resolutely
anti-leftist stance and must avoid all collaboration with leftists. Leftism is in the long tun
inconsistent with wild nature, with human freedom and with Ihc elimination of modern tech-
nology. Left ism is collectivism it seeks to bind together the ciltirc world (both nature and the
human race) into a unified whole. But this implies management of nature and of human life
by organized society, and il requires advanced technology. You can't have a united world
without rapid transportation and communication, you can't make all people love one another
without sophisticated psychological techniques, you can't have a "planned society" without
the necessary technological base. Above all, leftism is driven by the need for power, and the
leftist seeks power on a collective basis, through identification with a mass movement or an
organization. Leftism is unlikely ever to give up technology, because technology is too valu-
able a source of collective power.

215. The anarchist" too seeks power, but he seeks it on an individual or small-group basis; he
wants individuals and small groups to be able to control the circumstances of their own lives.
He opposes technology because it makes small groups dependent on large organizations.

216. Some leftists may seem to oppose technology, but they will oppose il only so long as they
are outsiders and the technological system is controlled by non-leftists, [f leftism ever be-
comes dominant in society, so that the technological system becomes a tool in the hands of
leftists, they will enthusiastically use it and promote its growth. In doing this they 1 will be
repealing a pattern that leftism has shown again and again in the past. When the Bolsheviks in
Russia were outsiders, they vigorously opposed censorship and the secret police, they advo-
cated scir- determination for ethnic minorities, and so forth; hut as soon as they crime into
power themselves, they imposed a lighter censorship and crealed a more ruthless secret po-
lice than any that had existed under the Isars, and they oppressed ethnic minorities at least as
much as the tsars had done. In the United Stales, a couple of decades ago when leftists were a
minority in our universities, leftist professors were vigorous proponents of academic frcc-



34. (Paragraph 215) Tltis statement refers to our particular brand of anarchism. A wide vmiety of social
altitudes have been called "anarchist, " and it may be that many who consider themselves anatchists would
not accept our statement of paragraph 215. It should be noted, by the way, dial there is a nonviolent
anarvhist movement whose members probably would nut accept FCas anarchist and certainly would not
appiave ofFC's violent methods.



rial presented to us by the mainstream communications media and the educational system.
Leftists, es|jccially those of the ovcrsocialized type, usually do not rebel against these prin-
ciples but justify their hostility to society by claiming (with some degree of truth) that society
is not living up to these principles.

29. Here is an illustration of the way in which theoversocialized leftist shows his real attachment
to the conventional altitudes of our society while pretending to be in rebellion against it.
Many leftists push fur affirmative action, for moving black people into high-prestige jobs, for
improved education in black schools and more money for such schools; the wny of life of the
black "underclass" they regard as a social disgrace. They want to integrate the black man into
the system, make him a business executive, a lawyer, a scientist just like upper-middlc-class
while people. The leftists will reply flint ihc hist thing Ihcy want is to make the block man into
a copy of Ihc while man; instead, they want to preserve African Amcricnn culture. Bui in what
does this preservation of African American culture consist"/ It can hardly consist in anything
mote than caling black-style food, listening to black-style music, wearing black-style cloth-
ing and going to a black-style church or mosque. In other words, il can express itself only in
superficial mailers. In all essential respects more leftists of the ovcrsocialized type want to
make ihc black man conform to while, middle-class ideals. They want to make him s'tudy
technical subjects, become an executive or a scientist, spend his life climbing the status lad-
der to prove that black people nre as good as while. They want to make black fathers "respon-
sible." They want black gangs to become nonviolent, etc. But these are exactly the values of
the industrial-technological system. The system couldn't care less what kind of music a man
listens lo, what kind of clothes he wears or what religion he believes in as long as he studies
in school, holds a respectable job, climbs the status ladder, is a "responsible" parent, is non-
violent and so forth. In effect, however much he may deny it, the ovcrsocialized leftist wants
lo integrate the black man into the system and make him adopt its values.

30. We certainly do not claim that leftists, even of theoversocialized type, never rebel against the
Imulanicntal values of our society. Clearly they sometimes do, Some ovci socialized leftists
have gone so far as lo rebel against one of modern society's most iinpot Hint principles by
engaging in physical violence. By their own account, violence is for them a form of "libera-
tion." In other words, by committing violence they break through the psychological restraints
that have been trained into them. Because ihey are oversocialized these restraints have been
more confining for them than for others; hence their need lo break free of them. Bui (hey
usually justify their rebellion in terms of mainstream values. If they engage in violence they
claim to be fighting against racism or the like.

3 1 . We realize (hat many objections could be raised lo Ihc foregoing thumb-nail sketch of leftist
psychology. The teal situation is complex, and anything like a complete description of it
would lake several volumes even if the necessary data were available. We claim only to have
indicated very roughly the two most important tendencies in the psychology of modern leftism.

32. The problems of the leftist are indicative of the problems of our society as a whole. Low self-
esteem, depressive tendencies and defeatism arc not restricted to the left. Though they are
especially noticeable in the left, they arc widespread in our society. And today's society ivies
lo socialize us to a greater extent than any previous society. We are even told by experts how
lo eal, how lo exercise, how lo make love, how lo raise our kids and so forth.



4. (Paragraph 28) There are many individuals of the middle and upper classes who resist some of these values,
but usually their resistance is more or less covert. Such resistance appears in the mass media only to a
very limited extent. The main thiust of propaganda in our society is in favor of the stated values. The main
reasons why these values have become, so to speak, the official values of our society is that they are useful
to the industrial system. Violence is discouraged because it disrupts the functioning of the system. Racism
is discouraged because ethnic conflicts also disrupt the system, and discrimination wastes the talent of
minority- group members who could be useful to die system. Poverty must be "cured" because the underclass
rouses pirdilems far die system and contact with the underclass lowers the moral of the other classes.
Women are encouraged to have careers because their talents ate useful to the system anil, more impor-
tantly because by having regular jobs women became better integrated into the system and lied directly lo
it rather than to their families. This helps toweaken fatuity solidarity. (The leaders of the system say they
want to strengthen the family, but they really mean It that they want the family to serve as an effective tool
for socialiiing children in accord with the needs of the system. We atgue in paragraphs 51,52 that the
system cannot ajfoid to let the family or other small-scale social groups be strong or autonomous )



The Power Process

33. Human beings luivc a need (probably based in biology) Tor something that we wilt csdl llie
"power process." This is closely related lo the need for power (which is widely recognized)
bul is not quite the same tiling. The power process has four elements. The three most elenr-cul
of these we cnll goal, effort and attainment of goal. (Everyone needs to have goals whose
attainment requires effort, and needs to succeed in attaining at least some of his goals.) The
fourth clement is more difficult to define and may not lie necessary for everyone. Wc cidl it
autonomy and will discuss it later (paragraphs 42-44).

34. Consider the hypothetical case of a man who can have anything he wants just by wishing for
it. Such a man has power, but he will develop serious psychological problems. At first he will
have a lot of fun, bul by nnd by he will become acutely bored and demoralized. Eventually he
may become clinically depressed. History shows that leisured aristocracies tend lo become
decadent. This is not true of fighting aristocracies that have lo struggle lo maintain their
power. But leisured,, secure aristocracies that have no need to exert ihemselves usually be-
come bored, hedonistic and demoralized, even though they have power. This shows that power
is noi enough. One must have goals toward which to exercise one's power.

35. Everyone has goals; if nothing else, to obtain the physical necessities oflife: food, water and
whatever clothing and shelter are made necessary by lite climate. Bul the leisured aristocrat
obtains these things without effort. Hence his boredom and demoralization.

36. Non-altainineni of important goals results in death if the goals are physical necessities, and in
frustration if non-attainment of the goals is compatible with survival. Consistent failure lo
attain goals throughout life results in defeatism, low self-esteem or depression.

37. Thus, in order to avoid serious psychological problems, a human being needs goals whose
attainment requires effort, and he must have a reasonable rate of success in attaining his
goals.

SURROGATE ACTIVITIES

38. But not every leisured aristocrat becomes bored and demoralized. Tor example, the emperor
Hirohilo, instead of sinking into decadent hedonism, devoted himself lo marine biology, n
field in which lie became distinguished. When people do not have to exerl Ihemselves In
satisfy Uieir physical needs they often scl up artificial goals for ihemselves. In many cases
(hey then pursue these goals with the same energy and emotional involvement (hat they oth-
erwise would have put into the search for physical necessities. Thus Ihc aristocrats of the
Roman Empire bad their literary pretentions; ninny European aristocrats n few centuries ago
invested tremendous lime and energy in hunting, though they certainly didn't need ihc meal;
other aristocracies have competed for status through elaborate displays of wealth; and a few
aristocrats, like Hirohilo. have turned to science.

39. We use Ihe term "surrogate activity" to designate an activity that is directed toward an artifi-
cial goal that people set up for ihemselves merely in order lo have some goal to work toward,
or let us say, merely for the sake of the "fulfilhiienl" that (hey get from pursuing the goal.
Here is a rule of Ihumb for the identification of surrogate activities. Given a person who
devotes much time and energy to the pursuit of goal X, ask yourself this: If he had to devote
most of his lime and energy lo satisfying his biological needs, and if that effort required him
to use his physical and mental facilities in a varied and interesting way, would he feci seri-
ously deprived because he did not attain goal X? If ihc answer is no, then the person's pursuit
of a goal X is a surrogate activity. Hirohilo's studies in marine biology clearly conslitulcd a
surrogate activity, since it is prclty certain that if Hirohilo had had lo spend his time working
at interesting non-scientific tasks in order to obtain Ihc necessities of life, he would not have
felt deprived because he didn't know all about the anatomy and life-cycles of marine animals
On the other band the pursuit of sex nnd love (for example) is nol a surrogate activity, because
most people, even if llicir existence were otherwise satisfactory, would feel deprived if they
passed their lives without ever having a relationship with a member of the opposite sex. (Bul
pursuit of an excessive amount or sex, more than one really needs, can be a surrogate activity.)

40. Ill modern industrial society only minimal effort is necessary to satisfy one's physical needs.



altitude is a direct outcome of a person's genetic constitution, but it nppcnrs (hat personality
Iraits tend, within the context of our society, to make & person more likely to hold this or thai
social attitude. Objections to these findings have been raised, bul objections are feeble and
seem lo be ideologically motivated. In any evcnl, no one denies thai children tend on the
average lo bold social altitudes similar to those of (heir parents. From our point of view it
doesn't mailer all that much whether the altitudes are passed on genetically or through child-
hood training. In either case they aw passed on,

205. The trouble is thai many of ihc people who arc inclined to rebel against the industrial system
arc also concerned about the population problems, hence Ihey are apt to have few or no
children. In this way ihey may be handing the world over lo the sort of people who support or
al leasl accept the industrial system. To insure ihc strength of the next generation of revolu-
tionaries Ihc present generation must reproduce ilsclf abundantly. In doing so they will be
worsening Ihc population problem only slightly. And ihc most important problem is to get rid
of the industrial system, because once the industrial system is gone the world's population
necessarily will decrease (see paragraph 167); whereas, if ihe industrial system survives, it
will continue developing new techniques of food production that may enable the world's
population to keep increasing almost indefinitely.

206. With regard to revolutionary strategy, the only points on which we absolutely insist are that
the single overriding goal must be ihe elimination of modern technology, and lhat no other
goal can be allowed lo compete with this one. For the rest, revolutionaries should take an
empirical approach. If experience indicates that some of the recommendations made in the
foregoing paragraphs arc not going to give good results, then those recommendations should
be discarded.

TWO KINDS OF TECHNOLOGY

207. An argument likely to be raised against our proposed revolution is lhat it is bound lo fiiil.
because (il is claimed) throughout history technology has always progressed, never regressed,
hence technological regression is impossible. But this claim is false.

208. Wc distinguish between ifvo kinds of technology, which wc will call small-scale technology
and organization-dependent technology. Small-scale technology is technology that can be
used by siniill-sciile communities without outside assistance. Organization-dependent tech-
nology is technology that depends on huge-scale social organization. Wc arc aware of no
significant cases of regression in small-scale technology. Bul organization-dependent tech-
nology does regress when the social organization on which it depends breaks down. Ex- .
ample: When Ihe Roman Umpire fell apart the Romans* small-scale technology surVivefd be-
cause any clever village craftsman could build, for instance, a waler wheel, any skilled smith
could make steel by Roman methods, and so forth. But the Romans' organization-dependent
technology did regress. Their aqueducts fell into disrepair and were never rebuilt. Their tech-
niques of road construction were lost. The Roman system of urban sanitation was forgotten,
so lhat until rather reccnl times did the sanitation of European cities match that of Ancient Rome.

209. The reason why technology has seemed always to progress is that, until perhaps a century
or two before the Industrial Revolution, mosl technology was small-scale technology. But
most of the technology developed since the Industrial Revolution is organization-dependent
technology. Take (he refrigerator for example. Without factory-made parts or the facilities of
a posl-iudusirial machine shop it would be virtually impossible for a handful of local crafts-
men lo build a re frige ralor. If by some miracle they did succeed in building one it would be
useless lo llicni without a reliable source of electric power. So they would have to dam a
stream and build a generator. Generators require large amounts of copper wire. Imagine try-
ing lo make that wire without modern machinery. And where would ihey get a gas suitable for
refrigeration? It would be much ensier lo build an icehouse or preserve food by drying or
picking, as was done before the invention of the refrigerator.

210. So il is clear lhat if ihc industrial system were once thoroughly broken down, refrigeration
technology would quickly be lost. The same is Irue of olher organ! z.at ion -dependent technol-
ogy. And once this technology had been lost for a generation or so it would take centuries lo
rebuild it, just as it look centuries to build il the first lime around. Surviving technical books

