

Hardly had Sam hidden the light of the star-glass when she came. A little way ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing from a black hole of shadow under the cliff, the most loathly shape that he had ever beheld, horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream. Most like a spider she was, but huger than the great hunting beasts, and more terrible than they because of the evil purpose in her remorseless eyes. Those same eyes that he had thought daunted and defeated, there they were lit with a fell light again, clustering in her out-thrust head. Great horns she had, and behind her short stalk-like neck was her huge swollen body, a vast bloated bag, swaying and sagging between her legs; its great bulk was black, blotched with livid marks, but the belly underneath was pale and luminous and gave forth a stench. Her legs were bent, with great knobbed joints high above her back, and hairs that stuck out like steel spines, and at each leg's end there was a claw.

As soon as she had squeezed her soft squelching body and its folded limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a horrible speed, now running on her creaking legs, now making a sudden bound. She was between Sam and his master. Either she did not see Sam, or she avoided him for the moment as the bearer of the light` and fixed all her intent upon one prey, upon Frodo, bereft of his Phial, running heedless up the path, unaware yet of his peril. Swiftly he ran, but Shelob was swifter; in a few leaps she would have him.

Sam gasped and gathered all his remaining breath to shout. 'Look out behind! ' he yelled. 'Look out master! I'm' - but suddenly his cry was stifled.

A long clammy hand went over his mouth and another caught him by the neck, while something wrapped itself about his leg. Taken off his guard he toppled backwards into the arms of his attacker.

`Got him! ' hissed Gollum in his ear. `At last, my precious, we've got him, yes, the nassty hobbit. We takes this one. She'll get the other. O yes, Shelob will get him, not Sméagol: he promised; he won't hurt Master at all. But he's got you, you nassty filthy little sneak!' He spat on Sam's neck.

Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was in deadly peril, gave to Sam a sudden violence and strength that was far beyond anything that Gollum had expected from this slow stupid hobbit, as he thought him. Not Gollum himself could have twisted more quickly or more fiercely. His hold on Sam's mouth slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged forward again, trying to tear away from the grip on his neck. His sword was still in his hand, and on his left arm, hanging by its thong, was Faramir's staff. Desperately he tried to turn and stab his enemy. But Gollum was too quick. His long right arm shot out, and he grabbed Sam's wrist: his fingers were like a vice; slowly and relentlessly he bent the hand down and forward, till with a cry of pain Sam released the sword and it fell to the ground; and all the while Gollum's other hand was tightening on Sam's throat.

Then Sam played his last trick. With all his strength he pulled away and got his feet firmly planted; then suddenly he drove his legs against the ground and with his whole force hurled himself backwards.

Not expecting even this simple trick from Sam, Gollum fell over with Sam on top, and he received the weight of the sturdy hobbit in his stomach. A sharp hiss came out of him, and for a second his hand upon Sam's throat loosened; but his fingers still gripped the sword-hand. Sam tore himself forward and away, and stood up, and then quickly he wheeled away to his right, pivoted on the wrist held by Gollum. Laying hold of the staff with his left hand, Sam swung it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on Gollum's outstretched arm, just below the elbow.

With a squeal Gollum let go. Then Sam waded in; not waiting to change the staff from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Quick as a snake Gollum slithered aside. and the stroke aimed at his head fell across his back. The staff cracked and broke. That was enough for him. Grabbing from behind was an old game of his, and seldom had he failed in it. But this time, misled by spite, he had made the mistake of speaking and gloating before he had both hands on his victim's neck. Everything had gone wrong with his beautiful plan, since that horrible light had so unexpectedly appeared in the darkness. And now he was face to face with a furious enemy, little less than his own size. This fight was not for him. Sam swept up his sword from the ground and raised it. Gollum squealed, and springing aside on to all fours, he jumped away in one big bound like a frog. Before Sam could reach him, he was off, running with amazing speed back towards the tunnel.

Sword in hand Sam went after him. For the moment he had forgotten everything else but the red fury in his brain and the desire to kill Gollum. But before he could overtake him, Gollum was gone. Then as the dark hole stood before him and the stench came out to meet him, like a clap of thunder the thought of Frodo and the monster smote upon Sam's mind. He spun round, and rushed wildly up the path, calling and calling his master's name. He was too late. So far Gollum's plot had succeeded.



Chapter 10
The Choices of Master Samwise
Frodo was lying face upward on the ground and the monster was bending over him, so intent upon her victim that she took no heed of Sam and his cries, until he was close at hand. As he rushed up he saw that Frodo was already bound in cords, wound about him from ankle to shoulder, and the monster with her great forelegs was beginning half to lift, half to drag his body away.

On the near side of him lay, gleaming on the ground, his elven-blade, where it had fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait to wonder what was to be done, or whether he was brave, or loyal, or filled with rage. He sprang forward with a yell, and seized his master's sword in his left hand. Then he charged. No onslaught more fierce was ever seen in the savage world of beasts; where some desperate small creature armed with little teeth alone, will spring upon a tower of horn and hide that stands above its fallen mate.

Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she turned slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost before she was aware that a fury was upon her greater than any she had known in countless years, the shining sword bit upon her foot and shore away the claw. Sam sprang in, inside the arches of her legs, and with a quick upthrust of his other hand stabbed at the clustered eyes upon her lowered head. One great eye went dark.

Now the miserable creature was right under her, for the moment out of the reach of her sting and of her claws. Her vast belly was above him with its putrid light, and the stench of it almost smote him down. Still his fury held for one more blow, and before she could sink upon him, smothering him and all his little impudence of courage, he slashed the bright elven-blade across her with desperate strength.

But Shelob was not as dragons are, no softer spot had she save only her eyes. Knobbed and pitted with corruption was her age-old hide, but ever thickened from within with layer on layer of evil growth. The blade scored it with a dreadful gash, but those hideous folds could not be pierced by any strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf should forge the steel or the hand of Beren or of Túrin wield it. She yielded to the stroke, and then heaved up the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head. Poison frothed and bubbled from the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge bulk down on him again. Too soon. For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping his own sword, with both hands he held the elven-blade point upwards, fending off that ghastly roof; and so Shelob, with the driving force of her own cruel will, with strength greater than any warrior's hand, thrust herself upon a bitter spike. Deep, deep it pricked, as Sam was crushed slowly to the ground.

No such anguish had Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in all her long world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor the most savage Orc entrapped, had ever thus endured her, or set blade to her beloved flesh. A shudder went through her. Heaving up again, wrenching away from the pain, she bent her writhing limbs beneath her and sprang backwards in a convulsive leap.

Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses reeling in the foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the mist before his eyes he was aware dimly of Frodo's face and stubbornly he fought to master himself and to drag himself out of the swoon that was upon him. Slowly he raised his head and saw her, only a few paces away, eyeing him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom, and a green ooze trickling from below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed upon the ground, the great bows of her legs quivering, as she gathered herself for another spring-this time to crush and sting to death: no little bite of poison to still the struggling of her meat; this time to slay and then to rend.

Even as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing his death in her eyes, a thought came to him, as if some remote voice had spoken. and he fumbled in his breast with his left hand, and found what he sought: cold and hard and solid it seemed to his touch in a phantom world of horror, the Phial of Galadriel.

'Galadriel! ' he said faintly, and then he heard voices far off but clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved shadows of the Shire, and the music of the Elves as it came through his sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond.

Gilthoniel A Elbereth!

And then his tongue was loosed and his voice cried in a language which he did not know:

A Elbereth Gilthoniel

o menel palan-diriel,

le nallon sí di'nguruthos!

A tiro nin, Fanuilos!

And with that he staggered to his feet and was Samwise the hobbit, Hamfast's son, again.

`Now come, you filth!' he cried. `You've hurt my master, you brute, and you'll pay for it. We're going on; but we'll settle with you first. Come on, and taste it again!'

As if his indomitable spirit had set its potency in motion, the glass blazed suddenly like a white torch in his hand. It flamed like a star that leaping from the firmament sears the dark air with intolerable light. No such terror out of heaven had ever burned in Shelob's face before. The beams of it entered into her wounded head and scored it with unbearable pain, and the dreadful infection of light spread from eye to eye. She fell back beating the air with her forelegs, her sight blasted by inner lightnings, her mind in agony. Then turning her maimed head away, she rolled aside and began to crawl, claw by claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind.

Sam came on. He was reeling like a drunken man, but he came on. And Shelob cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered as she tried to hasten from him. She reached the hole, and squeezing down, leaving a trail of green-yellow slime, she slipped in, even as Sam hewed a last stroke at her dragging legs. Then he fell to the ground.

Shelob was gone; and whether she lay long in her lair, nursing her malice and her misery, and in slow years of darkness healed herself from within, rebuilding her clustered eyes, until with hunger like death she spun once more her dreadful snares in the glens of the Mountains of Shadow, this tale does not tell.

Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening of the Nameless Land fell upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master.

'Master, dear master,' he said, but Frodo did not speak. As he had run forward, eager, rejoicing to be free, Shelob with hideous speed had come behind and with one swift stroke had stung him in the neck. He lay now pale, and heard no voice. and did not move.

`Master, dear master! ' said Sam, and through a long silence waited. listening in vain.

Then as quickly as he could he cut away the binding cords and laid his head upon Frodo's breast and to his mouth, but no stir of life could he find, nor feel the faintest flutter of the heart. Often he chafed his master's hands and feet, and touched his brow, but all were cold.

`Frodo, Mr. Frodo! ' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone! It's your Sam calling. Don't go where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo! O wake up, Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!'

Then anger surged over hint, and he ran about his master's body in a rage, stabbing the air, and smiting the stones, and shouting challenges. Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo's face, pale beneath him in the dusk. And suddenly he saw that he was in the picture that was revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in Lórien: Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Or fast asleep he had thought then. `He's dead! ' he said. 'Not asleep, dead! ' And as he said it, as if the words had set the venom to its work again. it seemed to him that the hue of the face grew livid green.

And then black despair came down on him, and Sam bowed to the ground, and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into his heart, and he knew no more.

When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about him; but for how many minutes or hours the world had gone dragging on he could not tell. He was still in the same place, and still his master lay beside him dead. The mountains had not crumbled nor the earth fallen into ruin.

'What shall I do, what shall I do? ' he said. `Did I come all this way with him for nothing? ' And then he remembered his own voice speaking words that at the time he did not understand himself, at the beginning of their journey: I have something to do before the end. I must see it through, sir, if you understand.

`But what can I do? Not leave Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on the top of the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?' he repeated, and for a moment doubt and fear shook him. `Go on? Is that what I've got to do? And leave him?'

Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body, and folded his cold hands upon his breast, and wrapped his cloak about him; and he laid his own sword at one side, and the staff that Faramir had given at the other.

'If I'm to go on,' he said, `then I must take your sword, by your leave, Mr. Frodo, but I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the old king in the barrow; and you've got your beautiful mithril coat from old Mr. Bilbo. And your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did lend it to me and I'll need it, for I'll be always in the dark now. It's too good for me, and the Lady gave it to you, but maybe she'd understand. Do you understand, Mr. Frodo? I've got to go on.'

But he could not go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could not release it. And time went by and still he knelt, holding his master's hand, and in his heart keeping a debate.

Now he tried to find strength to tear himself away and go on a lonely journey - for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger would bear him down all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him at last: Gollum. Then Gollum would die in a corner. But that was not what he had set out to do. It would not be worth while to leave his master for that. It would not bring him back. Nothing would. They had better both be dead together. And that too would be a lonely journey.

He looked on the bright point of the sword. He thought of the places behind where there was a black brink and an empty fall into nothingness. There was no escape that way. That was to do nothing, not even to grieve. That was not what he had set out to do. 'What am I to do then? ' he cried again, and now he seemed plainly to know the hard answer: see it through. Another lonely journey, and the worst.

`What? Me, alone, go to the Crack of Doom and all? ' He quailed still, but the resolve grew. `What? Me take the Ring from him? The Council gave it to him.'

But the answer came at once: `And the Council gave him companions, so that the errand should not fail. And you are the last of all the Company. The errand must not fail.'

`I wish I wasn't the last,' he groaned. `I wish old Gandalf was hare or somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind? I'm sure to go wrong. And it's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.'

'But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been put forward. And as for not being the right and proper person, why, Mr. Frodo wasn't as you might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn't choose themselves.'

`Ah well, I must make up my own mind. I will make it up. But I'll be sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over.

'Let me see now: if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that Thing's on him, well, the Enemy will get it. And that's the end of all of us, of Lorien, and Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And there s no time to lose, or it'll be the end anyway. The war's begun, and more than likely things are all going the Enemy's way already. No chance to go back with It and get advice or permission. No, it's sit here till they come and kill me over master's body, and gets It: or take It and go.' He drew a deep breath. 'Then take It, it is! '

He stooped. Very gently he undid the clasp at the neck and slipped his hand inside Frodo's tunic; then with his other hand raising the head, he kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over it. And then the head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came over the still face, and by that more than by all other tokens Sam was convinced at last that Frodo had died and laid aside the Quest.

`Good-bye, master, my dear! ' he murmured. 'Forgive your Sam. He'll come back to this spot when the job's done - if he manages it. And then he'll not leave you again. Rest you quiet till I come; and may no foul creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish, I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye! '

And then he bent his own neck and put the chain upon it, and at once his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of the Ring, as if a great stone had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became less, or new strength grew in him, he raised his head, and then with a great effort got to his feet and found that he could walk and bear his burden. And for a moment he lifted up the Phial and looked down at his master, and the light burned gently now with the soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and in that light Frodo's face was fair of hue again, pale but beautiful with an elvish beauty, as of one who has long passed the shadows. And with the bitter comfort of that last sight Sam turned and hid the light and stumbled on into the growing dark.

He had not far to go. The tunnel was some way behind; the Cleft a couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in the dusk` a deep rut worn in ages of passage, running now gently up in a long trough with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came to a long flight of broad shallow steps. Now the orc-tower was right above him, frowning black, and in it the red eye glowed. Now he was hidden in the dark shadow under it. He was coming to the top of the steps and was in the Cleft at last.

'I've made up my mind,' he kept saying to himself. But he had not. Though he had done his best to think it out, what he was doing was altogether against the grain of his nature. `Have I got it wrong? ' he muttered. `What ought I to have done? '

As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the actual summit, before he looked at last on the path descending into the Nameless Land. he turned. For a moment, motionless in intolerable doubt, he looked back. He could still see, like a small blot in the gathering gloom, the mouth of the tunnel; and he thought he could see or guess where Frodo lay. He fancied there was a glimmer on the ground down there, or perhaps it was some trick of his tears, as he peered out at that high stony place where all his life had fallen in ruin.

'If only I could have my wish, my one wish,' he sighed, `to go back and find him! ' Then at last he turned to the road in front and took a few steps: the heaviest and the most reluctant he had ever taken.

Only a few steps; and now only a few more and he would be going down and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly he heard cries and voices. He stood still as stone. Orc-voices. They were behind him and before him. A noise of tramping feet and harsh shouts: Orcs were coming up to the Cleft from the far side, from some entry to the tower, perhaps. Tramping feet and shouts behind. He wheeled round. He saw small red lights, torches, winking away below there as they issued from the tunnel. At last the hunt was up. The red eye of the tower had not been blind. He was caught.

Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was very near. In a minute they would reach the top and be on him. He had taken too long in making up his mind, and now it was no good. How could he escape, or save himself, or save the Ring? The Ring. He was not aware of any thought or decision. He simply found himself drawing out the chain and taking the Ring in his hand. The head of the orc-company appeared in the Cleft right before him. Then he put it on.

The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an hour of thought. At once he was aware that hearing was sharpened while sight was dimmed, but otherwise than in Shelob's lair. All things about him now were not dark but vague; while he himself was there in a grey hazy world, alone, like a small black solid rock and the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was like an orb of hot gold. He did not feel invisible at all, but horribly and uniquely visible; and he knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for him.

He heard the crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul Vale; and down away under the rock the bubbling misery of Shelob, groping, lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the cries of the Orcs as they came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in his ears, the crash of the feet and the rending clamour of the Orcs before him. He shrank against the cliff. But they marched up like a phantom company, grey distorted figures in a mist, only dreams of fear with pale flames in their hands. And they passed him by. He cowered, trying to creep away into some cranny and to hide.

He listened. The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had sighted one another, and both parties were now hurrying and shouting. He heard them both clearly, and he understood what they said. Perhaps the Ring gave understanding of tongues, or simply understanding, especially of the servants of Sauron its maker, so that if he gave heed, he understood and translated the thought to himself. Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in power as it approached the places of its forging; but one thing it did not confer, and that was courage. At present Sam still thought only of hiding, of lying low till all was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He could not tell how near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.

'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already? '

'Orders, you lubber. And what are you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? '

'Orders to you. I'm in command of this pass. So speak civil. What's your report? '

'Nothing.'

`Hai! hai! yoi!' A yell broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The Orcs lower down had suddenly seen something. They began to run. So did the others.

`Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in the road. A spy, a spy! ' There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.

With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood. They had seen his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make the blood run cold. It could not be borne. He sprang up. He flung the Quest and all his decisions away, and fear and doubt with them. He knew now where his place was and had been: at his master's side, though what he could do there was not clear. Back he ran down the steps, down the path towards Frodo.

`How many are there?' he thought. `Thirty or forty from the tower at least, and a lot more than that from down below, I guess. How many can I kill before they get me? They'll see the flame of the sword, as soon as I draw it, and they'll get me sooner or later. I wonder if any song will ever mention it: How Samwise fell in the High Pass and made a wall of bodies round his master. No, no song. Of course not, for the Ring'll be found, and there'll be no more songs. I can't help it. My place is by Mr. Frodo. They must understand that - Elrond and the Council, and the great Lords and Ladies with all their wisdom. Their plans have gone wrong. I can't be their Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.'

But the Orcs were out of his dim sight now. He had had no time to consider himself, but now he realized that he was weary, weary almost to exhaustion: his legs would not carry him as he wished. He was too slow. The path seemed miles long. Where had they all got to in the mist?

There they were again! A good way ahead still. A cluster of figures round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting this way and that, bent like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt.

'Come on, Sam! ' he said, `or you'll be too late again.' He loosened the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then-

There was a wild clamour, hooting and laughing, as something was lifted from the ground. 'Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up! '

Then a voice shouted: `Now off! The quick way. Back to the Undergate! She'll not trouble us tonight by all the signs.' The whole band of orc-figures began to move. Four in the middle were carrying a body high on their shoulders. `Ya hoi! '

They had taken Frodo's body. They were off. He could not catch them up. Still he laboured on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were passing in. Those with the burden went first, and behind them there was a good deal of struggling and jostling. Sam came on. He drew the sword, a flicker of blue in his wavering hand, but they did not see it. Even as he came panting up, the last of them vanished into the black hole.

For a moment he stood, gasping, clutching his breast. Then he drew his sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears. 'Curse the filth! ' he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.

It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if he had stepped out of a thin mist into a heavier fog. His weariness was growing but his will hardened all the more. He thought he could see the light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this tunnel they knew well.; for in spite of Shelob they were forced to use it often as the swiftest way from the Dead City over the mountains. In what far-off time the main tunnel and the great round pit had been made, where Shelob had taken up her abode in ages past. they did not know: but many byways they had themselves delved about in on either side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro on the business of their masters. Tonight they did not intend to go far down. but were hastening to find a side-passage that led back to their watch-tower on the cliff. Must of them were gleeful, delighted with what they had found and seen, and as they ran they gabbled and yammered after the fashion of their kind. Sam heard the noise of their harsh voices, flat and hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices from among all the rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The captains of the two parties seemed to be bringing up the rear, debating as they went.

'Can't you stop your rabble making such a racket, Shagrat? ' grunted the one. `We don't want Shelob on us.'

`Go on, Gorbag! Yours are making more than half the noise,' said the other. `But let the lads play! No need to worry about Shelob for a bit, I reckon. She's sat on a nail, it seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't you see: a nasty mess all the way back to that cursed crack of hers? If we've stopped it once, we've stopped it a hundred times. So let 'em laugh. And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that Lugbúrz wants.'

'Lugbúrz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me, but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that? '

'Don't know till we've had a look.'

'Oho! So they haven't told you what to expect? They don't tell us all they know, do they? Not by half. But they can make mistakes, even the Top Ones can.'

`Sh, Gorbag!' Shagrat's voice was lowered, so that even with his strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just catch what was said. 'They may, but they've got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as not. But there's no doubt about it, they're troubled about something. The Nazgûl down below are, by your account; and Lugbúrz is too. Something nearly slipped.'

`Nearly, you say! ' said Gorbag.

`All right,' said Shagrat, `but we'll talk of that later: Wait till we get to the Under-way. There's a place there where we can talk a bit, while the lads go on.'

Shortly afterwards Sam saw the torches disappear. Then there was a rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as he could guess the Orcs had turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo and he had tried and found blocked. It was still blocked.

There seemed to be a great stone in the way, but the Orcs had got through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other side. They were still running along, deeper and deeper into the mountain, back towards the tower. Sam felt desperate. They were carrying off his master's body for some foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and he threw himself against it, but it did not yield. Then not far inside, or so he thought, he heard the two captains' voices talking again. He stood still listening for a little hoping perhaps to learn something useful. Perhaps Gorbag, who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would come out, and he could then slip in.

`No, I don't know,' said Gorbag's voice. `The messages go through quicker than anything could fly, as a rule. But I don't enquire how it's done. Safest not to. Grr! Those Nazgûl give me the creeps. And they skin the body off you as soon as look at you, and leave you all cold in the dark on the other side. But He likes 'em; they're His favourites nowadays, so it's no use grumbling. I tell you, it's no game serving down in the city.'

`You should try being up here with Shelob for company,' said Shagrat.

'I'd like to try somewhere where there's none of 'em. But the war's on now, and when that's over things may be easier.'

`It's going well, they say.'

'They would.' grunted Gorbag. `We'll see. But anyway, if it does go well, there should be a lot more room. What d'you say? - if we get a chance, you and me'll slip off and set up somewhere on our own with a few trusty lads, somewhere where there's good loot nice and handy, and no big bosses.'

'Ah! ' said Shagrat. `Like old times.'

`Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As I said, the Big Bosses, ay,' his voice sank almost to a whisper, `ay, even the Biggest, can make mistakes. Something nearly slipped you say. I say, something has slipped. And we've got to look out. Always the poor Uruks to put slips right, and small thanks. But don't forget: the enemies don't love us any more than they love Him, and if they get topsides on Him, we're done too. But see here: when were you ordered out? '

`About an hour ago, just before you saw us. A message came: Nazgûl uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to head of Stairs. I came at once.'

'Bad business,' said Gorbag. `See here - our Silent Watchers were uneasy more than two days ago. that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out for another day, nor any message sent to Lugbúrz either: owing to the Great Signal going up, and the High Nazgûl going off to the war, and all that. And then they couldn't get Lugbúrz to pay attention for a good while, I'm told.'

`The Eye was busy elsewhere, I suppose,' said Shagrat. `Big things going on away west, they say.'

'I daresay,' growled Gorbag. `But in the meantime enemies have got up the Stairs. And what were you up to? You're supposed to keep watch, aren't you, special orders or no? What are you for?'

`That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right. We knew there were funny things going on.'

`Very funny! '

`Yes, very funny: lights and shouting and all. But Shelob was on the go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.'

`Her Sneak? What's that? '

`You must have seen him: little thin black fellow; like a spider himself, or perhaps more like a starved frog. He's been here before. Came out of Lugbúrz the first time, years ago, and we had word from High Up to let him pass. He's been up the Stairs once or twice since then, but we've left him alone: seems to have some understanding with Her Ladyship. I suppose he's no good to eat: she wouldn't worry about words from High Up. But a fine guard you keep in the valley: he was up here a day before all this racket. Early last night we saw him. Anyway my lads reported that Her Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good enough for me, until the message came. I thought her Sneak had brought her a toy. or that you'd perhaps sent her a present, a prisoner of war or something. I don't interfere when she's playing. Nothing gets by Shelob when she's on the hunt.'

'Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you I'm not easy in my mind. Whatever came up the Stairs, did get by. It cut her web and got clean out of the hole. That's something to think about! '

`Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she? '

`Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if he was the only one then she'd have had him off to her larder long before, and there he'd be now. And if Lugbúrz wanted him, you'd have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there was more than one.'

At this point Sam began to listen more attentively and pressed his ear against the stone.

'Who cut the cords she'd put round him, Shagrat? Same one as cut the web. Didn't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I reckon. And where is he? Where is he, Shagrat? '

Shagrat made no reply.

`You may well put your thinking cap on, if you've got one. It's no laughing matter. No one, no one has ever stuck a pin in Shelob before, as you should know well enough. There's no grief in that; but think-there's someone loose hereabouts as is more dangerous than any other damned rebel that ever walked since the bad old times, since the Great Siege. Something has slipped.'

`And what is it then? ' growled Shagrat.

`By all the signs, Captain Shagrat, I'd say there's a large warrior loose, Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well maybe: and he's loose in your bounds, too, and you've never spotted him. Very funny indeed! ' Gorbag spat. Sam smiled grimly at this description of himself.

'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy view.' said Shagrat. 'You can read the signs how you like, but there may be other ways to explain them. Anyhow. I've got watchers at every point, and I'm going to deal with one thing at a time. When I've had a look at the fellow we have caught, then I'll begin to worry about something else.'

`It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag. 'He may have had nothing to do with the real mischief. The big fellow with the sharp sword doesn't seem to have thought him worth much anyhow - just left him lying: regular elvish trick.'

`We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go and have a look at the prisoner!

`What are you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first. If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.'

'Now, now,' growled Shagrat. 'I have my orders. And it's more than my belly's worth, or yours, to break 'em. Any trespasser found by the guard is to be held at the tower. Prisoner is to be stripped. Full description of every article, garment, weapon, letter, ring. or trinket is to be sent to Lugbúrz at once, and to Lugbúrz only. And the prisoner is to be kept safe and intact, under pain of death for every member of the guard, until He sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough, and that's what I'm going to do.'

'Stripped, eh? ' said Gorbag. 'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all? '

`No, none of that. He's for Lugbúrz, I tell you. He's wanted safe and whole.'

'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion now. What Lugbúrz will do with such stuff I can't guess. He might as well go in the pot.'

'You fool,' snarled Shagrat. 'You've been talking very clever, but there's a lot you don't know, though most other folk do. You'll be for the pot or for Shelob, if you don't take care. Carrion! Is that all you know of Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords, she's after meat. She doesn't eat dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't dead! '

Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if the whole dark world was turning upside down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware of the comment: 'You fool, he isn't dead, and your heart knew it. Don't trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part of you. The trouble with you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? ' Fur the moment nothing, but to prop himself against the unmoving stone and listen, listen to the vile orc-voices.

`Garn!' said Shagrat. 'She's got more than one poison. When she's hunting, she just gives 'em a dab in the neck and they go as limp as boned fish, and then she has her way with them. D'you remember old Ufthak? We lost him for days. Then we found him in a corner; hanging up he was, but he was wide awake and glaring. How we laughed! She'd forgotten him, maybe, but we didn't touch him-no good interfering with Her. Nar - this little filth, he'll wake up, in a few hours; and beyond feeling a bit sick for a hit, he'll be all right. Or would be, if Lugbúrz would let him alone. And of course, beyond wondering where he is and what's happened to him.'

'And what's going to happen to him,' laughed Gorbag. 'We can tell him a few stories at any rate, if we can't do anything else. I don't suppose he's ever been in lovely Lugbúrz, so he may like to know what to expect. This is going to be more funny than I thought. Let's go!'

`There's going to be no fun, I tell you,' said Shagrat. 'And he's got to be kept safe, or we're all as good as dead.'

`All right! But if I were you, I'd catch the big one that's loose, before you send in any report to Lugbúrz. It won't sound too pretty to say you've caught the kitten and let the cat escape.'

The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was on him. `I got it all wrong! ' he cried. `I knew I would. Now they've got him, the devils! the filth! Never leave your master, never, never: that was my right rule. And I knew it in my heart. May I be forgiven! Now I've got to get back to him. Somehow, somehow! '

He drew his sword again and beat on the stone with the hilt, but it only gave out a dull sound. The sword, however, blazed so brightly now that he could see dimly in its light. To his surprise he noticed that the great block was shaped like a heavy door, and was less than twice his own height. Above it was a dark blank space between the top and the low arch of the opening. It was probably only meant to be a stop against the intrusion of Shelob, fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt beyond the reach of her cunning. With his remaining strength Sam leaped and caught the top, scrambled up, and dropped; and then he ran madly, sword blazing in hand, round a bend and up a winding tunnel.

The news that his master was still alive roused him to a last effort beyond thought of weariness. He could not see anything ahead. for this new passage twisted and turned constantly; but he thought he was catching the two Orcs up: their voices were growing nearer again. Now they seemed quite close.

`That's what I'm going to do,' said Shagrat in angry tones. 'Put him right up in the top chamber.'

`What for? ' growled Gorbag. `Haven't you any lock-ups down below? '

`He's going out of harm's way, I tell you,' answered Shagrat. 'See? He's precious. I don't trust all my lads, and none of yours; nor you neither, when you're mad for fun. He's going where I want him, and where you won't come, if you don't keep civil. Up to the top, I say. He'll be safe there.'

`Will he?' said Sam. 'You're forgetting the great big elvish warrior that's loose!' And with that he raced round the last corner, only to find that by some trick of the tunnel, or of the hearing which the Ring gave him, he had misjudged the distance.

The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could see them now, black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at last, up an incline; and at the end, wide open, were great double doors, leading probably to deep chambers far below the high horn of the tower. Already the Orcs with their burden had passed inside. Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing near the gate.

Sam heard a burst of hoarse singing, blaring of horns and banging of gongs, a hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold.

Sam yelled and brandished Sting, but his little voice was drowned in the tumult. No one heeded him.

The great doors slammed to. Boom. The bars of iron fell into place inside. Clang. The gate was shut. Sam hurled himself against the bolted brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground. He was out in the darkness. Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy.

Here ends the second part of the history of the War of the Ring.



The third part tells of the last defence against the Shadow, and the end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in The Return of the King.
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/




HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY



MANIFESTO



OF TBS



Communist Party



BY

KARL MARX and FREDERICK ENGELS



Authorized English Translation: Edited and
Annotated by Frederick Engels



CHICAGO

CHARLES H. KERR & COMPANY

1906



>oc fZo.li. Z2.<?$



-e^-^h^- .l^.n"^/^ •



<3




PREFACE.

The "Manifesto" was published as the
platform of the "Communist League," a
workingmen's association, first exclusively
German, later on international, and, under
the political conditions of the Continent be-
fore 1848, unavoidably a secret society. At
a Congress of the League, held in London in
November, 1847, Marx and Engels were com-
missioned to prepare for publication a com-
plete theoretical and practical party-pro-
gramme. Drawn up in German, in January,
1848, the manuscript was sent to the printer
in London a few weeks before the French
revolution of February 24th. A French
translation was brought out in Paris, shortly
before the insurrection of June, 1848. The
first English translation, by Miss Helen
Macfarlane, appeared in George Julian Har-
ney's "Bed Republican," London, 1850. A
Danish and a Polish edition had also been
published.

The defeat of the Parisian insurrection of)
June, 1848, — the first great battle between
Proletariat and Bourgeoisie— drove again into
the background, for a time, the social and
political aspirations of the European work-
ing class. Thenceforth the struggle for su-
premacy was again, as it had been before the
revolution of February, solely between dif-
S



4 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

ferent sections of the propertied class; the
working class was reduced to a fight for po-
litical elbow-room, and to the position of ex-
treme wing of the Middle-class Radicals.
Wherever independent proletarian move-
ments continued to show signs of life, they
were ruthlessly hunted down. Thus the
Prussian police hunted out the Central Board
of the Communist League, then located in
Cologne. The members were arrested, and,
after eighteen months' imprisonment, they
were tried in October, 1852. This celebrated
"Cologne Communist trial" lasted from Oc-
tober 4th till November 12th; seven of the
prisoners were sentenced to terms of im-
prisonment in a fortress, varying from three
to six years. Immediately after the sentence
the League was formally dissolved by the
remaining members. As to the "Manifesto,"
it seemed thenceforth to be doomed to obliv-
ion.

When the European working class had re-
covered sufficient strength for another attack
on the ruling classes, the International
Working Men's Association sprang up. But
this association, formed with the express
aim of welding into one body the whole mili-
tant proletariat of Europe and America,
could not at once proclaim the principles laid
down in the "Manifesto." The International
was bound to have a programme broad
enough to be acceptable to the English
Trades' Unions, to the followers of Proudhon
in France, Belgium, Italy, and Spain, and to



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 5

the £a«salleans* in Germany. Marx, who
drew up this programme to the satisfaction
of all parties, entirely trusted to the intel-
lectual development of the working-class,
which was sure to result from combined ac-
tion and mutual discussion. The very events
and vicissitudes of the struggle against
Capital, the defeats even more than the vic-
tories, could not help bringing home to
men's minds the insufficiency of their vari-
ous favourite nostrums, and preparing the
way for a more complete insight into the
true conditions of working-class emancipa-
tion. And Marx was right. The Interna-
tional, on its breaking up in 1874, left the
workers quite different men from what it
had found them in 1864. Froudhonism in
France, Lasalleanism in Germany were dy-
ing out, and even the Conservative English
Trades' Unions, though most of them had
long since severed their connexion with the
International, were gradually advancing to-
wards that point at which, last year at Swan-
sea, their Fresident could say in their name
"Continental Socialism has lost its terrors
for us." In fact: the principles of the "Man-
ifesto" had made considerable headway
among the working men of all countries.

The Manifesto itself thus came to the
front again. The German text had been,

♦Laesalle personally, to us, always acknowledged
himself to be a disciple of Marx, and, as such,
stood on the ground of the "Manifesto." But In
his public agitation, 1860-64, he did not go beyond
demanding co-operative workshops supported by
State credit.



6 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

since 1850, reprinted several times in Switz-
erland, England and America. In 1872, it
was translated into English in New York,
where the translation was published in
"Woodhull and Clafiin's Weekly." From
this English version, a French one was made
in "Le Socialiste" of New York. Since then
at least two more English translations, more
or less mutilated, have been brought out in
America, and one of them has been reprinted
in England. The first Russian translation,
made by Bakounine, was published at Her-
zen's "Kolokol" office in Geneva, about 1863;
a second one, by the heroic Vera Zasulitch,
also in Geneva, 1882. A new Danish edi-
tion is to be found in "Socialdemokratisk
Bibliothek," Copenhagen, 1885; a fresh
French translation in "Le Socialiste,*' Paris,
1886. From this latter a Spanish version
was prepared and published in Madrid, 1886.
The German reprints are not to be counted,
there have been twelve altogether at the
least. An Armenian translation, which was
to be published in Constantinople some
months ago, did not see the light, I am told,
because the publisher was afraid of bringing
out a book with the name of Marx on it,
while the translator declined to call it his
own production. Of further translations into
other languages I have heard, but have not
seen them. Thus the history of the Mani-
festo reflects, to a great extent, the history
of the modern working-class movement; at
present it . is undoubtedly the most wide-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 7

spread, the most international production of
all Socialist Literature, the common plat-
form acknowledged by millions of working
men from Siberia to California.

Yet, when it was written, we could not
have called it a Socialist Manifesto. By
Socialists, in 1847, were understood, on the
one hand, the adherents of the various Uto-
pian systems: Owenites in England, Four-
ierists in France, both of them already re-
duced to the position of mere sects, and
gradually dying out; on the other hand, the
most multifarious social quacks, who, by all
manners of tinkering, professed to redress,
without any danger to capital and profit, all
sorts of social grievances, in both cases men
outside the working class movement, and
looking rather to the "educated" classes for
support. Whatever portion of the working
class had become convinced of the insuf-
ficiency of mere political revolutions, and
had proclaimed the necessity of a total social
change, that portion, then, called itself Com-
munist. It was a crude, rough-hewn, purely
instinctive sort of Communism; still, it
touched the cardinal point and was power-
ful enough amongst the working class to
produce the Utopian Communism, in France,
of Cabet, and in Germany, of Weitling.
Thus, Socialism was, in 1847, a middle-class
movement, Communism a working class
movement. Socialism was, on the Continent
at least, "respectable"; Communism was the
very opposite. And as our notion, from the



8 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

very beginning, was that "the emancipa-
tion of the working class must be the act of
the working class itself/ 9 there could be no
doubt as to which of the two names we must
take. Moreover, we have, ever since, been
far from repudiating it.

The "Manifesto" being our joint produc-
tion, I consider myself bound to state that
the fundamental proposition which forms its
nucleus, belongs to Marx. That proposi-
tion is: that in every historical epoch, the
prevailing mode of economic production and
exchange, and the social organisation neces-
sarily following from it, form the basis upon
which is built up, and from which alone can
be explained, the political and intellectual
history of that epoch; that consequently the
whole history of mankind (since the dissolu-
tion of primitive tribal society, holding land
in common ownership) has been a history of
olass struggles, contests between exploiting
and exploited, ruling and oppressed classes;
that the history of these class struggles forms
a series of evolution in which, now-a-days,
a stage has been reached where the exploited
and oppressed class — the proletariat— cannot
attain its emancipation from the sway of the
exploiting and ruling class — the bourgeoisie
— without, at the same time, and once and
for all, emancipating society at large from
all exploitation, oppression, class-distinc-
tions and class-struggles.

This proposition which, in my opinion, is
destined to do for history what Darwin's



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 9

theory has done for biology, we, both of us,
had been gradually approaching for some
years before 1845. How far I had indepen-
dently progressed towards it, is best shown
by my "Condition of the Working Class in
England."* But when I again met Marx
at Brussels, in spring, 1845, he had it ready
worked out, and put it before me, in terms
almost as clear as those in which I have
stated it here.

From our joint preface to the German edi-
tion of 1872, I quote the following:

"However much the state of things may
have altered during the last 25 years, the
general principles laid down in this Mani-
festo are, on the whole, as correct to-day as
ever. Here and there some detail might be
improved. The practical application of the
principles will depend, as the manifesto it-
self states, everywhere and at all times, on
the historical conditions for the time being
existing, and, for that reason, no special
stress is laid on the revolutionary measures
proposed at the end of Section H. That pas-
sage would, in many respects, be very dif-
ferently worded to-day. In view of the
gigantic strides of Modern Industry since
1848, and of the accompanying improved
and extended organisation of the working-
class, in view of the practical experience
gained, first in the February revolution, and
then, still more, in the Paris Commune,

♦The Condition of the Working Class in England
in 1844. By Frederick Engels. Translated by
Florence K. Wischnewetzky— London, Swan, Son-
nenschein & Co.



10 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

where the proletariat for the first tixnt li«i«
political power for two whole months, this
programme has in some details become
antiquated. One thing especially was proved
by the Commune, viz., that "the work-
ing-class cannot simply lay hold of the
ready-made State machinery, and wield
it for its own purposes. 9 ' (See "The Civil
War in France; Address of the Gen-
eral Council of the International Work-
ing-men's Association," London, Truelove,
1871, p. 15, where this point is further
developed). Further, it is self-evident, that
the criticism of socialist literature is defi-
cient in relation to the present time, because
it comes down only to 1847; also, that the
remarks on the relation of the Communists
to the various opposition-parties (Section
IV.), although in principle still correct, yet
in practice are antiquated, because the po-
litical situation has been entirely changed,
and the progress of history has swept from
off the earth the greater portion of the po-
litical parties there enumerated.

But then, the Manifesto has become a his-
torical document which we have no longer
any right to alter."

The present translation is by Mr. Samuel
Moore, the translator of the greater portion
of Marx's "Capital." We have revised it in
common, and I have added a few notes ex-
planatory of historical allusions.

Frederick Engels.

London, 80th January, 1888.



Manifesto of the Communist Party.

BY

KARL MARX and FREDERICK ENCELS.



A SPECTRE is haunting Europe — the spec-
tre of Communism. All the Powers of old
Europe have entered into a holy alliance to
exorcise this spectre; Pope and Czar, Metter-
nich and Guizot, French Radicals and Ger-
man police-spies.

Where is the party in opposition that has
not been decried as communistic by its op-
ponents in power P Where the Opposition
that has not hurled back the branding re-
proach of Communism, against the more ad-
vanced opposition parties, as well as against
its re-actionary adversaries?

Two things result from this fact.

I. Communism is already acknowledged
by all European Powers to be itself a Power.

II. It is high time that Communists
should openly, in the face of the whole
world, publish their views, their aims, their
tendencies, and meet this nursery tale of the
Spectre of Communism with a Manifesto of
the party itself.

To this end, Communists of various nation-
alities have assembled in London, and
11



12 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

sketched the following manifesto, to be pub-
lished in the English, French, German,
Italian, Flemish and Danish languages.



BOTTBOEOIS AND PROLETARIANS.*

The history of all hitherto existing so-
cietyt is the history of class struggles.

Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian,
lord and serf, guild-master t and journey-
man, in a word, oppressor and oppressed,
stood in constant opposition to one another,
carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden,
now open fight, a fight that each time ended,

•By bourgeoisie Is meant the class of modern
Capitalists, owners of the means of social produc-
tion and employers of wage-labour. By prole-
tariat, the class of modern wage-labourers who,
having no means of production of their own, are
reduced to selling their labour-power in order to
live.

tThat is, all written history. In 1847, the pre-
history of society, the social organization existing
Erevlous to recorded history, was all but un-
nown. Since then, Haxthausen discovered com-
mon ownership of land in Russia, Maurer proved
it to be the social foundation from which all
Teutonic races started in history* and by and bye
village communities were found to be, or to have
been, the primitive form of society everywhere
from India to Ireland. The inner organization of
this primitive Communistic society was laid bare,
in its typical form, by Morgan's crowning dis-
covery of the true nature of the gens and its
relation to the tribe. With the dissolution of these
primaeval communities society begins to be dif-
ferentiated into separate and finally antagonistic
classes. I have attempted to retrace this process
of dissolution in: "Der Uraprung der Familie dea,
Privateigenthums und des Staats," 2nd edit.,
Stuttgart 1886.

X Guild-master, that is a full member of a guild,
a master within, not a head of. a guild.



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 13

either in a revolutionary re-constitution of
society at large, or in the common ruin of
the contending classes.

In the earlier epochs of history, we find
almost everywhere a complicated arrange-
ment of society into various orders, a mani-
fold gradation of social rank. In ancient
Home we have patricians, knights, plebeians,
slaves; in the middle ages, feudal lords, vas-
sals, guild-masters, Journeymen, apprentices,
serfs; in almost all of these classes, again,
subordinate gradations.

The modern bourgeois society that has
sprouted from the ruins of feudal society,
has not done away with class antagonisms.
It has but established new classes, new con-
ditions of oppression, new forms of struggle
in place of the old ones.

Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie,
possesses, however, this distinctive feature;
it has simplified the class antagonisms. So-
ciety as a whole is more and more splitting
up into two great hostile camps, into two
great classes directly facing each other:
Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.

From the serfs of the middle ages sprang
the chartered burghers of the earliest towns.
From these burgesses the first elements of
the bourgeoisie were developed.

The discovery of America, the rounding of
the Cape, opened up fresh ground for the
rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chi-
nese markets, the colonisation of America,
trade with the colonies, the increase in the



14 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

means of exchange and in commodities gen-
erally, gave to commerce, to navigation, to
industry, an impulse never before known,
and thereby, to the revolutionary element in
the tottering feudal society, a rapid develop-
ment.

The feudal system of industry, under
which industrial production was monopolised
by close guilds, now no longer sufficed for
the growing wants of the new markets. The
manufacturing system took its place. The
guild-masters were pushed on one side by
the manufacturing middle-class; division of
labour between the different corporate guilds
vanished in the face of division of labour
in each single workshop.

Meantime the markets kept ever growing,
the demand, ever rising. Even manufacture
no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and
machinery revolutionised industrial produc-
tion. The place of manufacture was taken
by the giant, Modern Industry, the place of
the industrial middle-class, by industrial
millionaires, the leaders of whole industrial
armies, the modern bourgeois.

Modern industry has established the
world-market, for which the discovery of
America paved the way. This market has
given an immense development to commerce,
to navigation, to communication by land.
This development has, in its turn, reacted on
the extension of industry; and in proportion
as industry, commerce, navigation, railways
extended, in the same proportion the hour-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 15

geoisie developed, increased its capital, and
pushed into the background every class
handed down from the Middle Ages.

We see, therefore, how the modern bour-
geoisie is itself the product of a long course
of development, of a series of revolutions in
the modes of production and of exchange.

Each step in the development of the bour-
geoisie was accompanied by a corresponding
political advance of that class. An op-
pressed class under the sway of the feudal
nobility, an armed and self-governing asso-
ciation in the mediaeval commune, * here in-
dependent urban republic (as in Italy and
Germany), there taxable "third estate" of
the monarchy (as in France), afterwards, in
the period of manufacture proper, serving
either the semi-feudal or the absolute mon-
archy as a counterpoise against the nobility,
and, in fact, corner stone of the great mon-
archies in general, the bourgeoisie has at
last, since the establishment of Modern In-
dustry and of the world-market, conquered
for itself, in the modern representative State,
exclusive political sway. The executive of
the modern State is but a committee for
managing the common affairs of the whole
bourgeoisie.

♦"Commune" was the name taken, in France, by
the nascent towns even before they had conquered
from their feudal lords and masters, local self-
government and political rights as "the Third
Estate." Generally speaking, for the economical
development of the bourgeoisie, England is here
taken as the typical country, for its political de-
velopment, France.



16 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a
most revolutionary part.
' The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the
upper hand, has put an end to all feudal,
patriarchal, idyllic relations. It has piti-
lessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties
that bound man to his "natural superiors,"
and has left remaining no other nexus be-
tween man and man than naked self-inter-
est, than callous "cash payment." It has
drowned the most heavenly ecstaciea of re-
ligious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of
Philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water
of egotistical calculation. It has resolved
personal worth into exchange value, and in
place of the numberless indefeasible char-
tered freedoms, has set up that single, un-
conscionable freedom — Free Trade. In one
word, for exploitation, veiled by religious
and political illusions, it has substituted
naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.

The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halt
every occupation hitherto honoured a
looked up to with reverent awe. It has con-
verted the physician, the lawyer, the priest,
the poet, the man of science, into its paid
wage-labourers.

The bourgeoisie has torn away from the
family its sentimental veil, and has reduced
the family relation to a mere money relation.

The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came
to pass that the brutal display of vigour in
the Kiddle Ages, which Beactionists so
much admire, found its fitting complement



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 17

in the most slothful indolence. It has been
the first to shew what man's activity can
bring about. It has accomplished wonders
far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, Roman
aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it has con-
ducted expeditions that put in the shade all
former Exoduses of nations and crusades.

The bourgeoisie cannot exist without con-
stantly revolutionising the instruments of
production, and thereby the relations of pro-
duction, and with them the whole relations
of society. Conservation of the old modes of
production in unaltered form, was, on the
contrary, the first condition of existence for
all earlier industrial classes. Constant revo-
lutionising of production, uninterrupted dis-
turbance of all social conditions, everlasting
uncertainty and agitation distinguish the
bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All
fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train
of ancient and venerable prejudices and
opinions, are swept away, all new-formed
t/j^es become antiquated before they can
ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all
that is holy is profaned, and man is at last
compelled to face with sober senses, his real
conditions of life, and his relations with his
kind.

The need of a constantly expanding market
for its products chases the bourgeoisie over
the whole surface of the globe. It must
nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, estab-
lish connexions everywhere.

The bourgeoisie has through its exploita-



18 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

tion of the world-market given a cosmopoli-
tan character to production and consumption
in every country. To the great chagrin of
Be-actionists, it has drawn from under the
feet of industry the national ground on
which it stood. All old-established national
industries have been destroyed or are daily
being destroyed. They are dislodged by new
industries, whose introduction becomes a life
and death question for all civilised nations,
by industries that no longer work up indig-
enous raw material, but raw material
drawn from the remotest zones; industries
whose products are consumed, not only at
home, but in every quarter of the globe. In
place of the old wants, satisfied by the pro-
ductions of the country, we find new wants,
requiring for their satisfaction the products
of distant lands and climes. In place of the
old local and national seclusion and self-
sufficiency, we have intercourse in every di-
rection, universal inter-dependence of na-
tions. And as in material, so also in intel-
lectual production. The intellectual crea-
tions of individual nations become common
property. National one-sidedness and nar-
row-mindedness become more and more im-
possible, and from the numerous national
and local literatures there arises a world-
literature.

The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement
of all instruments of production, by the im-
mensely facilitated means of communication,
draws all, even the most barbarian, nations



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 19

into civilisation. The cheap prices of its
commodities are the heavy artillery with
which it batters down all Chinese walls,
with which it forces the barbarians' in-
tensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to
capitulate. It compels all nations, on pain
of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode
of production; it compels them to introduce
what it calls civilisation into their midst,
i. e., to become bourgeois themselves. In a
word, it creates a world after its own image.

The bourgeoisie has subjected the country
to the rule of the towns. It has created
enormous cities, has greatly increased the
urban population as compared with the
rural, and has thus rescued a considerable
part of the population from the idiocy of
rural life. Just as it has made the country
dependent on the towns, so it has made bar-
barian and semi-barbarian countries de-
pendent on the civilised ones, nations of
peasants on nations of bourgeois, the East
on the West.

The bourgeoisie keeps more and more do-
in^ away with the scattered state of the
population, of the means of production, and
of property. It has agglomerated popula-
tion, centralised means of production, and
has concentrated property in a few hands.
The necessary consequence of this was po-
litical centralisation. Independent, or but
loosely connected provinces, with separate
interests, laws, governments and systems of
taxation, became lumped together in one na-



20 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

tion, with one government, one code of laws,
one national class-interest, one frontier and
one customs-tariff.

The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce
one hundred years, has created more massive
and more colossal productive forces than
have all preceding generations together.
Subjection of Nature's forces to man, ma-
chinery, application of chemistry to industry
and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways,
electric telegraphs, clearing of whole conti-
nents for cultivation, canalization of rivers,
whole populations conjured out of the
ground — what earlier century had even a
presentiment that such productive forces
slumbered in the lap of social labour P

We see then: the means of production and
of exchange on whose foundation the bour-
geoisie built itself up, were generated in
feudal society. At a certain stage in the de-
velopment of these means of production and
of exchange, the conditions under which
feudal society produced and exchanged, the
feudal organisation of agriculture and man-
ufacturing industry, in one word, the feudal
relations of property became no longer com-
patible with the already developed produc-
tive forces; they became so many fetters.
They had to burst asunder; they were burst
asunder.

Into their places stepped free competition,
accompanied by a social and political con-
stitution adapted to it, and by the economical
and political sway of the bourgeois class.



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 21

A similar movement is going on before our
own eyes. Modern bourgeois society with
its relations of production, of exchange and
of property, a society that has conjured up
such gigantic means of production and of ex-
change, is like the sorcerer, who is no longer
able to control the powers of the nether
world whom he has called up by his spells.
For many a decade past the history of indus-
try and commerce is but the history of the
revolt of modern productive forces against
modern conditions of production, against the
property relations that are the conditions for
the existence of the bourgeoisie and of its
rule. It is enough to mention the commer-
cial crises that by their periodical return
put on its trial, each time more threaten-
ingly, the existence of the entire bourgeois
society. In these crises a great part not only
of the existing products, but also of the
previously created productive forces, are pe-
riodically destroyed. In these crises there
breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier
epochs, would have seemed an absurdity—
the epidemic of over-production. Society
suddenly finds itself put back into a state of
momentary barbarism; it appears as if a
famine, a universal war of devastation had
cut off the supply of every means of sub-
sistence; industry and commerce seem to be
destroyed; and whyP Because there is too
much civilisation, too much means of sub-
sistence, too much industry, too much com-
merce. The productive forces at the dis-



22 COIOCITHIST XAHTFESTO

posal of society no longer tend to further the
development of the conditions of bourgeois
property; on the contrary, they have become
too powerful for these conditions, by which
they are fettered, and so soon as they over-
come these fetters, they bring disorder into
the whole of bourgeois society, endanger the
existence of bourgeois property. The con-
ditions of bourgeois society are too narrow
to comprise the wealth created by them. And
how does the bourgeoisie get over these
crisesF On the one hand by enforced de-
struction of a mass of productive forces; on
the other, by the conquest of new markets,
and by the more thorough exploitation of
the old ones. That is to say, by paving the
way for more extensive and more destructive
crises, and by diminishing the means
whereby crises are prevented.

The weapons with which the bourgeoisie
felled feudalism to the ground are now
turned against the bourgeoisie itself.

But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the
weapons that bring death to itself; it has
also called into existence the men who are to
wield those weapons — the modern working-
class — the proletarians.

In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i. e., capi-
tal, is developed, in the same proportion is
the proletariat, the modern working-class,
developed, a class of labourers, who live only
so long as they find work, and who find work
only so long as their labour increases capi-
tal. These labourers, who must sell them-



L



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 23

selves piecemeal, are a commodity, like every
other article of commerce, and are conse-
quently exposed to all the vicissitudes of
competition, to all the fluctuations of the
market.

Owing to the extensive use of machinery
and to division of labour, the work of the
proletarians has lost all individual character,
and, consequently, all charm for the work-
man. He becomes an appendage of the ma-
chine, and it is only the most simple, most
monotonous, and most easily acquired knack
that is required of him. Hence, the cost of
production of a workman is restricted, al-
most entirely, to the means of subsistence
that he requires for his maintenance, and for
the propagation of his race. Bu.t the price
of a commodity, and also of labour, is equal
to its cost of production. In proportion,
therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work
increases, the wage decreases. Nay more, in
proportion as the use of machinery and divi-
sion of labour increases, in the same propor-
tion the burden of toil also increases, whether
by prolongation of the working hours, by in-
crease of the work enacted in a given time,;
or by increased speed of the machinery, etc/

Modern industry has converted the little
workshop of the patriarchal master into the
great factory of the industrial capitalist.
Masses of labourers, crowded into the fac-
tory, are organised like soldiers. As pri-
vates of the industrial army they are placed
under the command of a perfect hierarchy of



24 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

officers and sergeants. Not only are they
the slaves of the bourgeois class, and of the
bourgeois State, they are daily and hourly
enslaved by the machine, by the over-looker,
and, above all, by the individual bourgeois
manufacturer himself. The more openly this
despotism proclaims gain to be its end and
aim, the more petty, the more hateful and
the more embittering it is.

The less the skill and exertion or strength
implied in manual labour, in other words,
the more modern industry becomes devel-
oped, the more is the labour of men super-
seded by that of women. Differences of age
and sex have no longer any distinctive so-
cial validity for the working class. All are
instruments of labour, more or less expen-
sive to use, according to their age and sex.

No sooner is the exploitation of the la-
bourer by the manufacturer, so far, at an
end, that he receives his wages in cash, than
he is set upon by the other portions of the
bourgeoisie, the landlord, the shopkeeper,
the pawnbroker, etc.

The lower strata of the Middle class — the
small tradespeople, shopkeepers, and retired
tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen
and peasants — all these sink gradually into
the proletariat, partly because their diminu-
tive capital does not suffice for the scale on
which Modern Industry is carried on, and is
swamped in the competition with the large
capitalists, partly because their specialised
skill is rendered worthless by new methods



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 25

of production. Thus the proletariat is re-
cruited from all classes of the population.

The proletariat goes through various stages
of development. With its birth begins its
struggle with the bourgeoisie. At first the
contest is carried on by individual labour-
ers, then by the workpeople of a factory,
then by the operatives of one trade, in one
locality, against the individual bourgeois
who directly exploits them. They direct their
attacks not against the bourgeois conditions
of production, but against the instruments
of production themselves; they destroy im-
ported wares that compete with their labour,
they smash to pieces machinery, they set
factories ablaze, they seek to restore by force
the vanished status of the workman of the
Middle Ages.

At this stage the labourers still form an
incoherent mass scattered over the whole
country, and broken up by their mutual
competition. If anywhere they unite to form
more compact bodies, this is not yet the con-
sequence of their own active union, but of
the union of the bourgeoisie, which class, in
order to attain its own political ends, is
compelled to set the whole proletariat in
motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able
to do so./ At this stage, therefore, the
proletarians do not fight their enemies, but
the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of
absolute monarchy, the landowners, the non-
industrial bourgeois, the petty bourgeoisie.
Thus the whole historical movement is con-



26 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

centrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie;
every victory so obtained is a victory for the
bourgeoisie.

But with the development of industry the
proletariat not only increases in number; it
becomes concentrated in greater masses, its
strength grows, and it feels that strength
more. The various interests and conditions
of *Ufe within the ranks of the proletariat
are more and more equalised, in proportion
as machinery obliterates all distinctions of
labour, and nearly everywhere reduces
wages to the same low level. The growing
competition among the bourgeois, and the
resulting commercial crises, make the wages
of the workers ever more fluctuating. The
unceasing improvement of machinery, ever
more rapidly developing, makes their liveli-
hood more and more precarious; the colli-
sions between individual workmen and indi-
vidual bourgeois take more and more the
character of collisions between two classes.
Thereupon the workers begin to form com-
binations (Trades' Unions) against the bour-
geois; they club together in order to keep
up the rate of wages; they found permanent
associations in order to make provision be-
forehand for these occasional revolts. Here
and there the contest breaks out into riots.

Now and then the workers are victorious,
but only for a time. The real fruit of their
battles lies, not in the immediate result, but
in the ever expanding union of the workers.
This union is helped on by the improved



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 27

means of communication that are created by
modern industry, and that place the workers
of different localities in contact with one an-
other. It was just this contact that was
needed to centralise the numerous local strug-
gles, all of the same character, into one na-
tional struggle between classes. But every
class struggle is a political struggle. And
that union, to attain which the burghers of
the Middle Ages, with their miserable high-
ways, required centuries, the modern prole-
terians, thanks to railways, achieve in a
few years.

This organisation of the proletarians into
a class, and consequently into a political
party, is continually being upset again by
the competition between the workers them-
selves. But it ever rises up again, stronger,
firmer, mightier. It compels legislative rec-
ognition of particular interests of the work-
ers, by taking advantage of the divisions
among the bourgeoisie itself. Thus the ten-
hours'-bill in England was carried.

Altogether collisions between the classes
of the old society further, in many ways,
the course of development of the proletariat.
The bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a
constant battle. At first with the aristoc-
racy; later on, with those portions of the
bourgeoisie itself, whose interests have be-
come antagonistic to the progress of indus-
try; at all times, with the bourgeoisie of for-
eign countries. In all these battles it sees
itself compelled to appeal to the proletariat,



28 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

to ask for its help, and thus, to drag it into
the political arena. The bourgeoisie itself,
therefore, supplies the proletariat with its
own elements of political and general educa-
tion, in other words, it furnishes the prol-
etariat with weapons for fighting the bour-
geoisie.

Further, as we have already seen, entire
sections of the ruling classes are, by the
advance of industry, precipitated into the
proletariat, or are at least threatened in their
conditions of existence. These also supply
the proletariat with fresh elements of en-
lightenment and progress.

Finally, in times when the class-struggle
nears the decisive hour, the process of dis-
solution going on within the ruling class,
in fact within the whole range of old so-
ciety, assumes such a violent, glaring char-
acter, that a small section of the ruling
class cuts itself adrift, and joins the revolu-
tionary class, the class that holds the future
in its hands. Just as, therefore, at an earlier
period, a section of the nobility went over to
the bourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bour-
geoisie goes over to the proletariat, and in
particular, a portion of the bourgeois ideolo-
gists, who have raised themselves to the
level of comprehending theoretically the his-
torical movements as a whole.

Of all the classes that stand face to face
with the bourgeoisie to-day, the proletariat
alone is a really revolutionary class. The
other classes decay and finally disappear in



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 29

the face of modern industry; the proletariat
is its special and essential product.

The lower middle-class, the small manu-
facturer, the shopkeeper, the artisan, the
peasant, all these fight against the bour-
geoisie, to save from extinction their exist-
ence as fractions of the middle class. They
are therefore not revolutionary, but con-
servative. Nay more, they are reactionary,
for they try to roll back the wheel of his-
tory. If by chance they are revolutionary,
they are so, only in view of their impending
transfer into the proletariat, they thus de-
fend not their present, but their future in-
terests, they desert their own standpoint to
place themselves at that of the proletariat.

The "dangerous class," the social scum,
that passively rotting mass thrown off by
the lowest layers of old society, may, here
and there, be swept into the movement by
a proletarian revolution; its conditions of life,
however, prepare it far more for the part
of a bribed tool of reactionary intrigue.

In the conditions of the proletariat, those
of old society at large are already virtually
swamped. The proletarian is without prop-
erty; his relation to his wife and children
has no longer anything in common with the
bourgeois family-relations; modern indus-
trial labour, modern subjection to capital, the
same in England as in France, in America as
in Germany, has stripped him of every trace
of national character. Law, morality, re-
ligion, are to him so many bourgeois preju-



30 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

dices, behind which lurk in ambush just as
many bourgeois interests.

All the preceding classes that got the up-
per hand, sought to fortify their already ac-
quired status by subjecting society at large
to their conditions of appropriation. The
proletarians cannot become masters of the
productive forces of society, except by abol-
ishing their own previous mode of appropria-
tion, and thereby also every other previous
mode of appropriation. They have nothing
of their own to secure and to fortify; their
mission is to destroy all previous securities
for, and insurances of, individual property.

All previous historical movements were
movements of minorities, or in the interest of
minorities. The proletarian movement is
the self-conscious, independent movement of
the immense majority, in the interest of the
immense majority. The proletariat, the low-
est stratum of our present society, cannot
stir, cannot raise itself up, without the whole
superincumbent strata of official society be-
ing sprung into the air.

Though not in substance, yet in form, the
struggle of the proletariat with the bour-
geoisie is at first a national struggle. The
proletariat of each country must, of course,
first of all settle matters with its own bour-
geoisie.

In depicting the most general phases of
the development of the proletariat, we traced
the more or less veiled civil war, raging
within existing society, up to the point where



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 31

that war breaks ou.t into open revolution,
and where the violent overthrow of the bour-
geoisie, lays the foundation for the sway of
the proletariat.

Hitherto, every form of society has been
based, as we have already seen, on the an-
tagonism of oppressing and oppressed classes.
But in order to oppress a class, certain con-
ditions must be assured to it under which it
can, at least, continue its slavish existence.
The serf, in the period of serfdom, raised
himself to membership in the commune, just
as the petty bourgeois, under the yoke of
feudal absolutism, managed to develop into
a bourgeois. The modern labourer, on the
contrary, instead of rising with the progress
of industry, sinks deeper and deeper below .
the conditions of existence of his own class.v
He becomes a pauper, and pauperism devel-
ops more rapidly than population and
wealth. And here it becomes evident, that
the bourgeoisie is unfit any longer to be the
ruling class in society, and to impose its
conditions of existence upon society as an
over-riding law. It is unfit to rule, because
it is incompetent to assure an existence to
its slave within his slavery, because it can-
not help letting him sink into such a state,
that it has to feed him, insead of being fed
by him. Society can no longer live under
this bourgeoisie, in other words, its exist-
ence is no longer compatible with society.

The essential condition for the existence,
and for the sway of the bourgeois class, is



32 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

the formation and augmentation of capital;
the condition for capital is wage-labour.
Wage-labour rests exclusively on competi-
tion between the labourers. The advance of
industry, whose involuntary promoter is the
bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the la-
bourers, due to competition, by their invol-
untary combination, due to association. The
development of Modern Industry, therefore,
cuts from under its feet the very foundation
on which the bourgeoisie produces and ap-
propriates products. What the bourgeoisie
therefore produces, above all, are its own
grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of
the proletariat are equally inevitable.

II.
PBOLETABIANS AND COMMUNISTS.

In what relation do the Communists stand
to the proletarians as a whole P

The Communists do not form a separate
party opposed to other working-class par-
ties.

They have no interests separate and apart
from those of the proletariat as a whole.

They do not set up any sectarian principles
of their own, by which to shape and mould
the proletarian movement.

The Communists are distinguished from
the other working class parties by this only:
1/ In the national struggles of the proleta-
rians of the different countries, they point
out and bring to the front the common inter-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 33

ests of the entire proletariat, independently
of all nationality. 2. In the various stages
of development wmcn tne struggle of the
working class against the bourgeoisie has to
pass through, they always and everywhere
represent the interests of the movement as a
whole.

The Communists, therefore, are on the one
hand, practically, the most advanced and
resolute section of the working class par-
ties of every country, that section which
pushes forward all others; on the other hand,
theoretically, they have over the great mass
of the proletariat the advantage of clearly
understanding the line of march, the condi-
tions, and the ultimate general results of the
proletarian movement.

The immediate aim of the Communists is
the same as that of all the other proletarian
parties: formation of the proletariat into a
class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy,
conquest of political power by the proletariat.

The theoretical conclusions of the Commun-
ists are in no way based on ideas or prin-
ciples that have been invented, or discov-
ered, by this or that would-be universal re-
former.

They merely express, in general terms, ac-
tual relations springing from an existing
class struggle, from a historical movement
going on under our very eyes. The abolition
of existing property-relations is not at all a
distinctive feature of Communism.

All property relations in the past have con-



34 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

tinually been subject to historical change
consequent upon the change in historical
conditions.

The French Bevolution, for example, abol-
ished feudal property in favour of bour-
geois property.

The distinguishing feature of Communism
is not the abolition of property generally,
but the abolition of bourgeois property. But
modern bourgeois private property is the
final and most complete expression of the
system of producing and appropriating pro-
ducts, that is based on class antagonism, on
the exploitation of the many by the few.

In this sense, the theory of the Commun-
ists may be summed up in the single sen-
tence: Abolition of private property.

We Communists have been reproached with
the desire of abolishing the right of person-
ally acquiring property as the fruit of a
man's own labour, which property is alleged
to be the ground work of all personal free-
dom, activity and independence.

Hard-won, self -acquired, self -earned prop-
erty! Do you mean the property of the petty
artizan and of the small peasant, a form of
property that preceded the bourgeois form?
There is no need to abolish that; the develop-
ment of industry has to a great extent al-
ready destroyed it, and is still destroying it
daily.

Or do you mean modern bourgeois private
property?

But does wage-labour create any property



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 35

for the labourer? Not a bit. It creates cap-
ital, i. e., that kind of property which ex-
ploits wage-labour, and which cannot in-
crease except upon condition of getting a
new supply of wage-labour for fresh exploit-
ation. Property, in its present form, is
based on the antagonism of capital and
wage-labour. Let us examine both sides of
this antagonism.

To be a capitalist, is to have not only a
purely personal, but a social status in pro-
duction. Capital is a collective product, and
only by the united action of many members,
nay, in the last resort, only by the united
action of all members of society, can it be
set in motion.

Capital is therefore not a personal, it is a
social power.

When, therefore, capital is converted into
common property, into the property of all
members of society, personal property is not
thereby transformed into social property. It
is only the social character of the prop-
erty that is changed. It loses its class-char-
acter.

Let us now take wage-labour.

The average price of wage-labour is the
minimum wage, i. e., that quantum of the
means of subsistence, which is absolutely re-
quisite to keep the labourer in bare existence
as a labourer. What, therefore, the wage-
labourer appropriates by means of his la-
bour, merely suffices to prolong and repro-
duce a bare existence. We by no means in-



36 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

tend to abolish this personal appropriation
of the products of labour, an appropriation
that is made for the maintenance and repro-
duction of human life, and that leaves no
surplus wherewith to command the labour of
others. All that we want to do away with is
the miserable character of this appropria-
tion, under which the labourer lives merely
to increase capital, and is allowed to live
only in so far as the interest of the ruling
class requires it.

In bourgeois society, living labour is but
a means to increase accumulated labour. In
Communist society, accumulated labour is
but a means to widen, to enrich, to promote
the existence of the labourer.

In bourgeois society, therefore, the past
dominates the present; in communist society,
the present dominates the past. In bour-
geois society capital is independent and has
individuality, while the living person is de-
pendent and has no individuality.

And the abolition of this state of things
is called by the bourgeois, abolition of indi-
viduality and freedom! And rightly so. The
abolition of bourgeois, individuality, bour-
geois independence, and bourgeois freedom is
undoubtedly aimed at.

By freedom is meant, under the present
bourgeois conditions of production, free
trade, free selling and buying.

But if selling and buying disappears, free
selling and buying disappears also. This
talk about free selling and buying, and all



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 37

the other "brave words" of our bourgeoisie
about freedom in general, have a meaning,
if any, only in contrast with restricted sell-
ing and buying, with the fettered traders of
the Middle Ages, but have no meaning when
opposed to the Communistic abolition of buy-
ing and selling, of the bourgeois conditions
of production, and of the bourgeoisie itself.

You are horrified at our intending to do
away with private property. But in your ex-
isting society, private property is already
done away with for nine-tenths of the popu-
lation; its existence for the few is solely due
to its non-existence in the hands of those
nine-tenths. You reproach us, therefore, with
intending to do away with a form of prop-
erty, the necessary condition for whose ex-
istence is, the non-existence of any property
for the immense majority of society.

In one word, you reproach us with intend-
ing to do away with your property. Pre-
cisely so: that is just what we intend.

From the moment when labour can no
longer be converted into capital, money, or
rent, into a social power capable of being
monopolised, i. e., from the moment when
individual property can no longer be trans-
formed into bourgeois property, into capi-
tal, from that moment, you say, individual-
ity vanishes.

You must, therefore, confess that by "in-
dividual" you mean no other person than the
bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of



38 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

property. This person must, indeed, be
swept out of the way, and made impossible.

Communism deprives no man of the power
to appropriate the products of society: all
that it does is to deprive him of the power
to subjugate the labour of others by means
of such appropriation.

It has been objected, that upon the aboli-
tion of private property all work will cease,
and universal laziness will overtake us.

According; to this, bourgeois society ought
long ago to have gone to the dogs through
sheer idleness; for those of its members who
work, acquire nothing, and those who ac-
quire anything, do not work. The whole of
this objection is but another expression of
the tautology: that there can no longer be
any wage-labour when there is no longer any
capital.

All objections urged against the Commun-
istic mode of producing and appropriating
material products, have, in the same way,
been urged against the Communistic modes
of producing and appropriating intellectual
products. Just as, to the bourgeois, the dis-
appearance of class property is the disap-
pearance of production itself, so the disap-
pearance of class culture is to him identical
with the disappearance of all culture.

That culture, the loss of which he laments,
is, for the enormous majority, a mere train-
ing to act as a machine.

But don't wrangle with us so long as you
a PPly> to our intended abolition of bourgeois



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 39

property, the standard of your bourgeois no-
tions of freedom, culture, law, etc. Your
very ideas are but the outgrowth of the con-
ditions of your bourgeois production and
bourgeois property, just as your jurispru-
dence is but the will of your class made into
a law for all, a will, whose essential charac-
ter and direction are determined by the eco-
nomical conditions of existence of your class.

The selfish misconception that induces you
to transform into eternal laws of nature and
of reason, the social forms springing from
your present mode of production and form
of property— historical relations that rise and
disappear in the progress of production— this
misconception you share with every ruling
class that has preceded you. What you see
clearly in the case of ancient property, what
you admit in the case of feudal property, you
are of course forbidden to admit in the case
of your own bourgeois form of property.

Abolition of the family! Even the most
radical flare up at this infamous proposal
of the . Communists.

On what foundation is the present family,
the bourgeois family, based? On capital, on
private gain. In its completely developed
form this family exists only, among the bour-
geoisie. But this state of things finds its
complement in the practical absence of the
family among the proletarians, and in pub-
lic prostitution.

The bourgeois family will vanish as a v mat-
ter of course when its complement vanishes,



40 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

and both will vanish with the vanishing of
capital.

Bo you charge us with wanting to stop
the exploitation of children by their parents?
To this crime we plead guilty.

But, you will say, we destroy the most hal-
lowed of relations, when we replace home
education by social.

And your education! Is not that also so-
cial, and determined by the social conditions
under which you educate, by the interven-
tion, direct or indirect, of society by means
of schools, &c.P The Communists have not
invented the intervention of society in edu-
cation; they do but seek to alter the char-
acter of that intervention, and to rescue edu-
cation from the influence of the ruling class.

The bourgeois clap-trap about the family
and education, about the hallowed co-rela-
tion of parent and child, become all the more
disgusting, the more, by the action of Modern
Industry, all family ties among the proleta-
rians are torn asunder, and their children
transformed into simple articles of com-
merce and instruments of labour.

But you Communists would introduce com-
munity of women, screams the whole bour-
geoisie in chorus*

The bourgeoisies in his wife a mere in-
strument of production. He hears that the
instruments of production are to be exploited
in common, and, naturally, can come to no
other conclusion, than that the lot of being



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 41

common to all will likewise fall to the
women.

He has not even a suspicion that the real
point aimed at is to do away with the status
of women as mere instruments of production.

For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous
than the virtuous indignation of our bour-
geois at the community of women which,
they pretend, is to be openly and officially
established by the Communists. The Com-
munists have no need to introduce commun-
ity of women; it has existed almost from time
immemorial.

Our bourgeois, not content with having
the wives and daughters of their proleta-
rians at their disposal, not to speak of com-
mon prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in
seducing each others' wives.

Bourgeois marriage is in reality a system
of wives in common and thus, at the most,
what the Communists might possibly be re-
proached with, is that they desire to intro-
duce, in substitution for a hypocritically con-
cealed, an openly legalised community of
women. For the rest, it is self-evident, that
the abolition of the present system of pro-
duction must bring with it the obolition of
the community of women springing from
that system, i. e., of prostitution both public
and private.

The Communists are further reproached
with desiring to abolish countries and na-
tionalities.

The working men have no country. We



42 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

cannot take from them what they have not
got. Since the proletariat must first of all
acquire political supremacy, must rise to be
the leading class of the nation, must con-
stitute itself the nation, it is, so far, itself
national, though not in the bourgeois sense
of the word.

National differences, and antagonisms be-
tween peoples, are daily more and more van-
ishing, owing to the development of the
bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the •
world-market, to uniformity in the mode of
production and in the conditions of life cor-
responding thereto.

The supremacy of the proletariat will cause
them to vanish still faster. United action,
of the leading civilised countries at least, is
one of the first conditions for the emancipa-
tion of the proletariat.

In proportion as the exploitation of one in-
dividual by another is put an end to, the
exploitation of one nation by another will
also be put an end to. In proportion as the
antagonism between classes within the na-
tion vanishes, the hostility of one nation to
another will come to an end.

The charges against Communism made
from a religious, a philosophical, and gen-
erally, from an ideological standpoint, are
not deserving of serious examination.

Does it require deep intuition to compre-
hend that man's ideas, views, and concep-
tions, in one word, man's consciousness,
changes with every change in the conditions



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 43

of his material existence, in his social rela-
tions and in his social life?

What else does the history of ideas prove,
than that intellectual production changes in
character in proportion as material produc-
tion is changed? The ruling ideas of each
age have ever been the ideas of its ruling
class.

When people speak of ideas that revolu-
tionize society, they do but express the fact,
that within the old society, the elements of a
new one have been created, and that the dis-
solution of the old ideas keeps even pace
with the dissolution of the old conditions of
existence.

When the ancient world was in its last
throes, the ancient religions were overcome
by Christianity. When Christian ideas suc-
cumbed in the 18th century to rationalist
ideas; feudal society fought its death-battle
with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The
ideas of religious liberty and freedom of
conscience, merely gave expression to the
sway of free competition within the domain
of knowledge.

"Undoubtedly," it will be said, "religious,
moral, philosophical and juridical ideas have
been modified in the course of historical de-
velopment. But religion, morality, philoso-
phy, political science, and law, constantly
survived this change."

"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as
Freedom, Justice, etc., that are common to all
states of society. But Communism abolishes



44 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

eternal truth*, it abolishes all religion, and
all morality, instead of constituting them
on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradic-
tion to all past historical experience."

What does this accusation reduce itself to?
The history of all past society has consisted
in the development of class antagonisms,
antagonisms that assumed different forms at
different epochs.

But whatever form they may have taken,
one fact is common to all past ages, viz., the
exploitation of one part of society by the
other. No wonder, then, that the social con-
sciousness of past ages, despite all the mul-
tiplicity and variety it displays, moves with-
in certain common forms, or general ideas,
which cannot completely vanish except with
the total disappearance of class antagonisms.

The Communist revolution is the most rad-
ical rupture with traditional property-rela-
tions; no wonder that its development in-
volves the most radical rupture with tradi-
tional ideas.

But let us have done with the bourgeois
objections to Communism.

We have seen above, that the first step in
the revolution by the working class, is to
raise the proletariat to the position of rul-
ing class, to win the battle of democracy.

The proletariat will use its political su-
premacy, to wrest, by degrees, all capital
from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instru-
ments of production in the hands of the
State, i. e., of the proletariat organised as



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 45

the ruling class; and to increase the total of
productive forces as rapidly as possible.

Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be
effected except by means of despotic inroads
on the rights of property, and on the condi-
tions of bourgeois production; by means of
measures, therefore, which appear econom-
ically insufficient and untenable, but which,
in the course of the movement, outstrip
themselves, necessitate further inroads upon
the old social order, and are unavoidable as
a means of entirely revolutionising the mode
of production.

These measures will of course be different
in different countries.

Nevertheless in the most advanced coun-
tries the following will be pretty generally
applicable:

1. Abolition of property in land and ap-
plication of all rents of land to public pur-
poses.

2. A heavy progressive or graduated in-
come tax.

3. Abolition of all right of inheritance.

4. Confiscation of the property of all emi-
grants and rebels.

5. Centralisation of credit in the hands of
the State, by means of a national bank with
State capital and an exclusive monopoly.

6. Centralisation of the means of communi-
cation and transport in the hands of the
State.

7. Extension of factories and instruments
of production owned by the State; the bring-



46 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

ing into cultivation of waste lands, and the
improvement of the soil generally in accord-
ance win a common plan.

8. Equal liability of all to labour. Es-
tablishment of industrial armies, especially
for agriculture.

9. Combination of agriculture with manu-
facturing industries; gradual abolition of the
distinction between town and country, by a./
more equable distribution of the population
over the country.

10. Free education for all children in pub-
lic schools. Abolition of children's factory
labour in its present form. Combination of
education with industrial production, etc.,
etc.

When, in the course of development, class
distinctions have disappeared, and all pro-
duction has been concentrated in the hands
of a vast association of the whole nation,
the public power will lose its political char-
acter. Political power, properly so called, is
merely the organised power of one class for
oppressing another. If the proletariat dur-
ing its contest with the bourgeoisie is com-
pelled, by the force of circumstances, to or-
ganise itself as a class, if, by means of a
revolution, it makes itself the ruling class,
and, as such, sweeps away by force the old
conditions of production, then it will, along
with these conditions, have swept away the
conditions for the existence of class antag-
onisms, and of classes generally, and will



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 47

thereby have abolished its own supremacy
as a class.

In place of the old bourgeois society, with
its classes and class antagonisms, we shall
have an association, in which the free de-
velopment of each is the condition for the
free development of all.



III.

SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERA-
TURE.

1. Reactionary Socialism*

a. Feudal Socialism.

Owing to their historical position, it be-
came the vocation of the aristocracies of
France and England to write pamphlets
against modern bourgeois society. In the
French revolution of July, 1830, and in the
English reform agitation, these aristocracies
again succumbed to the hateful upstart.
Thenceforth, a serious political contest was
altogether out of the question. A literary
battle alone remained possible. But even in
the domain of literature the old cries of the
restoration period * had become impossible.

In order to arouse sympathy, the aristoc-
racy were obliged to lose sight, apparently,
of their own interests, and to formulate their
indictment against the bourgeoisie in the in-
terest of the exploited working class alone.
Thus the aristocracy took their revenge by

♦Not the English Restoration 1660 to 1689, but the
French Restoration 1814 to 1830.



48 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

singing lampoons on their new master, and
whispering in his ears sinister prophecies of
coming catastrophe.

In this way arose feudal socialism: half
lamentation, half lampoon; half echo of the
past, half menace of the future; at times,
by its bitter, witty and incisive criticism,
striking the bourgeoisie to the very hearts 9
core, but always ludicrous in its effect,
through total incapacity to comprehend the
march of modern history.

The aristocracy, in order to rally the people
to them, waved the proletarian alms-bag in
front for a banner. But the people, so often
as it joined them, saw on their hindquarters
the old feudal coats of arms, and deserted
with loud and irreverent laughter.

One section of the French Legitimists, and
"Young England," exhibited this spectacle.

In pointing out that their mode of * ex-
ploitation was different to that of the bour-
geoisie, the feudalists forget that they ex-
ploited under circumstances and conditions
that were quite different, and that are now
antiquated. In showing that, under their
rule, the modern proletariat never existed,
they forget that the modern bourgeoisie is
the necessary offspring of their own form of
society.

For the rest, so little do they conceal the
reactionary character of their criticism, that
their chief accusation against the bourgeoisie
amounts to this, that under the bourgeois
regime a class is being developed, which is



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 49

destined to cut up root and branch the old
order of society.

What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with
is not so much that it creates a proletariat,
as that it creates a revolutionary proletariat.

In political practice, therefore, they join in
all coercive measures against the working-
class; and in ordinary life, despite their
high f alutin phrases, they stoop to pick up
the golden apples dropped from the tree of
industry, and to barter truth, love, and hon-
our for traffic in wool, beetroot-sugar, and
potato spirit. *

As the parson has ever gone hand in hand
with the landlord, so has Clerical Socialism
with Feudal Socialism.

Nothing is easier than to give Christian
asceticism a Socialist tinge. Has not Chris-
tianity declaimed against private property,
against marriage, against the State? Has it
not preached in the place of these, charity
and poverty, celibacy and mortification of the
flesh, monastic life and Mother Church?
Christian Socialism is but the Holy Water
with which the priest consecrates the heart-
burnings of the aristocrat.

♦This applies chiefly to Germany where the
landed aristocracy and squirearchy have large
portions of their estates cultivated for their own
account by stewards, and arc, moreover, extensive
beetroot-sugar manufacturers and distillers of po-
tato spirits. The wealthier British aristocracy
are, as yet, rather above that; but they, too,
know how to make up for declining rents by
lending their names to floaters of more or less
shady joint-stock companies.



50 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

b. Petty Bourgeois Socialism.

The feudal aristocracy was not the only
class that was ruined by the bourgeoisie, not
the only class whose conditions of existence
pined and perished in the atmosphere of mod-
ern bourgeois society. The medieval bur-
gesses and the small peasant bourgeoisie,
were the precursors of the modern bour-
geoisie. In those countries which are but
little developed, industrially and commer-
cially, these two classes still vegetate side
by side with the rising bourgeoisie.

In countries where modern civilisation has
become fully developed, a new class of petty
bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating be-
tween proletariat and bourgeoisie, and ever
renewing itself as a supplementary part of
bourgeois society. The individual members
of this class, however, are being constantly
hurled down into the proletariat by the ac-
tion of competition, and, as modern industry
develops, they even see the moment ap-
proaching when they will completely disap-
pear as an independent section of modern so-
ciety, to be replaced, in manufactures, agri-
culture and commerce, by overlookers, bail-
iffs and shopmen.

In countries, like France, where the peas-
ants constitute far more than half of the
population, it was natural that writers who
sided with the proletariat against the bour-
geoisie, should use, in their criticism of the
bourgeois regime, the standard of the peasant
and petty bourgeois, and from the stand-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 51

point of these intermediate classes should
take up the cudgels for the working-class.
Thus arose petty bourgeois Socialism. Sis-
mondi was the head of this school, not only
in France, but also in England.

This school of Socialism dissected with
great acuteness the contradictions in the con-
ditions of modern production. It laid bare
the hypocritical apologies of economists. It
proved, incontrovertibly, the disastrous ef-
fects of machinery and division of labour;
the concentration of capital and land in a
few hands; overproduction and crises; it
pointed out the inevitable ruin of the petty
bourgeois and peasant, the misery of the
proletariat, the anarchy in production, the
crying inequalities in the distribution of
wealth, the industrial war of extermination
between nations, the dissolution of old moral
bonds, of the old family relations, of the old
nationalities.

In its positive aims, however, this form of
Socialism aspires either to restoring the old
means of production and of exchange, and
with them the old property relations, and the
old society, or to cramping the modern means
of production and of exchange, within the
frame work of the old property relations that
have been, and were bound to be, exploded
by those means. In either case, it is both
reactionary and Utopian.

Its last words are: corporate guilds for
manufacture; patriarchal relations in agri-
culture.



52 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts
had dispersed all intoxicating effects of self-
deception, this form of Socialism ended in a
miserable fit of the blues.

German or "True" Socialism.

The Socialist and Communist literature of
Trance, a literature that originated under
the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power, and
that was the expression of the struggle
against this power, was introduced into Ger-
many at a time when the bourgeoisie, in
that country, had just begun its contest with
feudal absolutism.

German philosophers, would-be philosoph-
ers, and beaux esprits, eagerly seized on this
literature, only forgetting, that when these
writings immigrated from France into Ger-
many, French social conditions had not im-
migrated along with them. In contact with
German social conditions, this French litera-
ture lost all its immediate practical signifi-
cance, and assumed a purely literary aspect.
Thus, to the German philosophers of the
Eighteenth Century, the demands of the first
French Revolution were nothing more than
the demands of "Practical Reason" in gen-
eral, and the utterance of the will of the
revolutionary French bourgeoisie signified in
their eyes the laws of pure Will, of Will as it
was bound to be, of true human Will gen-
erally.

The work of the German literati consisted
solely in bringing the new French ideas into



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 53

harmony with their ancient philosophical
conscience, or rather, in annexing the French
ideas without deserting their own philo-
sophic point of view.

This annexation took place in the same
way in which a foreign language is appro-
priated, namely by translation.

It is well known how the monks wrote silly
lives of Catholic Saints over the manuscripts
on which the classical works of ancient
heathendom had been written. The German
literati reversed this process with the pro-
fane French literature. They wrote their
philosophical nonsense beneath the French
original. For instance, beneath the French
criticism of the economic functions of money,
they wrote "Alienation of Humanity," and
beneath the French criticism of the bour-
geois State they wrote, "Dethronement of the
Category of the General," and so forth.

The introduction of these philosophical
phrases at the back of the French historical
criticisms they dubbed "Philosophy of Ac-
tion," "True Socialism," "German Science of
Socialism," "Philosophical Foundation of So-
cialism," and so on.

The French Socialist and Communist litera-
ture was thus completely emasculated. And,
since it ceased in the hands of the German
to express the struggle of one class with the
other, he felt conscious of having overcome
"French one-sidedness" and of representing,
not true requirements, but the requirements
of Truth, not the interests of the proletariat,



54 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

but the interests of Human Nature, of Man
in general, who belongs to no class, has no
reality, who exists only in the misty realm
of philosophical phantasy.

This German Socialism, which took its
school-boy task so seriously and solemnly,
and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such
mountebank fashion, meanwhile gradually
lost its pedantic innocence.

The nght of the German, and, especially, of
the Prussian bourgeoisie, against feudal aris-
tocracy and absolute monarchy, in other
words, the liberal movement, became more
earnest.

By this, the long-wished-for opportunity
was offered to "True Socialism" of confront-
ing the political movement with the socialist
demands, of hurling the traditional anathe-
mas against liberalism, against representa-
tive government, against bourgeois competi-
tion, bourgeois freedom of the press, bour-
geois legislation, bourgeois liberty and
equality, and of preaching'to the masses that
they had nothing to gain, and everything to
lose, by this bourgeois movement. German
Socialism forgot, in the nick of time, that
the French criticism, whose silly echo it was,
presupposed the existence of modern bour-
geois society, with its corresponding eco-
nomic conditions of existence, and the po-
litical constitution adapted thereto, the very
things whose attainment was the object of
the pending struggle in Germany.

To the absolute governments, with their



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 55

following of parsons, professors, country
squires and officials, it served as a welcome
scarecrow against the threatening bour-
geoisie.

It was a sweet finish after the bitter pills
of floggings and bullets, with which these
same governments, just at that time, dosed
the German working-class risings.

While this "True" Socialism thus served
the governments as a weapon for fighting
the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time,
directly represented a reactionary interest,
the interest of the German Philistines. In
Germany the petty bourgeois class, a re-
lique of the 16th century, and since then
constantly cropping up again under various
forms, is the real social basis of the exist-
ing state of things.

To preserve this class, is to preserve the ex-
isting state of things in Germany. The in-
dustrial and political supremacy of the bour-
geoisie threatens it with certain destruc-
tion; on the one hand, from the concentra-
tion of capital; on the other, from the rise
of a revolutionary proletariat. "True" So-
cialism appeared to kill these two birds with
one stone. It spread like an epidemic.

The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroid-
ered with flowers of rhetoric, steeped in the
dew of sickly sentiment, this transcendental
robe in which the German Socialists wrapped
their sorry "eternal truths" all skin and
bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale
of their goods amongst such a public.



56 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

And on its part, German Socialism recog-
nised, more and more, its own calling as the
bombastic representative of the petty bour-
geois Philistine.

It proclaimed the German nation to be the
model nation, and the German petty Philis-
tine to be the typical man. To every vil-
lainous meanness of this model man it gave
a hidden, higher, socialistic interpretation,
the exact contrary of its true character. It
went to the extreme length of directly oppos-
ing the "brutally destructive" tendency of
Communism, and of proclaiming its supreme
and impartial contempt of all class strug-
gles. With very few exceptions, all the so-
called Socialist and Communist publications
that now (1847) circulate in Germany be-
long to the domain of this foul and enervat-
ing literature.



2. Conservative or Bourgeois Socialism.

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of re-
dressing social grievances, in order to secure
the continued existence of bourgeois society.

To this section belong economists, philan-
thropists, humanitarians, improvers of the
condition of the working class, organisers of
charity, members of societies for the preven-
tion of cruelty to animals, temperance fa-
natics, hole and corner reformers of every
imaginable kind. This form of Socialism
has, moreover, been worked out into com-
plete systems.



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 57

We may cite Proudhon's "Philosophic de
la Misere" as an example of this form.

The socialistic bourgeois want all the ad-
vantages of modern social conditions with-
out the struggles and dangers necessarily re-
sulting therefrom. They desire the existing
state of society minus its revolutionary and
disintegrating elements. They wish for a
bourgeoisie without a proletariat. The bour-
geoisie naturally conceives the world in
which it is supreme to be the best; and bour-
geois socialism develops this comfortable
conception into various more or less com-
plete systems. In requiring the proletariat
to carry out such a system, and thereby to
march straightway into the social New Jeru-
salem, it but requires in reality, that the
proletariat should remain within the bounds
of existing society, but should cast away all
its hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie.

A second and more practical, but iess sys-
tematic form of this socialism sought to de-
preciate every revolutionary movement in
the eyes of the working class, by showing
that no mere political reform, but only a
change in the material conditions of exist-
ence, in economical relations, could be of any
advantage to them. By changes in the ma-
terial conditions of existence, this form of
Socialism, however, by no means understands
abolition of the bourgeois relations of pro-
duction, an abolition that can be effected
only by a revolution, but administrative
reforms, based on the continued existence of



58 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

these relations; reforms, therefore, that in no
respect affect the relations between capital
and labour, but, at the best, lessen the cost,
and simplify the administrative work, of
bourgeois government.

Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate ex-
pression, when, and only when, it becomes a
mere figure of speech.

Free trade: for the benefit of the working
class. Protective duties: for the benefit of
the working class. Prison Beform: for the
benefit of the working class. This is the last
word and the only seriously meant word of
bourgeois Socialism.

It is summed up in the phrase: the bour-
geois is a bourgeois— for the benefit of the
working class.

3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Commun-
ism.

We do not here refer to that literature
which, in every great modern revolution,
has always given voice to the demands of
the proletariat: such as the writings of Ba-
beauf and others.

The first direct attempts of the proletariat
to attain its own ends, made in times of
universal excitement, when feudal society
was being overthrown, these attempts neces-
sarily failed, owing to the then undevel-
oped state of the proletariat, as well as to
the absence of the economic conditions for
its emancipation, conditions that had yet to
be produced, and could be produced by the



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 59

impending bourgeois epoch alone. The revo-
lutionary literature that accompanied these
first movements of the proletariat had nec-
essarily a reactionary character. It incul-
cated universal asceticism and social level-
ing in its crudest form.

The Socialist and Communist systems
properly so called, those of St. Simon, Four-
ier, Owen and others, spring into existence
in the early undeveloped period, described
above, of the struggle between proletariat
and bourgeoisie, (see section I. Bourgeoisie
and Proletariat).

The founders of these systems see, indeed,
the class antagonisms, as well as the action
of the decomposing elements in the prevail-
ing form of society. But the proletariat, as
yet in its infancy, offers to them the spec-
tacle of a class without any historical initia-
tive or any independent political movement.

Since the development of class antagonism
keeps even pace with the development of in-
dustry, the economic situation, as they find
it, does not as yet offer to them the material
conditions for the emancipation of the prole-
tariat. They therefore search after a new
social science, after new social laws, that are
to create these conditions.

Historical action is to yield to their per-
sonal inventive action, historically created
conditions of emancipation to phantastic
ones, and the gradual, spontaneous class-or-
ganisation of the proletariat to an organisa-
tion of society specially contrived by these



60 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

inventors. Future history resolves itself, in
their eyes, into the propaganda and the prac-
tical carrying out of their social plans.

In the formation of their plans they are
conscious of caring chiefly for the interests
of the working-class, as being the most suf-
fering class. Only from the point of view
of being the most suffering class does the
proletariat exist for them.

The undeveloped state of the class strug-
gle, as well as their own surroundings, cause
Socialists of this kind to consider themselves
far superior to all class antagonisms. They
want to improve the condition of every mem-
ber of society, even that of the most fa-
voured. Hence, they habitually appeal to
society at large, without distincton of class;
nay, by preference, to the ruling class. For
how can people, when once they understand
their system, fail to see in it the best pos-
sible plan of the best possible state of so-
cietyP

Hence, they reject all political, and espe-
cially all revolutionary action; they wish to
attain their ends by peaceful means, and
endeavour, by small experiments, necessa-
rily doomed to failure, and by the force of
example, to pave the way for the new social
Gospel.

Such phantastic pictures of future society,
painted at a time when the proletariat is still
in a very undeveloped state, and has but a
phantastic conception of its own position,
correspond with the first instinctive yearn-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 61

Ings of that class for a general reconstruc-
tion of society.

But these Socialist and Communist publi-
cations contain also a critical element. They
attack every principle of existing society.
Hence they are full of the most valuable ma-
terials for the enlightenment of the working
class. The practical measures proposed in
them, such as the abolition of the distinc-
tion between town and country, of the fam-
ily, of the carrying on of industries for the
account of private individuals, and of the
wage system, the proclamation of social har-
mony, the conversion of the functions of the
State into a mere superintendence of produc-
tion, all these proposals point solely to the
disappearance of class-antagonisms which
were, at that time, only just cropping up,
and which, in these publications, are recog-
nised under their earliest, indistinct and un-
defined forms only. These proposals, there-
fore, are of a purely Utopian character.

The significance of Critical-Utopian So-
cialism and Communism bears an inverse re-
lation to historical development. In propor-
tion as the modern class struggle develops
and takes definite shape, this phantastic
standing apart from the contest, these phan-
tastic attacks on it lose all practical value
and all theoretical justification. Therefore,
although the originators of these systems
were, in many respects, revolutionary, their
disciples have, in every case, formed mere
reactionary sects. They hold fast by the orig-



62 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

inal views of their masters, in opposition to
the progressive historical development of the
proletariat. They, therefore, endeavour, and
that consistently, to deaden the class strug-
gle and to reconcile the class antagonisms.
They still dream of experimental realisation
of their social Utopias, of founding isolated
"phalansteres," of establishing "Home Colo-
nies," of setting up a "Little Icaria"*— duo-
decimo editions of the New Jerusalem, and
to realise all these castles in the air, they
are compelled to appeal to the feelings and
purses of. the bourgeois. By degrees they
sink into the category of the reactionary
conservative Socialists depicted above, dif-
fering from these only by more systematic
pedantry, and by their fanatical and super-
stitious belief in the miraculous effects of
their social science.

They, therefore, violently oppose all po-
litical action on the part of the working
class; such action, according to them, can
only result from blind unbelief in the new
Gospel.

The Owenites in England, and the Four-
ierists in France, respectively oppose the
Chartists and the "Beformistes."



IV.



POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS IN RE-
LATION TO THE VARIOUS EXIST-
ING OPPOSITION PARTIES.

Section II. has made clear the relations of
the Communists to the existing working
class parties, such as the Chartists in Eng-
land and the Agrarian Reformers in Amer-
ica.

*Phalansteres were socialist colonies on the plan
of Charles Fourier. Icaria was the name given
by Cabot to his Utopia and, later on, to his Ameri-
can Communist colony.



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 63

The Communists light for the attainment
of the immediate aims, for the enforcement
of the momentary interests of the working
class; but in the movement of the present,
they also represent and take care of the future
of that movement. In France the Commun-
ists ally themselves with the Social-Demo-
crats,* against the conservative and radical
bourgeoisie, reserving, however, the right to
take up a critical position in regard to
phrases and illusions traditionally handed
down from the great Bevolution.

In Switzerland they support the Radicals,
without losing sight of the fact that this
party consists of antagonistic elements, part-
ly of Democratic Socialists, in the French
sense, partly of radical bourgeois.

In Poland they support the party that in-
sists on an agrarian revolution, as the prime
condition for national emancipation, that
party which fomented the insurrection of
Cracow in 1846.

In Germany they fight with the bourgeoisie
whenever it acts in a revolutionary way,
against the absolute monarchy, the feudal
squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.

But they never cease, for a single instant,
to instill into the working class the clearest
possible recognition of the hostile antago-
nism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in
order that the German workers may straight-
way use, as so many weapons against the
bourgeoisie, the social and political condi-
tions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily
introduce along with its supremacy, and in
order that, after the fall of the reactionary

♦The party then represented in parliament by
Ledru-Rollln. in literature by Louis Blatic, in the
daily press by the R6forme. The nw.e of Social
Democracy signified, with these its Inventors, a
section of the Democratic or Repuf|!aan party
more or less tinged with Socialism.



€4 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

classes in Germany, the fight against the
bourgeoisie itself may immediately begin.

The Communists turn their attention chief-
ly to Germany, because that country is on
the eve of a bourgeois revolution, that is
bound to be carried out under more advanced
conditions of European civilisation, and
with a more developed proletariat, than that
of England was in the seventeenth, and of
France in the eighteenth century, and be-
cause the bourgeois revolution in Germany
will be but the prelude to an immediately
following proletarian revolution.

In short, the Communists everywhere sup-
port every revolutionary movement against
the existing social and political order of
things.

In all these movements they bring to the
front, as the leading question in each, the
property question, no matter what its de-
gree of development at the time.

Finally, they labour everywhere for the
union and agreement of the democratic par-
ties of all countries.

The Communists disdain to conceal their
views and aims. They openly declare that
their ends can be attained only by the forci-
ble overthrow of all existing social condi-
tions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a
Communistic revolution. The proletarians
have nothing to lose but their chains. They
have a world to win.

Working men of all countries unite!



No Compromise

No Political Trading



BY

WILHELM LIEBKNECHT



THAN SLAT ID BY

A. M. SIMONS and MARCUS HITCH



REVISED EDITION



80



CHICAGO:

CHARLES H. KERR & COMPANY (Co-Operative)

1907



PEEFACE.



The following pamphlet is not an address, as
was my first one on Tactics;* but it is occasioned
by an address which I delivered this summer, at
the request of my Berlin constituents, on the last
Bavarian legislative elections in particular and
on compromises in general. For some time past
and from different directions persistent efforts
have been made to bring our party nearer to the
other political parties; this, together with the
incessant demand for taking part in the Prussian
legislative elections, has aroused in a part of the
Berlin voters, as well as among the comrades all
over Germany, an apprehension that there may
exist in the party certain tendencies which, though
not having that aim, nevertheless must have the
result, of leading the Social Democratic party
over into the field of spoils politics, pure and sim-
ple. This apprehension was nourished by Bern-
stein's book of repentance, a solemn renunciation
of social democratic principles by a comrade who
up to that time had been considered a guardian
of our principles, and by his recantation of the
social democratic heresy and his reconfession
of faith in the bourgeois philosophy as the only
means of salvation. Bernstein's pamphlet in it-
self is insignificant and contains not a single
new, original idea, but merely acknowledges as
correct what the enemies of the Social Democ-
racy for decades past have said against it a hun-
dred times; yet, taken in connection with the
confusing agitation for taking part in the Prus-
sian legislative elections and with the unfortunate
Isegrim articles against the militia system and

♦On the Political Stand of the Social Democracy,
especially with Reference to the Reichstag. Berlin,
1893. Vorwaerts Publishing House.



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 3

in favor of militarism, the pamphlet, considered
as a symptom, acquired an importance which
could not be ignored.

The party was engaged in a fight against the
penitentiary bill, and other attempts at coercion
on the part of the dominant reactionists, and
was just beginning to forget Schippelism and
Bernsteinism, expecting from the next party con-
vention a thorough shaking up and cleaning out,
when suddenly the report came of the political
" cow-trade' ' or log-rolling in Bavaria. We
have been accustomed to Bavarian peculiarities
for years; we know that Bavarian affairs, and in
general South Qerman affairs, are not to be
measured according to the North Qerman stand-
ard; and no one can be more tolerant than the
Berlin comrades who, in front of the gates of
the Imperial Capital, have to deal with peculiari-
ties which, though of a different kind, are quite
as striking as the Bavarian possibly can be. We
know particularly that where the religious ele-
ment cuts a figure in politics and the clerical
Center party prevents a normal political develop-
ment, class-consciousness is easily crowded out
by other considerations. And also outside of
Bavaria we have heard of some very strange cam-
paign alliances. Nevertheless, what happened
this time in Bavaria was in its way an innova-
tion. A formal alliance was entered into, not
underhanded, not over the heads of the mass by
particular comrades, but by one party with an-
other party, by the leaders of the Social Democ-
racy in Bavaria, with the leaders of the Center
party in Bavaria.

This event stirred up a great commotion and
caused the most intense anxiety everywhere in
party circles. At first the astonishment, the dis-
approval, found no expression. As the legislative
elections in Bavaria are indirect, one could not
Immediately raise a protest, for in so doing one
would only have embarrassed the Bavarian com-



4 i*0 COMPROMISE.

rades, who were then in the midst of the fight,
and would perhaps have incurred a grave respon-
sibility. Therefore, the Bavarian supporters of
the political cow trade had the field to themselves
for the time being. Under such circumstances,
it is easy to understand that the apprehensions
of comrades, who thought they saw indications
of a designed and methodical stagnation of the
party, were aroused to the utmost. Berlin com-
rades turned to me. I explained why the Vor-
waerts hud not yet taken a stuud towurds tho
Bavarian cow trade, but made no secret of the
fact that my views on compromises were not the
same as those of the editorial staff; I wrote an
article, which in spite of its unusually calm tone,
was looked upon by the Bavarian comrades as
a grievous attack; I also explained my views in
a meeting of the voters 1 club of the Sixth Berlin
election district. Although, for the sake of sweet
peace, I prevented a vote of censure for the
Bavarian comrades, nevertheless both myself and
the Berlin comrades were, on account of this
meeting, violently attacked by the Bavarian party
members, and not always in elegant terms. One
who feels that he is in the wrong generally makes
up for the weakness of his case by the violence of
his speech. I have always taken the insolence of
my opponents as an involutary compliment, and
never bothered myself about it.

About the time of the Bavarian cow trade the
entrance of a socialist — Millerand — into a reac-
tionary bourgeois cabinet took place in France
and was the cause of a split in the French Social
Democracy. The ablest of our French comrades,
— Guesde, Lafargue and Yaillant, the founders of
the modern socialist movement in France, — pro-
tested against the entrance of Millerand into the
cabinet of the reactionary capitalist, Waldeck-
Rousseau, and of Qallifet, the butcher of the
Communists; they withdrew from the socialist



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 5

/group, which they were convinced had abandoned
the platform of the class 1 struggle.

Here we could see the dangers of a compro-
mise policy in their life-size and entire outlines.
In the meantime an article appeared in For-
waert8, in the issue of July 28, entitled "Mo-
mentary Alliances," which sought to justify the
compromise policy. I therefore determined, at
the request of comrades in Berlin and vicinity, to
write a pamphlet and express myself, as I know,
in harmony with an overwhelming majority of
the Berlin comrades, on the question of tactics,
especially on compromises and alliances; and
thus, so far as in my power lies, afford the party
an opportunity, before the party convention is
held, to realize in their proper connection and in
their entire extent the consequences which an
abandonment of the time-tried policy of our
party would bring about. ,

When I speak here of our policy, I use the
word without regard to anything immaterial and
superficial, but in the sense which since the begin-
.ning of the party it has had for us in contrast to
all other parties, — in the sense of the policy of
the class struggle, which has very often changed
in form, but in substance has remained the same,
— our unique proletarian class policy, which sep-
arates us from all other political parties in tho
world of bourgeois society and excludes us from
intercourse with them.

The pamphlet is a vacation task. It was writ-
ten on the move in the true sense of the word,
in house and field, on mountains, in the cars, here
and there. This, of course, necessarily marred its
unity, but shows also how seriously I took the
matter, to sacrifice for it the quiet of my vaca-
tion. W. LIEBKNECHT.

August, 1899.



• »o ooMPBomaii

NO COMPROMISE.
NO POLITICAL TRADING.



By Wilhelm Liebknecht.

(Published at the Bequest of the Members of
the Social Democratic Party in Berlin and
Vicinity.)

THE PARTY LAW.

t The question of compromises has, in one form
or another, engaged the attention of our party
ever since its entrance into the political arena.
But I have not now the time nor is this the place
for a complete historical presentation of the sub-
ject. The present state of party law in reference
to the compromise question is expressed in the
resolutions of the party conventions held at
Cologne, Hamburg and Stuttgart. The resolu-
tion of the Cologne convention, passed October
28, 1893, is as follows:

"Whereas, The three-class electoral system of
Prussia, which, according to Bismarck's own ex-
pression, is the most wretched of all systems of
election, makes it impossible for the Social Dem-
ocracy to take an independent part in the elec-
tions for the Prussian legislature with any pros-
pect of success; and whereas, it contradicts the
principles heretofore followed by the party in
elections to enter into compromises with hostile
parties, because this would necessarily lead to
demoralization and to strife and dissension in the
ranks of the party; therefore, resolved, that it
is the duty of the party members in Prussia to
abstain from participation in the election for
the legislature.

And whereas, the electoral systems in the scp-



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 7

arate states constitute an excellent specimen of
reactionary election laws and particularly the
plutocratic character of the three-class electoral
system in Prussia makes it impossible for the
laboring class to send its own representatives
to the legislature; therefore, the convention calls
upon the party members to begin a systematic
and energetic agitation in all the separate states
for the introduction of universal, equal, recret
and direct suffrage in elections for the legislature
as demanded by our party platform.' ' j

Four years later, on October 9, 1897, the Ham-
burg convention passed the following resolution:

"The resolution of the Cologne convention
forbidding the Prussian members of the party to
participate in the legislative elections under the
three-class system of voting, is repealed. Par-
ticipation in the next Prussian legislative elec-
tions is recommended everywhere where the con-
ditions render it possible for the party members
to do so. Just how far it is possible to take part
in the elections in the separate election districts
much be decided by the party members of each
election district according to local circumstances.

Compromises and alliances with other parties
must not be entered into."

The repeal of the Cologne resolution was
passed by 160 votes against 50. The entire reso-
lution was passed by 145 votes against 64, one
delegate not voting.

After the vote on the separate parts of the
resolution and after the vote on the whole, in
order to prevent any question from arising as to
the practical meaning of the Hamburg resolution,
the chairman, Singer, with the express consent of
Bebel, who had offered the resolution, and with-
out objection by anyone, and with unanimous
consent, entered on the minutes, made the follow-
ing announcement:

"I wish to state that the convention is unani-
mous in the view that under the resolution



8 NO COMPROMISE.

adopted here no participation in the elections can
take place except by putting up social demo-
cratic candidates."

That comrades should, in the first instance, vote
for candidates of the liberal party was, as Bebel
remarked, absolutely excluded, and would belong
under the head of compromises and alliances with
other parties.

In spite of the clear language of the resolution
and of the clear and authoritative interpretation
thereof on a point susceptible of different con-
structions, the convention had hardly adjourned
when differences of opinion began to be ex-
pressed. In sharp contradiction to the facts and
to the record of the proceedings, it was denied
that voting in the first instance by our party for
candidates of the liberal party would be a com-
promise; and the claim was even made that
the convention had been bulldozed by Singer.

Last year's convention was held at Stuttgart
immediately before the elections for the Prussian
legislature. There was such a difference of opin-
ion that it was not possible to think of disposing
of the matter, especially as the order of business
before the convention was overloaded without
that. So nothing could be done but leave the
final disposition of the matter for a future con-
vention, and for the present pass an emergency
resolution.

On October 5, 1898, the Stuttgart convention
adopted unanimously the following resolution,
agreed upon by a committee, to- wit:

"Participation in the Prussian legislative elec-
tions under the three-class electoral system can-
not be regarded, as is the case in elections for
the Reichstag, as a marshaling of forces; it is
not a means of attaining a moral effect by the
number of our votes, but is only a means of
attaining certain practical results, especially
warding off the danger of allowing the most hide-
bound reactionists to get a majority In the



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 9

legislature. Proceeding from this view, the con-
vention declares that participation in the Prussian
legislative elections is not required in all elec-
tion districts, the less so as the shortness of the
time which remains before the Prussian legisla-
tive elections makes it impossible to bring to-
gether the widely divergent views now existing
within the party on this question, so to make
harmonious action by the party possible. Under
these circumstances the convention leaves it to
the comrades of the separate election districts
to decide on the question of participation. If it
is decided in an election district to take part, and
if a proposition is made to support candidates of
our political opponents, then the candidates must
pledge themselves, in case of their election to
the legislature, to work for the introduction of the
universal, equal, direct and secret ballot, for the
elections to the legislature, the same as it now
exists for the elections to the Reichstag, and to
resist energetically all measures in the legislature
which tend to diminish or abolish the existing
rights of the people in the separate states. All
propositions introduced under the head of 'Prus-
sian Legislative Elections ' shall be considered
disposed of by the adoption of this resolution."
This was the Stuttgart resolution. As can be
seen, it is only temporary and leaves the question
of tactics exactly on the basis of the Hamburg
resolution. In spite of that, the comrades of
some election districts considered themselves jus-
tified in making, contrary to this resolution, ar-
rangements with other parties which were clearly
compromises within the meaning of the Ham-
burg resolution. And the latest events in Bavaria,
the alliance with the Center party, which was
characterized as a cow trade by the comrades
themselves, who took part in it, has shown that
when once the thin end of the opportunist wedge
has forced itself into the policy of the party the
thick end soon follows.



1# NO COMPROMISE.

PROLETARIAN SOCIALISM.

For our party and for our party tactics there
is but one valid basis: the basis of the doss strug-
gle, out of which the Social Democratic party
has sprung up, and out of which alone it can
draw the necessary strength to bid defiance to
every storm and to all its enemies. The founders
of our party, — Marx, Engels and Lassalle, — im-
pressed upon the workingmen the necessity of
the class character of our movement so deeply that
down to a very recent time there were no consid-
erable deviations or getting off the track. The
Cologne resolution was called forth by a proposal
made by Edward Bernstein, then living in Lon-
don, and as editor of the Social Democrat hon-
ored by the members of the party.

Till the year 1803 there never was any talk in
public about the possibility or advisability of tak-
ing part in the Prussian legislative elections. In
the beginning of the '80s, the cooperation of the
Social Democracy with the political democrats
was advocated on the quiet by the democrats
of Frankfort for the purpose of gaining a socialist
and a democratic representative for Frankfort in
the legislature; but the proposition was declined,
also on the quiet, without getting noised abroad.
What turned the scale was this consideration,
viz.: That the class character of the party would
be weakened by an alliance of this "kind; aid
that the advantage of gaining a representative
would be far more than offset by the disadvantage
of an alliance in a legislative election with a
party which we are compelled to fight in the
Reichstag election. The importance of a seat in
the Prussian legislature was not overlooked by
anyone. But it was looked upon as more import-
ant that the representatives of the party should
depend exclusively upon the strength of the party,
and not upon an alliance with parties which
might have momentarily a common interest with



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 11

as, but which in their political make-up are hos-
tile to us and will remain permanently hostile.

Bernstein's proposal, which contemplated a
participation of the Social Democracy in the
Prussian legislative elections, found little response
and no advocates; so that the resolution intro-
duced and supported by Bebel against such par-
ticipation was adopted unanimously.

That the question of taking part in the Prussian
legislative elections should come up again after
many years and even lead to quite animated de-
bates, appears at first sight unintelligible. But
it is explained by two circumstances which I
will here set forth.

First. In reference to the Prussian three-class
electoral system the views of many of the com-
rades had in the course of time undergone a
change. It had escaped the memory of some
of them, here and there, that the logically and
cunningly realized purpose of the three-class
electoral system was to exclude with hermetic
sealing all democratic thought and sentiment,
and that the capitalistic era, which began about
the same time with the introduction of the "most
wretched of all electoral systems,'* had by creat-
ing a class conscious proletariat rendered the vote
of the socialist masses more insignificant than the
vote of the democratic masses had been origin-
ally. How badly many of the speakers (both men
and women) at the Hamburg convention de-
ceived themselves as to the working of the three-
class electoral system is clear from the fact that
some of them entertained the delusion that the
reform of the Prussian legislative elections could
be used as the means of a grand arousing of the
masses. In the jubilation over the success which
had been achieved under other non-democratic
laws regulating legislative elections, especially in
Saxony, many had forgotten that the Prussian
three-class system made the publicity of the bal-
lot obligatory, and thereby in advance practically



12 NO COMPROMISE.

disfranchised all who were dependent, either
economically, socially or politically, that is, the
great majority of the population, and by this
means alone rendered it impossible for the masses
to take part in the election or get up any general
enthusiasm.

The optimistic self-deception in regard to the
three-class electoral law went so far that not a
few of the comrades imagined in all seriousness
that we social democrats would be in a position
by our own strength without fusion or even an
alliance with other parties, to win a number, if
only a small number, of seats. To-day no one is
laboring under this delusion any longer. To-day
everybody knows that we cannot win a single
seat in the Prussian legislature without a com-
promise or an alliance. It was different two
years ago when the party convention, its majority
being under the curse of optimistic self-deception,
pronounced in favor of taking part in the Prus-
sian legislative elections. Fortunately, however,
the heads and supreme council of the party be-
thought themselves of the origin and nature of
the party and by an unqualified prohibition of all
compromises and alliances with other parties
sought to prevent the self-deception from causing
steps which might injure the party and lead it
astray into wrong paths.

The Hamburg resolution has been called con-
tradictory and illogical. True, if the party the
same as before rejected all compromises and
alliances with other parties, then there was no
sense in repealing the Cologne resolution. The
contradiction is explained, as already indicated,
by the fact that a portion of the party deceived
itself or was deceived as to the nature of the Prus-
sian three-class election law. But from this con-
tradiction to conclude, as has actually been done,
that the party had more at heart its desire to par-
ticipate in the Prussian legislative elections than
its aversion to compromises, and that therefore,



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 13

as a contradiction existed, it must be solved by
unqualifiedly advocating participation in tbe elec-
tions and by repealing the prohibition against
compromises and election alliances; such a con-
clusion gives evidence of just as little logic as
of regard for the principles and history of the
party.

Second. This brings me to the second reason
why the question of participation in the legisla-
tive elections could become a matter of serious
party strife. In certain circles there exists an
inclination, or let us say an effort, to desert
the platform of the class struggle and enter into
the common arena of the other parties. As all the
other parties stand upon the basis of a political
state, therefore their field of activity is necessarUy
confined to the spoils of politics. I do not say
that the advocates of the new tactics all wish this:
as to some of them I am convinced that they do
not wish it. But others wish it; and it is no
mere accident that it was just Bernstein who first
proposed the participation of the social democ-
racy in the Prussian legislative elections. This
tactics corresponds perfectly with Bernstein's
program which aims at the politicalization of the
Social Democracy; whereas, it is decidedly Il-
logical from the standpoint of those who do not
wish to deny or destroy the militant character of
our party as carrying on a class struggle.

STATE CAPITALISM.

I do not hesitate to repeat Yny former declara-
tion that a practical surrender of our party prin-
ciples appears to me far more dangerous than all
of Bernstein's theoretical will-o -the-wisps put
together. It has been claimed that in the spoils
parties political nerve has died out; that they
have lost the spirit of freedom and justice. The
claim certainly does not lack foundation, and yet
that condition is no recent matter. Disregarding



14 NO COMPROMISE.

short periods, the German bourgeoisie never did
have what is understood by "political nerve." But
however that may be, it cannot be denied that we
are now living under the influence of politico-
economie conditions which tend to sharpen in
the highest degree the economic and political
antagonisms on the one hand, and yet on the
other hand tend towards an opportunist relaxa-
tion of principles. In addition to that we must
take into consideration the political backward-
ness of the bourgeoisie in Germany, which is the
cause of the fact that there does not exist here
a really liberal party, to say nothing of a demo-
cratic party. This fact has this as its natural
result: that the honestly liberal and democratic
elements of the bourgeoisie gravitate more and
more towards the side of the Social Democracy
as the only party which is fighting for democratic
principles in Germany. But these democratic ele-
ments do not thereby become Socialists, though
many believe they are socialists. In short, we
have now in Germany a phenomenon which has
been observable in France for half a century and
longer, and which has contributed much to the
confusion of party relations in France, viz.: that
a part of the radical bourgeoisie rallies around
the Socialist flag without understanding the
nature of socialism. This political socialism,
which in fact is only philanthropic humanitarian
radicalism, has retarded the development of so-
cialism in France exceedingly. It has diluted and
blurred the principles and weakened the socialist
party because it brought into it troops upon
which no reliance could be placed in the decisive
moment.

Marx in his articles on the class struggles in
France,* characterized for us this political social-
ism. And it would be an unparalleled ease of

♦The Class Struggles In France, 1848-50. with an
Introduction by Frederick Engels, Berlin, 1S»B. For-
toaerU Publishing House.



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 15

flying the track and going astray if the German
Social Democracy, which has had such wonder-
ful success and such a wonderful growth for the
very reason that it has marched ahead unterri-
fied on the basis of the class struggle, should sud-
denly face about and plunge into mistakes, the
avoidance of which has been the power and pride
of our party, and has put the German Social
Democracy at the head of the international social
democracy of all countries.

The disappearance of fear and aversion to us
in political circles of course brings political ele-
ments into our ranks. As long as this takes place
on a small scale it causes no apprehension be-
cause the political elements are outnumbered by
the proletarian elements and are gradually as-
similated. But it is a different thing if the politi-
cal elements in the party become so numerous
and influential that their assimilation becomes
difficult and even the danger arises that the pro-
letarian socialist element will be crowded to the
rear. This danger of politicalization threatens
the German Social Democracy from two sources
on account of the backwardness of our bour-
geoisie. First, the democratic elements of the bour-
geoisie, which find no political satisfaction in
their own class, flow to us in greater numbers
than in countries with a normally developed
bourgeoisie; second, the bureaucratic, though
capitalistic, spirit of our governments tends to-
wards a state socialism which, in fact, is only
state capitalism, but which is dazzling and mis-
leading for those who are easily deceived by ex-
ternal similarities and catch words. The German,
or more accurately the Prussian, state socialism
whoso ideal is a military, landlord and police
state, hates democracy above everything else.
The Kanitzes and their followers claim to be out
and out radical socialists, but will have nothing
to do with democracy. Democracy is their



If NO COMPROMISE.

enemy. It is to them something inherently polit-
ical. But all politics is diametrically opposed to
what is socialist. So by this trick logic we ar-
rive at the conclusion which has gained footing
here and there, even in social democratic circles,
that democracy as savoring of politics has noth-
ing in common with socialism, but on the con-
trary is opposed to it. Certain errors, for ex-
ample the opposition to the militia system, can be
traced to this piece of sophistry, as also at one
time the false teachings of von Schweitzer. But
the truth is that democracy is not a thing that is
specifically political, and we must never forget
that we are not merely a socialist party, but a
social democratic party because we have per-
ceived that socialism and democracy are insepar-
able.

BISMARCK.
As Prince Bismarck, in the '60s, wanted to
move the "Acheron 11 of socialism, and through
the intervention of Brass offered to me the edi-
torship of the North German Gazette, and then
later through Bucher offered to Marx even the
editorship of the StaaU Aneeiger, in both cases
with full freedom to advocate socialism unreserv-
edly, clear down to its ultimate consequences, it
was of course not love for socialism or knowledge
of socialism that led Prince Bismarck to do this.
He understood nothing about socialism at that
time, and never did understand anything about it
down to his death; in fact, he never had any
conception of the moving forces of political and
social life at all. There probably never lived at
any time in any country a "statesman" who was
less scientific, who had less knowledge, and who
relied so purely on experience and a sort of
half-gambler, half-peddler cunning, as Bismarck.
Those offers to socialists place in the clearest
light the untruthfulness of Prince Bismarck's
claim that he always regarded the social democ-



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 17

racy as incompatible with the existence of the
state. Bismarck wanted to use socialism for the
purpose of breaking up and dissolving the bour-
geois liberal opposition, especially the Progres-
sive party. This, in itself, is the most conclusive
proof that he had no conception of the real na-
ture of socialism. Of course the fate of the boy-
magician was repeated. The elemental force
which was conjured up grew over the head of the
dabbler, and he did not get the best of socialism;
socialism got the best of him.

The question of tactics came up then in our
party for the first time. Should we, in considera-
tion of certain concessions to the laborers, aid
Bismarck against the Progressive party and other
opponents of his policy in the expectation of be-
ing then after that strong enough for a successful
struggle against him and against the landlord,
police and military state embodied in his person?
Or did prudence and party interest demand that
we, taking advantage of Bismarck's quarrel with
the Progressive bourgeoisie and the other op-
ponents of his policy, contest the Bismarckian
policy and organize the proletariat into an inde-
pendent political party for the purpose of pre-
paring it for the conquest of political power t

For a while the proletariat wavered, but after
a few years the tactics, advocated principally by
Herr von Schweitzer, of drawing closer to the
Bismarckian policy, was given up and the tactics
was everywhere accepted which has ever since
been in force for the party down to the present
day. This tactics consists in keeping clear the
class character of the socialist party as a prole-
tarian party; to train it by agitation, education
and organization for the victorious completion of
the emancipation struggle; to wage a systematic
war against the dlass state, in whose hands the
political and economic power of capitalism is con-
centrated, and in this war to draw advantages



18 NO COICPROlCISt.

a mLs as possible out of the quarrels and eon-
flievj of the different political parties with each
other.

BOUBGEOIS AND BOUBGEOISIB.

I» Germany the bourgeoisie has never at-
tained political power as in France and England.
Though the English bourgeoisie two and a half
centuries ago, and the French bourgeoisie more
than a century ago, cleared away all the medieval
rubbish, the German bourgeoisie has never yet
been in the position to bring about a political
revolution and to realize in the state what is
called political liberty. The loss of the world's
commerce in consequence of the discovery of
America, and in connection with that the stunt-
ing of industrial activity; the political splitting
up and ruin of Germany; the paralysis of the
national spirit bordering almost on doath; the
rise of dynastic interests hostile to the people
and to enlightenment; all these prevented the
growth of a strong citizenry. As in 1848 a belated
opportunity was offered, the German people even
then did not have the strength for a political revo-
lution. After a brief revel of freedom it bowed
its bead again under the old yoke. From fear of
the laborers, in whom it scented a new and dan-
gerous power, it became reactionary, without
ever having been revolutionary; it did penance
for its dreams of freedom, which appeared to it
as youthful indiscretions, and threw itself into
the arms of political reactionism, filled with but
one remaining ideal, viz.: to get rich. The citi-
zen disappeared from the political arena and
became either politically indifferent or else cap-
italistic. And to be capitalistic means to recog-
nize and support the government unconditionally,
provided it is a class government and represents
and promotes exclusively the interests of capital-
ism.

To prevent misunderstandings and wrong im-
pressions, we must become fully conscious of



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 19

the difference between "political" and " capital-
istic' ' These two ideas, which because of the
ambiguity of the German word "Buerger" are
very easily confused by us, must be clearly
separated from each other. In France the word
"bourgeois," which in the middle ages had the
same meaning as our "Buerger," in the course of
time and of economic development gradually as-
sumed the meaning of ' ' great-capitalist ; ' ' where-
as we Germans for this latter idea borrow the
French word "bourgeois," but also use concur-
rently the German words "Buerger," and
"buergerlich" without noticing the difference.
So there arises a confusion of language which is
anything but conducive to clearness of concep-
tion. We speak of "buergerlich" society, and
mean modern capitalistic bourgeois society. We
speak of "buergerlich" spirit, "buergerlich"
freedom, and mean a democratic spirit of free-
dom such as the citizenry had in former times
when it was fighting the priests and feudal land-
lords, which spirit, however, is diametrically op-
posed to the spirit, of the capitalistic, and Lence
reactionary, landlord and priest coddling citizenry,
or bourgeoisie of to-day.

The correctness of the so-called materialistic
conception of history, which considers the political
development as dependent on the economic,
cannot be brought more strikingly and con-
vincingly to the mind than by the change which in
the course of the Nineteenth century has been
wrought in the bourgeoisie. It can be demon-
strated with the greatest precision how with the
change in the productive relations a change of
political view and attitude has taken place in the
bourgeoisie. Every step forward in economic
development has been a step forward in the
development of class antagonisms and a step in
the approach of the bourgeoisie towards its old
wnermes, the landlords and priests, and a step
*.ii drawing away from the rising proletariat,



29 NO COMPROMISE

which in order to effect its emancipation, mart
advocate equal rights for all men and the demo-
cratic principles formerly supported by the
bourgeoisie. The moment the proletariat steps
forth as a class separate from the bour-
geoisie and having interests opposed to it*
from that moment the bourgeoisie ceased
to be democratic. In the states of tbn
European continent this reaction falls in a chav*
acteristic manner just in a period which is usual
ly called the revolutionary period par excellence
— in the period of the February and March
revolutions. The contradiction is only an ap-
parent one. The February revolution was a
tardy victory of bourgeois idealism which stirred
up the material interests of bourgeois realism to
contradiction, to opposition and to reaction. The
premature outbreak of the proletarian revolution
(in the battle of June, 1848, at Paris), which
followed upon the heels of the belated outbreak
of the bourgeois revolution, drove the bourgeoisie
over to the side of its hereditary enemy, because
it foresaw in the victory of the proletariat the
downfall of capitalism. In France Napoleon was
elected President, and in Germany the bour-
geoisie even in the honeymoon of the March
revolution longed for a deliverer which would
down the red specter. Thus the "black reaction,"
which in 1849 followed our revolution, was in
fact simply the true character of this revolution,
stripped of its fantastic deceptive dress of gilded
phrases. Under the rule of capitalism the bour-
geoisie was forced to become politically reac-
tionary so far as it was capitalistic or stood under
capitalistic influence. The "black reaction"
which half a century ago spread over the Euro-
pean continent, was just as much a historical
necessity as the still blacker reaction of' 'the
present zigzag policy of penitentiary bJj Qg which
capitalism in a fit of desperation has forwi upon



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 21

THE GERMAN BOURGEOISIE NEVER

PASSED THROUGH THE LIBERAL

STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT.

In Germany where capitalism was developed
later than in England and France, and where
it was not preceded, as in those two countries,
by an era of economic prosperity for the bour-
geoisie as well as of political supremacy by it,
the whole political development was obliged to
take on a different character. Thero a soil
cleared of medieval mould and undergrowth;
here, the most modern of modern conditions, as
modern as in France and England, in between
medieval mould and undergrowth; the healthy
growth entwined with ivy which sucks the life
out of everything that it clasps with its tendrils;
which only lives from death and rottenness and
which must bo torn off and grubbed up to pre-
vent the healthy and growing from being sacri-
ficed to the dead. The German bourgeoisie,
which was sleeping the sleep of impotence at
the time when in other lands the bourgeoisie im-
pressed upon the state its bourgeois character,
docs not even now possess the strength to tear
away and extirpate the romantic and death-briqg-
ing parasitic ivy of landlordism and medieval
semi-barbarism.

The political impotence of the German citi-
zenry in past and present is what distinguishes
the political life of Germany from that of the
other advanced countries, and has assigned to
the German proletariat the mission not only of
solving its own strictly proletarian problem, but
also of accomplishing the work left undone by
our bourgeoisie. Tactics is determined by the
nature of the conditions. So far as the bour-
geoisie is capitalistic, we have to fight it; so far
as the bourgeoisie opposes capitalism and the
reactionism which it shields and assists, we have



22 NO COMPROMISE

either to support it positively or at least not
assume a hostile attitude towards it, unless it
gets in our line of tie, as for example, in the
elections for the Beichstag where a bourgeois
and a social democratic candidate are running
against each other

Disregarding the yon Schweitzer episode, the
German Social Democracy has consistently and
consciously followed the tactics prescribed in the
Communist Manifesto, to direct its main attack
against political reactionism and to lend aid to
the bourgeoisie, so far as it is liberal or demo-
cratic, in its struggle against political reaction-
ism and in no case to throw itself on the side
of political reaction in its struggle against the
bourgeoisie. It is necessary to emphasize this,
because Bernstein in his polemic written against
the Social Democratic party of Germany, and
which has been so suspiciously praised and rec-
ommended, has accused us of something which
is a favorite old legend of Eugene Bichter's, viz.:
that we blindly opposed the German bourgeoisie
to the advantage of political reactionism and
repelled and terrorized it so much that in its
alarm it took refuge under the wings of a reac-
tionary landlord, police and military state. It is
not possible to slap the truth squarer in the
face than is done by saying this.

THE VAILUBE OP THE PBOGBESSIVE
PABTY.

At the time of the great eonstitutional struggle
in the '60s there was no socialist party worth
speaking of. In 1864, at the time Lassalle was
killed in a duel with the Wallachian noble Bako-
witz, the Universal German Working Men's
Union numbered in all Germany 5,000 or 6,000
members on paper; in reality still fewer. This
little band could not have scared the German
Progressive party out of its wits, even though



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 23

we measure the latter 's valor by the microscopic
scale of rabbit courage, befitting the German
bourgeoisie. Yet it surrendered to Bismarck;
and after the success of the civil war of 1866 it
granted him indemnity and bowed itself under
the Caudine yoke which he set up. To claim that
the Social Democracy is to blame for that is
simply ridiculous. It is true that Lassalle had
attacked the bourgeoisie very bitterly, but in so
doing had found very little sympathy among
German workingmen. And although Lassallo in
his opposition to the Progressive party occa-
sionally got perhaps somewhat too close to the
Bismarckian reactionary policy, still it must not
be forgotten that at the beginning of the con-
stitutional struggle he had stood on the side of
the Progressive party and only separated from
it after it had obstinately refused to carry on the
struggle in earnest in spite of his repeated de-
mands that it do so.

The German bourgeoisie — and this is the key
to its otherwise unaccountable conduct— did not
have in 1862 any more than it had in 1848 and
earlier, the stuff for a political revolution. It
feared — as I told one of the leaders of the Pro-
gressive party to his face in the beginning of the
year 1863 — it feared a revolution more than a
reaction. And Bismarck with his cynical con-
tempt of men and his horse-trader cuteness, soon
brought out that fact. The Progressists did not
strike him as ' ' imposing ; ' ' and the more impu-
dent ho was in his intercourse with them the easier
he curled them around his finger. To hold the
German Social Democracy responsible for the
treason to liberty committed by the Prussian
Progressive party is not only an insult to his-
torical truth; it indicates also a complete misun-
derstanding of the role which the German bour-
geoisie has played since the middle ages.

I simply put the two facts side by side: In
the period of the constitutional struggle when



£4 no ooicpROiass.

the Progressive party stood at the height of its
power and had the people behind it, Bismarck,
then in the beginning of his career, turned it
down with the greatest ease. In the period of
the anti-Socialist law, when Bismarck stood at
the height of his power and with all the re-
sources of capitalism was exercising a bourgeois
dictatorship, he was turned down by the Social
Democracy with the greatest ease, though it had
all the political parties against it. That shows
who can fight reactionism in Germany and who
can not

The wretchedness of the German bourgeoisie
does not, however, release us from the duty of
assisting it, wherever it does earnestly oppose
reactionism, provided our own interests do not
thereby suffer. And this has been done without
exception ever since the German Social Democ-
racy entered the arena as an independent party.
For myself, I need only to mention the fact that
in 1865 I was expelled from Prussia because I
foiled Bismarck's attempt to crush the Progres-
sive party with the aid of the Socialists as be-
tween two millstones. I can say with a good
conscience that in all my struggles against the
Bismarckian reaction I have fought for political
liberty. And in my oft-quoted pamphlet on the
political attitude of the Social Democracy I
emphasized the democratic character of our move-
ment not less than has been done recently by
Bernstein, who recommends to us as brand new
wisdom what we have already been practicing for
thirty-odd years.

THE PAMPHLET ON TACTICS.

I must here say a word about my above men-
tioned pamphlet on tactics. The speech out of
which it arose was delivered in the year 1869
at the time of the North German Confederation;
this was a temporary arrangement which could
not possibly last and which would nave to end



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 25

either with the breaking down of Bismarck's
Great-Prussian policy or with its victory by a
union with the South German States, excepting
Austria. In this temporary state or interim the
tactics forced upon us by the logic of the facts
was that of opposition at any price. Bismarck
had introduced a universal suffrage of the Napo-
leonic pattern, not to establish the sovereignty
of the people, but to cover up his despotic dic-
tatorship. As Napoleon through his prefects
directed the universal sufTrago as he pleased, so
Bismarck thought he could do the same through
his local counsellors. It seemed to him an instru-
ment easier to handle than the three class electoral
system, which the bourgeoisie had got control of,
and in the first two classes of which it had cre-
ated for itself an impregnable stronghold.

The history of the Prussian three class electoral
system is interesting because it shows so plainly
how the most craftily planned political schemes
of reactionists enn be overthrown by economic
development and temporarily turned so as to
have an opposite effect from that intended. De-
signed with cunning shrewdness to bar out all
democratic or opposition elements, it answered
this purpose perfectly for a decade, until one
fine day the bourgeoisie, having grown econom-
ically strong and being provoked by the dis-
gusting orgies of landlord and police stewardship
began to feel its political strength; it came upon
the idea that it only needed to will the thing in
order to obtain a majority in the first two
electoral classes, and thereby win a 'ictory in
the election of the deputies. The idea was made
a reality, and I'rince Bismarck damned the ma-
chinery which so outrageously refused to work
as it was expected to; the three class electoral
system then became the "most wretched of sll
electoral systems ; ' ' but on the other hand, uni-
versal, equal and direct suffrage, this God-be-
with-us of the "frantic year" 1848, and which



26 NO COMPROMISE.

in Napoleonic France bad shown such splendid
results, now beamed as a brilliant salvation of
the state and of society through Caesarism.

So we got the universal franchise; and for
another reason as well The dynastic-feudal
revolution from above which topped off Bis-
marck's "national 11 policy, would have hung in
mid-air unless there had been given to it at
least the appearance of a revolution from below.
He needed the people even though only for a
dummy; and there was no better bait than the
universal franchise of 1848. It united the Bis-
marckian revolution from above with the '48er
revolution from below and put the unthinking
masses in the delusion that Prussia, enlarged at
the expense of Germany and turned into a land-
lord, police and soldier state, »was the realization
of German democracy. To-day we know how
deep this delusion had taken root; it required
decades of brutal misgovernment to root it out
again.

But in one thing Bismarck miscalculated, viz.:
in the strength of the revolutionary idea. What
was possible in France after the battle of June,
which drove the whole bourgeoisie into the wild-
est reactionism, was not possible in Germany
where the power of the state was not so closely
centralized and where, fed by the development
of capitalism, a healthy workingmen's movement
grew up which was determined to exploit the
national and dynastic crises and struggles in
the interest of the proletariat; to make socialism
the decisive power in Germany and to help it on
to victory and supremacy. The German pro-
letariat had the advantage of being able to draw
practical lessons from the labor movement in
other countries which were (and are) ahead of
Germany in political and economic development.
It also had the extraordinary good fortune to be
led into the field of political action by its great
teachers, Marx, Engels and Lassalle, right at



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 27

the beginning of its career. It was thereby
spared from the errors of pure and simple union-
ism on the ono hand, and of aimless planless,
through and through bourgeois-anarchistic plot-
ting and bawling for revolutions on the
other hand. Though the German working-class
in 1867, when the universal franchise went into
effect, was only to a very small extent filled with
class consciousness, it was nevertheless the only
class, and the socialist party was the only party,
which clearly saw the moaning of voting and
the value of the franchise. There was oven a
slight overestimation of it, but this was useful
because it increased the enthusiasm.

If Prince Bismarck entertained the hope that
the universal franchise could be exploited in
Napoleonic style and that the Reichstag would
remain what I called it in 1867, the figleaf to
partly cover the naked figure of absolutism, the
political basis of this hope was overthrown by the
expansion of the North German Confederation
into the German Empire. The highest triumph
of Bismarckian politics carried its downfall and
bankruptcy within it. "What the stiff Prussian
military and police spirit could perhaps have
prevented for an indefinite time within the limits
of the North German Confederation, viz.: the
rise and growth of an independent popular move-
ment, this could not be prevented on the larger
field of the German Empire. The power of the
people could not be suppressed, and the jealousy
of the "Federal Princes' ' at Prussian supremacy
helped along, so that the trees of Bismarck's
feudal Cffisarism could not shoot up as high
as the trees of Napoleon's prefect-Caesarism. It
was not possible by any allurements to take from
the workingmen the recognition of the insepara-
bility of socialism from democracy and of de-
mocracy from socialism.

"The question" (thus I began my speech
in 1869), "what attitude should the Social



28 NO C0MPB0MI8K.

Democracy take in the political itruggle, is
answered with ease and certainty if we have
attained a clear conception of the insepara-
bility of socialism and democracy. Socialism and
democracy are not the same, but they are only
different expressions of the same fundamental
idea. They oolong to each other, round out each
other, and can never stand in contradiction to
each other. Socialism without democracy is
pseudo-socialism, just as democracy without so-
cialism is pseudo-democracy. The democratic
state is the only possible form of a socialistically
organised society." ,

This truth, the inseparableness of democracy
and socialism, served for the German working
class as a sure guide amidst the greatest con-
fusion of political issues, so that the dangerous
shoals of state socialism were avoided towards
which the Prussian reaction was headed even in
the '40s; for the ideal of the garrison and police
state was of course a garrison and police social-
ism, which is euphemistically called state so-
cialism. The sophisms of Wagoner and von
Schweitzer that democracy has something bour-
geois about it, and that socialism, being directed
against bourgeois society, must consequently be
anti-democratic, did, it is true, confuse many a
man in von Schweitzer's time; out it never found
acceptance among the mass of laborers. This
pseudo-logic bobbed up again recently in the well
known militia debate, but has no longer any sig-
nificance.

WHAT IS A COMPROMISBt

Before we go farther we must get a clear idea
of the meaning of the word "compromise," other-
wise every debate on it will be completely with-
out aim and without result, because every one
will have in mind something different and conse-
quently no one will meet the arguments of an-
other. If compromise is understood as a con-
cession of theory to practice, then our entire life



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 29

and activity is a compromise and all huinaL.
history and the history of the race from the ttie
of the individual up to that of nations and of
mankind is an endless, unbroken chain of com-
promises. That conception of history according
to which tabula rasa, i. e., a clean sweep, is tem-
porarily made and must be made in order
to start a new administration and system
free from the old, is in the highest degree un-
scientific and stands in the most direct contra-
diction to experience. The clean sweep theory
is a spook which exists to-day only in the heads
of police politicians who accuse us of wanting to
1 'ruinate" everything that does not fit into our
scheme. These gentlemen thereby give judgment
against themselves, for they think they are the
ones who possess this magical power of being
able to "ruinate" anything and everything which
Time's eternal loom has woven and is weaving, if
perchance it has been done without first getting
a permit from the chief of police. The framers
of the anti-socialist law and penitentiary law dis-
play by their foolish activity only their bottom-
less ignorance. The organic laws according to
which political and social development goes on,
cannot be arbitrarily changed or nullified, just
as little as this can be done with the laws under
which an animal or a plant grows and develops.
Whoever interferes there with violence can only
disturb and destroy; this has always been the
effect wrought by the police politicians. What
these fuddlers, who call themselves "statesmen,"
say against us social democrats, viz.: that we
cannot create anything, but only destroy is
simply the reflection of their own actings and
doings; there is not among the innumerable sins
and vices, of which they accuse us, a single one
which they have not taken from themselves.

To add one new example to the old ones, I
will simply refer to the charge, which has been
stereotyped for twenty years, viz.: that ike



80 NO COMPROMISE

Social Democracy has for its object a pruiecaim*.
dictatorship. The truth is that since the battle
of June at Paris, that is for fifty-one years, we
have actually had on the continent of Europe the
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. A dictatorship
which has been exercised with fire and sword
against the working class; which, after the battle
of June, brought us the horrible butcheries of
the Commune, and hundreds of smaller butch-
eries of laborers; a dictatorship which extends to
the disfranchisement of the working class and
deprives the proletariat of the enjoyment not
only of political rights, but also of simple legal
rights; a dictatorship which has expressed itself
in dozens of exceptional laws and force laws and
which we Germans have to thank for the Anti-
Socialist law, the penitentiary bill and class law
decrees such as the Loebtau judgment and the
perjury trial at Essen. And if "King Stumm,"
who is now king in the realm of "social reform,"
should accomplish his purpose of annihilating
every organization of workingmen, what in com-
parison with such a dictatorship would be the
dictatorship of a Marius or a Sulla or of the
French convention of 1792-17941 The political
power which the social democracy aims at and
which it will win, no matter what its enemies
may do, has not for its object the establishment
of a dictatorship of the proletariat, but the sup-
pression of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
Just as the class struggle which the proletariat
carries on is only a counter struggle in self de-
fense to resist the class struggle of the bour-
geoisie against the proletariat; and the end of
this struggle by the victory of the proletariat
will be the abolition of the class struggle in every
form.

We Social Democrats know that the laws ac-
cording to which political and social evolution
goes on can no more be changed or stopped by
us than by the authorities of capitalistic society.



NO POLITICAL TRATOKG. %\

We know that we can no more introduce at will
socialistic production and a socialist form of
society than the German Kaiser nine years ago
could carry out his February proclamations
against the representatives of the capitalistic
class struggle. Therefore we were able to watch
with smiling indifference the attempt of our
opponents to crush the labor movement by force.
We were and still are sure of our success, as
sure as of the solution of a mathematical problem.
But we know also that tho shifting of relations,
though it goes on unceasingly, yet goes on grad-
ually because it is an organic movement; and it
goes on, too. without destruction of the existing
relations (the removal of the dead is not de-
struction). The destruction of the exist-
ing, of the living, is in general impossible.
We saw that plainly in the French revolution,
which was probably the best planned and most
energetically carried out of all political up-
heavals; but nevertheless after the "golden
period" of ideological groping around and of
phantastic and Utopian illusions was past, it was
compelled to take things as they were and fit
the new on to the old. In the first rush it may
be possible occasionally to crowd out the living;
but history teaches us that the most revolutionary
and despotic governments were finally compelled
by the logic of facts to yield and to recognize
perhaps in another form, that which was unnat-
urally and mechanically abolished. In short,
viewed historically, the present is, as a rule, a
compromise between the past and the future.

Therefore to reject a compromise in this sense
would be unscientific folly. And practical folly
it would be for a political party to fail to draw
advantages out of the opportunities of political
life and utilize for itself the quarrels of the dif-
ferent opposing parties. Prudence demands this;
principles do not come into the question; no
obligations are assumed and not to do what



82 HO OOMPBOMISt



pro

Soci



ctance demands would be stupidity. That wt
cial Democrats in the Reichstag sometimes om
a socio-political question Tote with the Conserva-
tives for the government, and on political and
commercial questions sometimes vote with the
Radicals against the government, that is a com-
mon requirement of political warfare. Though it
is undoubtedly a compromise between theory and
practice, it has nothing at all in common with the
compromises against which the party has re-
peatedly declared itself distinctly and expressly.
What the party had in mind and what it by
formal resolutions made the duty of the members,
was the avoidance of alliances, agreements, ar-
rangements, contracts or whatever they might be
called, which would involve a surrender of prin-
ciples or in general a change in the relation of
our party towards the bourgeois parties in a
manner injurious to us. This last point must
be especially emphasized, because the question
hinges principally on this. In the debate on
taking part in the Prussian legislative elections
the question at issue was exclusively this last
point; for none of those who advocated partici-
pation had the slightest idea of sacrificing party
principles in an alliance with the Progressive
party, though it must not be overlooked that
questions of tactics very easily shift into questions
of principle.

If the circumstances and necessities of the sit-
uation demand cooperation with other parties,
this can always be accomplished without a com-
promise. I take for example Belgium. The
Liberal party had there a common interest with
the Socialist party in fighting the Clericals. The
two parties united and worked together up to a
certain point. That would have been done even
without any fusion. But it was done by fusion,
and what was the result f Quarrel and strife.
Fusions have shown themselves to be entirely
superfluous. When that point is passed up to



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 83

which community of interests existed and wp to
which the community of interests, without any
fusion, would have induced united action, then
united action ceases. If class consciousness is
not strong enough among laborers, it certainly
is among the gentlemen of the bourgeoisie, in
whom the class instinct is much more active than
in laborers. And this is true even in countries
with democratic laws and institutions. I refer to
the separation between bourgeois democrats and
socialists in Switzerland, Bernstein's Eldorado,
where, according to Bernstein's doctrine, class
antagonism should properly have entirely disap-
peared; but we know it exists there just as strong
as in less democratic countries. But it is not
denied that the acuteness of class struggles is
lessened by democratic institutions.

In Belgium with its free institutions on one
hand and its priest-ridden government on the
other hand, election alliances between the Social
Democracy and the bourgeois parties have here-
tofore found a fertile soil. At any rate, in all
alliances which it formed there our party had
the advantage of being in the lead. It could not
bo exploited nor deceived. And yet the Belgium
comraden have found a drawback in compro-
mises. Comrade Vandervelde, writing in the
Wiener Arbeiterzeitung, welcomes the introduc-
tion of the proportional system in Belgium as
the end of election alliances. "In future," he
writes, "secondary factors will no longer enter
into the class struggle; the confusing side issues
will disappear which render it so difficult for
the masses to grasp the truth of the class strug-
gle.' ' Friend Vandervelde has therefore found
out that compromises, even there where they
take place under conditions and circumstances
the most favorable for the laborers, have an
injurious effect because "they render it difficult
for the masses to grasp the truth of the class
struggle; 99 in other words, alliances by removing



34 NO COMPROMISE.

the laborers from the ground of the class struggle
take away from them the possibility of developing
their full power and making it count. This they
are only able to do on the platform of the class
struggle.

The harm of a compromise does not consist
in the danger of a formal selling out or side-
tracking of party principles. That has probably
never been intended by any one in our party.
Even when our comrades in Essen in the election
before the last voted for the "cannon king" out
of spite, they had no idea of surrendering even
one iota of our program. The danger and root
of the evil does not lie here. It lies In giving tp,
keeping in the background or forgetting the
class struggle basis, for this is the source of the
whole modern labor movement. It is necessary
here to distinguish sharply, and not be misled
by catchwords; in short, we must have an emanci-
pation from phrases, as I said decades ago, with
reference to the phraseology of anarchism, which
poses as revolutionary, but in fact is only small
bore reactionism, merely a late-arrival caricature
of the bourgeois ideal of freedom and a theatrical
masquerade of commercial free competition.

SOCIALISM AND ETHICS.

Pity for poverty, enthusiasm for equality and
freedom, recognition of social injustice and a de-
sire to remove it, is not socialism. Condemna-
tion of wealth and respect for poverty, such as
we find in Christianity and other religions, is not
socialism. The communism of early times, as it
was before the existence of private property, and
as it has at all times and among all peoples been
the elusive dream of some enthusiasts, is not
socialism. The forcible equalization advocated
by the followers of Baboeuf, the so-called equali-
tarians, is not socialism.

In all these appearances thore is lacking the



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 35

real foundation of capitalist society with its class
antagonisms. Modern socialism is the child of
capitalist society and its class antagonisms. With
out these it could not be. Socialism and ethics
are two separate things. This fact must be kept
in mind.

Whoever conceives of socialism in the sense
of a sentimental philanthropic striving after hu-
man equality, with no idea of the existence of
capitalist society, is no socialist in the sense of
the class struggle, without which modern social-
ism is unthinkable. To be sure Bernstein is nom-
inally for the class struggle — in the same manner
as the Hessian peasant is for "the Republic and
the Grand Duke." Whoever has come to a full
consciousness of the nature of capitalist society
and the foundation of modern socialism, knows
also that a socialist movement, that leaves the
basis of the class struggle may be anything else,
but it is not socialism.

This foundation of the class struggle, which
Marx — and this is his immortal service — has
given to the modern labor movement, is the main
point of attack in the battle which the bourgeois
political economy is waging with socialism. The
political economists deny the class struggle and
would make of the labor movement only a part
of the bourgeois party movements, and the Social
Democracy only a division of the bourgeois
democracy. The bourgeois political economy
and politics direct all their exertions against the
class character of the modern labor movement.
If it were possible to create a breach in this bul-
wark, in this citadel of the Social Democracy,
then the Social Democracy is conquered, and the
proletariat thrown back under the dominion of
capitalistic society. However small such a breach
may be in the beginning, the enemy has the
power to widen it and the certainty of final vic-
tory. And the enemy is most dangerous when he
comes as a friend to the fortress, when he slinks



36 NO COMPROMISE.

in under the cover of friendship, and is recog-
nized as a friend and comrade.

The enemy who comes to us with open visor
we face with a smile; to set our foot upon his
neck is mere play for us. The stupidly brutal
acts of violence of police politicians, the out-
rages of anti-socialist laws, the anti-revolution
laws, penitentiary bills — these only arouse feel-
ings of pitying contempt; the enemy, however,
that reaches out the hand to us for a political
alliance, and intrudes himself upon us as a friend
and brother, — him and him alone have we to
fear.

Our fortress can withstand every assault — it
can not be stormed nor taken from us by siege —
it can only fall when we ourselves open the doors
to the enemy and take him into our ranks as a
fellow comrade. Growing out of the class strug-
gle, our party rests upon the class struggle as a
condition of its existence. Through and with
that struggle the party is unconquerable; without
it the party is lost, for it will have lost the source
of its strength. Whoever fails to understand
this or thinks that the class struggle is a dead
issue, or that class antagonisms are gradually be-
ing effaced, stands upon the basis of bourgeois
philosophy.

The present discussion over tactics in relation
to participation in the elections to the Prussian
legislature, has been compared to the discussion
which took place among the Social Democratic
members of the Reichstag in the middle of the
'80s concerning the steamship subsidy. If one
examines the matter only superficially the com-
parison appears strikingly close, but ceases to
be so as soon as the kernel of the question is
reached. At that time we were concerned with
the application of universally recognized prin-
ciples to a concrete case. That the Social Demo-
cratic faction in the Reichstag was interested in
the furtherance of German shipping and com-



NO COMPROMISE. 87

mercial interests was as universally admitted as
that they were opposed to the colonial policy and
all other imperialistic reactionary tendencies. The
only question was whether the subsidy was pri-
marily in the interest of the German commer-
cial interests, which were national in their chnr-
acter, or whether it was a part of colonial pol-
itics that served only the private interests of re-
actionary individuals at the expense of the pub-
lic. No one suggested at that time to change
the old tactics or alter the course of the party.
The present discussion, however, is concerned
with the question of a complete change of the
old tactics and aims; a change of tactics that
would mean a change in the character of the
party. It turns upon the question of the reten-
tion or abandonment of the class struggle stand-
point which distinguishes us from all bourgeois
parties; in short, it involves a decisive step, upon
which depends whether we shall remain a social-
ist party, or whether we shall brHg* over the
Rubicon of the class struggle and become the
left wing of the bourgeois democracy.

THEORETICAL DIFFERENCES OF OPIN-
ION, NOT MATERIAL: TACTICS
IS MATERIAL.

Diversity of opinions on theoretical points is
never dangerous to the party. There are for us
no bounds to criticism, and however great our
respect may be for the founders and pioneers of
our party, we recognize no infallibility and no
other authority than science, whose sphere is
ever widening and continually proves what it
previously held as truths to be errors; destroys
the old decayed foundations and creates new
ones; does not stand still for an instant; but in
perpetual advance moves remorselessly over
every dogmatic belief. At the Union Conven-
tion held at Gotha twenty-four years ago I said,



38 NO COMPROMISE

i

"We recognize no infallible Pope, not even a
literary one." And when in 1891, in Erfurt, I
explained and advocated the newly drafted plat-
form, which was unanimously adopted, I declared
that just because our program was a scientific
one it most be constantly changed at minor
points to meet the continuous advance of science.
And I maintain that no man — Marx, in spite
of his comprehensive and deep intellect, as little
as any other — can bring science to final perfec-
tion; and this position is for everyone who un-
derstands the nature of science a foregone con-
clusion. No socialist, therefore, has the right
to condemn attacks on the theoretical ideas of
the Marxian teachings or to excommunicate any
one from the party because of such attacks. But
it is wholly different when such attacks imply a
complete overturning of our whole conception of
society, as, for example, is the case with Bern-
stein. Then vigorous defense is in order.

Far more dangerous than theoretical assaults
are practical disavowals of our principles. The-
oretical discussions interest only a comparatively
small portion of our membership; whereas prac-
tical disavowal of principles and tactical offenses
against the party program touch every
party comrade and arouse the attention of
every party comrade; and when they are not
quickly checked and corrected they bring con-
fusion into the whole party. I do not believe
I shall be disputed by any one who is familiar
with the circumstances and with the party, when
I say that the masses within the party care little
for Bernstein's writings. They only find sym-
pathy among those who have formerly held sim-
ilar views, and they arouse a sensation only
among our opponents who wish to see fulfilled
their old hopes of a split in the party, or to see
the whole Social Democracy go over with drums
beating, into the bourgeois camp. I will wager
that not ten thousand of our comrades have



NO POLITICAL TRADING/ 39

ever read Bernstein's book, and I am far from
considering it as a reproach to the party that
they show no inclination to busy themselves
once more with the underbrush that the founders
of socialism, more than a generation ago, yes,
in some cases more than two generations ago,
hewed down in clearing the way for socialism.
One might just as well accuse our comrades of
being unscientific because they no longer read
the antedeluvian writings of Schultzo-Delitzsch
that may be lying around somewhere in country
villages as dust-covered and shopworn goods.

Look at the list of those who have commented
on Bernstein's book. There is not a single la-
borer among them. It is only those comrades
whose professional duty it is to read and discuss
such writings. With what interest, on the con-
trary, the whole party followed the question of
participation in the Prussian legislative elections,
or the election alliance in Bavaria — how lively
was the discussion! This lively interest showed
the maturity of the party. We are past the
stage of theoretical debates about platforms.
The establishment, elaboration and clarifying of
our program we leave to science, which in our
present society is the business of only a few.
But the practical application of our program,
and the tactics of the party are the business of
all j here all work together.

The supreme importance of tactics and the
necessity of maintaining its class struggle char-
acter, is something the party has been well con-
scious of from the beginning. If we read the
proceedings of the early conventions held in
the 70s we find that in all questions of tactics the
thought was continually kept in the foreground
that the party must be kept clean from all mix-
ture with all other parties, every one of which,
no matter how much they differed from each
other or how furiously they fought among them-
selves, stood upon the ground of bourgeois so-



40 NO C0MPB01O8B.

cietv as a common basis. This separation of the
Social Democracy from all other parties, this
essential difference, which silly opponents take
as a reason or pretext for declaring us political
outlaws, is our pride and our strength.

In the Hamburg convention, where under the
influence of a series of confusing circumstances,
the mass of the delegates appeared decided to
break with the old tactics and traditions, the
party still recovered itself at the last moment
boforo the leap into tho dark and doc la red itsolf
by an overwhelming majority as opposed to
every compromise. And this resolution has re-
mained in force to the present day. If two or
three election districts have been induced to enter
into an alliance with a bourgeois party, this was
done upon their own responsibility and in un-
doubted violation of the Hamburg resolution,
which, let me repeat, was not repealed by the
Stuttgart resolution. On the other hand, the
Berlin comrades, who have been complained of
by the friends of compromise as violators of the
Hamburg resolution, have conscientiously fol-
lowed the spirit and letter of it, and by their
decisive stand maintained the authority of the
supreme party council and performed a service
to the party.

The advocates of compromise tactics overesti-
mate the value of parliamentary activity and
parliamentary representation. Not that I do not
recognize the enormous value of parliamentary
activity, but this is not an end, but only a means
to an end. Our power is not measured by the
number of representatives, but by the total num-
ber of votes that are behind us.

It is a bourgeois feeling to overvalue the pos-
session of representatives. In representation as
in money there is power — power over others.
Whoever places the purity and the greatness of
our party above all else, for him representatives
have value only in so far as they serve to give ex-



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 41

pression to the power and extent of Social De-
mocracy. What do ten, what do a hundred repre-
sentatives signify, when our escutcheon has lost
its gloss through their acquisition f The value
of a representative is small. But the value of the
integrity of our party is immeasurable. In it
rests our strength. As with the shorn hair, that
signified his manhood's honor, the strength of
Samson disappeared, so the strength of our party
would cease if we allowed the bourgeois Delilahs
to flatter away our most precious jewel and the
roots of our triumphal strength— 4he party purity,
the party honor.

WE ABE A PECULIAB PEOPLE.

We may not do as other parties, because we
are not like the others. We are — and this cannot
be too often repeated — separated from all other
parties by an insurmountable barrier, a barrier
that any individual can easily surmount; but
once on the other side of it, and he is no Social
Democrat.

We are different from the others; "we are
other than the others." What for the others are
necessities and conditions of life are death to us.
What is it that has made of us in Germany the
pivotal party, which according to the significant
testimony of Caprivi and the teaching of daily
experience makes us the axle around which gov-
ernmental politics turns f Most assuredly not our
representatives in the Reichstag. We might have
three times as many representatives, and the
allied bourgeois parties would have nothing to
fear from us. No, it is the avalanche-like in-
crease of our supporters that gradually, with the
certainty of a natural law, or more correctly of
a natural force, grows from tens of thousands to
hundreds of thousands, and from hundreds of
thousands to millions, and is daily increasing,
bidding defiance to our opponents and driving



42 NO COMPROMISE.

them into impotent rage. And this avalanche-
like increase has come, and is coming, as a con-
sequence of our opposition to and struggle with
all other parties.

All who are weary and heavy laden; all who
suffer under injustice; all who suffer from the
outrages of the existing bourgeois society; all
who have in them the feeling of the worth of
humanity, look to us, turn hopefully to us, as
the only party that can bring rescue and deliver-
ance. And if we, the opponents of this unjust
world of violence, suddenly reach out the hand of
brotherhood to it, conclude alliances with its
representatives, invite our comrades to go hand
in hand with the enemy whose misdeeds have
driven the masses into our camp, what confusion
must result in their minds I How can the masses
longer believe on usf If the men of the clerical
party, of the progressive party, and the other
boodle parties are our comrades, wherefore then
the struggle against capitalist society, whose rep-
resentatives and champions all of these aref
What reason have we, then, for existence f It
must be that for the hundreds and thousands,
for the millions that have sought salvation under
our banner, it was all a colossal mistake for
them to come to us. If we are not different
from the others, then we are not the right ones
— the Savior is yet to come; and the Social
Democracy was a false Messiah, no better than
the other false ones!

Just in this fact lies our strength, that we are
not like the others, and that we are not only
not like the others, and that we are not simply
different from the others, but that we are their
deadly enemy, who have sworn to storm and
demolish the Bastile of Capitalism, whose de-
fenders all those others are. Therefore we are
only strong when we are alone.

This is not to say that we are to individualize
or to isolate ourselves. We have never lacked



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 43

for company, and we never shall so long as the
fight lasts. On the essentially true but literally
false phrase about a "single reactionary mass,"
the Social Democracy has never believed since it
passed from the realm of theory to that of prac-
tice. We know that the individual members and
divisions of the "single reactionary mass" are in
conflict with each other, and we have always used
these conflicts for our purposes. We have used
opponents against opponents, but have never
allowed them to use us. We have in the person
of Bismarck, the agrarian, fought personified
capitalism and militarism and utilized all his
capitalistic opponents to weaken him; thus we
have used particularism; and thus the bourgeois
democracy. That was, however, no compromise,
not even a momentary truce. Just as little as it
is a compromise or momentary truce when we in
the Reichstag vote against the Agrarians in favor
of some measure of the Progressive party.

This exclusiveness of the German Social De-
mocracy as opposed to other parties is especially
required of us. because of the historical develop-
ment and political conditions of Germany. We
have no revolutionary bourgeois with whom we
might temporarily unite as in France and Bel-
gium.

We have no Democratic institutions that make
it possible for a Social Democrat to take part
in the government side by side with members of
other parties. In Switzerland the government is
little more than an administration, and one chosen
by the people at that. A Social Democrat, as a
member of the government of a canton signifies
little more than a Social Democrat in a com-
mon council. Accordingly our comrades in
Switzerland could vote unreservedly for the gov-
ernment monopoly of grain and brandy without
feeling that the money secured thereby would
be squandered for purposes hostile to the people
and injurious to the community.



44 NO 00MPR0MI8I.

Even in France things are somewhat different
from here, although the government is emphat-
ically a class government (occasionally so in a
degree scarcely equaled by any other govern-
ment) ; yet the relations are so little consolidated,
and the influence of the democracy and of the
social democracy is so great that any permanent
misuse of the governmental powers for reaction-
ary and oppressive purposes is not to be feared.
Accordingly it was possible a few years ago for
the socialist Jaures to introduce a bill in the legis-
lative chamber regarding the grain traffic, which
was externally but little different from the bill
introduced in the German Reichstag by Count
Kanitz of the Agrarian party. Tet the inner dif-
ference was all the greater. In France there is
no agrarian class; the bourgeoisie rules directly,
yet under conditions that would prevent it from
making the means of government — police, army
and class judiciary — the end and purpose of the
state, as in Germany is not only possible, but is
the actual case. We here come again and again
upon the tragical fate that robbed Germany of
the liberal stage of political development. We
have, to be sure, a capitalist class state, and that
in the worst sense of the word, but the bourgeois
capitalism only rules indirectly; it has to be
satisfied to let the purely Catholic clerical party,
the Center, hold the balance of power in the
German house of representatives, and to let the
Prussian agrarian class, a backward anachron-
istic class, that has no essential function to fulfill
either in political or economic life, and has a
purely parasitical existence, control the adminis-
tration. The result of this is that the social
democracy of Germany must fulfill the role of
champions of political freedom. The task of
uniting the struggle for economic independence
with that for political liberty has fallen upon the
German laboring class; in other words, besides
performing its own class mission, it must do



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 45

what in normally developed lands was long ago
done by the bourgeoisie.

THE INCLINED PLANE OF COMPROMISE.

All parties without exception recognize us as
a political power, and exactly in proportion to our
power. Even the craziest reactionary that 'denies
us the right of existence courts our favor and
by his acts gives the lie to his words. From the
fact that our assistance is sought by other parties,
some of our comrades draw the strange conclu-
sion that we should reverse the party tactics, and
in place of the old policy of the class struggle
against all other parties, substitute the commer-
cial politics of log rolling, wire pulling and com-
promise. Such persons forget that the power
which makes our alliance sought for, even by
our bitterest enemies, would have had absolutely
no existence were it not for the old class struggle
tactics. If Marx, Engels and Lassalle had ac-
cepted from Bernstein and his modest or not
modest fellow thinkers the tactics of compromise
and dependence upon bourgeois parties, then there
never would have been any Social Democracy;
we would have been simply the tail of the Pro-
gressive party. That we accept as a part of our
tactics the utilization of the quarrels among the
bourgeois parties is self-explaining. And this
course has been followed ever since we have
had a German Social Democracy. To recognize
this, we do not need the counsel of the newly
baked party statesmen. That we have here and
there worked with the Center or the Progressive
party against a reactionary governmental party
is understood by the comrades without the neces-
sity of a special party manifesto. And in different
election districts we have obtained greater ad-
vantages by co-operation with the Center party
without fusion than through the recent alliance in
Bavaria. One rule does not fit every case.

We Social Democrats dare not be like the



46 NO COMPROMISE.

other parties, all of whom are equally guilty of
the injustices of the present system and equally
responsible for them. Every one who suffers
under these injustices looks to us for deliverance.
Every one of us has had these victims of society
after failing to get justice from the courts, from
the government, from the Emperor himself, and
from all the other parties, come to us as the last
and only ones that can help them. They do not
know our scientific program; thoy do not know
what capital and capitalism mean; but they have
the belief, the feeling, that we are a party that
can help when all other parties fail This belief
is for us an inexhaustible source of power. It
was a similar faith of despair that spread more
and more in the decaying Roman empire and
slowly undermined the heathen world until it
finally collapsed. We give up this inexhaustible
source of power if we ally ourselves with other
parties and drive suffering humanity from us by
saying to it: "We are not essentially different
from tho others." Once the boundary line of
the class struggle is wiped away and we have
started upon the inclined plane of compromise,
there is no stopping. Then we can only go
down and down until there is nothing deeper.
We have had many instructive experiences of
this in the Beichstag. Practical politics com-
pelled us to make concessions to the society
in which we lived. But every step on the
way of concessions to present society was
,hard for us, and was only done with reluc-
tance. There are some who ridicule us for this.
But he who fears to take a step on the inclined
plane is at all events a more trustworthy com-
rade than he who pours out scorn upon the
cautious one.

The catch word "revolution" is certainly ridicu-
lous. Ridiculous it certainly is — and no one has
expressed this more clearly than I myself — to
drop the words ' ' revolution ' ' and * ' revolutionary ' '



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 47

out of the mouth at every opportunity. It can
become as mechanical a song as saying one's
beads. But ridiculous as it is to boast of be-
longing to the party and to express one's views
at every opportunity when there is no necessity
for it, still such exaggerations do not justify us
in throwing away the good with the bad, and
declaring that to emphasize the revolutionary
character of our party is, under all circumstances,
ridiculous. To emphasize it is a very serious
and a very necessary thing. It is serious, be-
cause membership in the social democracy means
a struggle, a political struggle with grievous per-
secutions, and a private struggle for existence, a
struggle that for the majority is far more difficult
and heavy than the political struggle. And it is
necessary, because the courage for this twofold
struggle is created only by the consciousness that
the injustice of society by which the great ma-
jority of mankind are to-day oppressed, cor-
rupted and crippled, can only be abolished
through a revolutionary movement, that is, a
movement that shall completely exterminate capi-
talism with every fiber of its roots.

I know that it has here and there become the
fashion to laugh at the warning about sliding
down inclined planes. They refer us to the fable
of the sheep and the wolf. The comparison
limps, however, and finally turns against the
laugher. The wolf was actually there and at
last broke into the fold. And in our case it is
also no imaginary danger from which we are
warned. And at all events the interests of the
party are at least as carefully guarded by tho
warners as by the scorners. Heretofore distrust
was counted as a democratic virtue, and over-
confidence as a democratic vice. Here and there
are found persons who would reverse this maxim.

BLUECHER'S MOTTO.

The proletariat stands politically as well as



socially in the most abrupt contradiction to the
present class state. It must fight it on all fields
and upon every question, both of domestic and
of foreign policy. To be sure it is not always
easy to decide rightly. Where the interests are
not clearly visible the feelings may be easily de-
ceived. Fortunately we have at the points where
|t is hardest to decide an infallible compass in
the actions of our enemies. If there are questions
on which we can temporarily unite with them it
is still inconceivable that anything that is fought
for by our enemies as a question of great im-
portance, or especially as of vital importance to
them, can be desirable for the proletariat. We
shall never go wrong if we do what is opposed to
the interests of our enemy. On the other hand,
we shall almost never go right if we do what
our enemies applaud. Historical development is
a continuous conflict, a conflict of interests, a
conflict of races, a conflict of classes. And if
friendship does not count even in ordinary busi-
ness, how much less so in such a conflict. Good-
naturedness and sentimentality have no place in
politics. They have never won a victory, but
have brought unnumbered defeats. Bluecher's
motto, "Always follow the eannon's roar and
throw yourself upon the enemy," is the best rule
also in political warfare.

Just a word in this connection. The class in-
stinct of the bourgeoisie is far better developed
than that of the proletariat. The governing
class naturally knows its interests better than
the governed, who have so much less opportunity
to become informed and are also sometimes in-
tentionally, and sometimes not, systematically de-
ceived and misled from a recognition of their
interests. Do not say that it is the rough form
in which socialism is often set forth that frightens
and embitters the bourgeoisie. That is absolutely
false. It is not the form; it is the content which
they detest; and the more harmless the form so



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 49

much the more dangerous do the contents appear
to the gentlemen of the bourgeoisie. The fineness
of the form makes no difference to them. That is
clear from the manner in which they fight out
their quarrels among themselves.

What a lot of abuse and fiction has been
brought out about "Toelke's club!" "Toelke's
club'* really never touched any one un gently.
But club tactics has existed in Germany for
decades, and has even yet not wholly disap-
peared. But it is not laborers and also not
socialists with whom the club counts, as the
ultima ratio, the conclusive argument. It is the
tactics of the noblest of the nation, the national
liberals, who in the middle and southwestern por-
tions of Germany organized battalions of brawl-
ing club heroes, and thereby sought to retain
their political domains through a brutal terror-
ism. But the advancing social democracy has
well nigh stamped them out.

COMPROMISES LIKE TREATIES ARE NOT
KEPT.

At any rate we may be sure that the political
instinct of our bourgeois opponents, as soon as
their class interests come into play, will lead them
to take a position hostile to us. A classical ex-
ample is furnished by Belgium, where, as already
remarked, a compromise was concluded under
the most favorable circumstances conceivable,
between the socialists and the liberals. Our
party was in undisputed possesion of the loader-
ship and was therefore in no danger of being
cheated out of the fruits of the common victory.
The end sought was universal, equal and direct
suffrage. But the clerical party knows its boys,
knows its Pappenheimers. It knows that the
bourgeoisie has no class interest in giving the
laborers, who, in modern industrial states, con
stitute a majority of the population, the uni-
versal suffrage and thereby the prospect of win-



50 no coifPROinsi.

ning a majority and getting political supremacy.
It made a counter demand for proportional rep-
resentation with plural voting, that is, giving
more votes to the rich, and thereby granting to
the radical bourgeoisie a share in the govern-
ment, if it would assist in defeating universal
and direct suffrage. And behold, without a min-
ute's hesitation the gentlemen of the radical bour-
geoisie broke their agreement with the socialists
and joined the clericals in their fight against
universal suffrage and the social democracy.
Whoever is not convinced by this example that
the emancipation struggle of the proletariat is a
class struggle is one on whom further arguments
would be wasted.

There is no political party upon whose firm
support the social democracy can reckon. And
every assistance that we can possibly expect from
bourgeois parties in the complications of political
life must, if we act skillfully, come to us anyhow
without compromise. It is the same with com-
promises and fusions between parties as with
treaties between nations. They are observed so
long, and only so long, as they are in the interest
of the parties concerned. When common inter-
ests exist, however, no compromise, fusion or
contract is necessary. Suppose, to cite an actual
instance, suppose the securing of six more repre-
sentatives in the legislature was of great im-
portance to our party in Bavaria; with the
strength and influence which our party had it
could have found a way to get them without any
"cattle trade." The strengthening of the Center
party, aside from the question of principles, was
a great tactical error. This error was all the
greater in that it checked the process of dissolu-
tion which the Center party is now undergoing.
This party holds together so long as the laborers
who come within the sphere of its influence have
not yet attained to class consciousness, have not
yet learned to set their class interests above their



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 51

sectarian interests; this is a process which the
economic development necessarily carries along
with itself, and which we aim to hasten by our
propaganda. In Offenbach and other election
districts this has been so far attained that in tho
last election the majority of the Catholics voted
for our candidates on the first ballot instead of for
the candidates of their own party. The class
struggle tactics is not only more correct in prin-
ciple; it is also more practical and successful than
compromise tactics.

The standpoint of utility, which was empha-
sized by the advocates of the Bavarian compro-
mise, is certainly a very useful point, but there
are other factors than utility which must be
taken into consideration. The purity of our prin-
ciples, the idealism of our struggle, these are
factors of strengthening and drawing power that
have given to us courage for all our battles, and
have given to our doctrines an irresistible at-
traction for all who feel themselves oppressed
and have a sense of honor. Certainly the alliance
with the Center party was very useful; it has
given us half a dozen legislative votes; but what
is it Gretchen sayst

"How scornfully I once reviled
When some poor maiden was beguiled I
More speech than any tongue suffices
I craved to censure others' vices.
Black as it seemed I blackened still,
And blacker yet was in my will;
And blessed myself and boasted high —
And now — a living sin am I ! ' '

Yes, how bravely we could once scold at the
political log rollers, especially at the black ones!
We painted them blacker than black. And to-
day! We dare not do all that our opponents do.
We dare not sacrifice everything for advantages.
For what is an advantage to our opponents is
deadly poison to us. The nobility say of them-



52 NO COMPROMISE.

selves, noblesse oblige; so we may say, sooialistne
oblige, socialism imposes its obligations.

If tactics prescribes or allows us to obligate
ouselves to our opponents in order to attain a
temporary success by a. temporary alliance, then
Schuhwacher in Sobngen acted as a good tacti-
cian in the opportunist sense by fusing with the
Progressive party last year at the Reichstag elec-
tions to rescue the party from us. He did not
become a bourgeois, not at all; he only used the
bourgeoisie to overthrow us, the false socialists,
and to help true socialism on to victory, just as
Millerand is going to crush out militarism by a
compact with Gallifet and Waldeck-Bousseau.
Schuhmacher can give exactly the same reasons
for his action as Millerand can for his. Treason
to the party is what we call it.

With the growth of Social Democracy and
with its entrance into fields hitherto dominated
by other parties, and with the extension of our
practical activity, we come more and more fre-
quently into momentary unions, or momentary
relations with other parties. But these momen-
tary relations must never become momentary
alliances. We must never bind the party. We
must always keep our hand free; exploit the con-
ditions; let our opponents do the dirty work for
us; and with the goal of the party firmly in mind,
keep in the middle of the road, and go our own
way, only going along with opposing parties
when our way happens to be the same as theirs.
That we are a party of the class struggle, who
have nothing in common with any other party,
and who have to fight and conquer all other
parties, in order to attain our goal, is something
which we must never for a mome nt Jo se sight or.

MILLERAND.

Concerning the case of Millerand, and the
question of party union, I wrote at the invitatioa
of the French comrades, on the occasion of the



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 53

last anual convention of the Labor Party (the
Marxists) at Epernay, the following letter:

"Dear Friends; You know that I have made
it a rule not to interfere with the affairs of the
socialists in other countries. But as you wish to
know my opinion on the burning question that
is occupying the attention of the whole laboring
and socialist portion of France, and as many of
your countrymen, who have wholly different
views upon this question from yours, have also
turned to me, I have no longer any reason to
withhold my opinion. The situation with which
you are now occupied in France is at bottom not
a foreign affair as to Germans.

1 ' The internationality of socialism is a f act that
is daily becoming more evident and more signifi-
cant. We socialists are one nation to ourselves,
•—one and the same international nation in all
the lands of the earth. And the capitalists with
their agents, instruments and dupes are likewise
an international nation, so that we can truthfully
say, there are to-day only two great nations in
all lands that battle with each other in the great
class struggle, which is the new revolution — a
class struggle on one side of which stands the
proletariat, representing socialism, and on the
other the bourgeoisie, representing capitalism.

"While the bourgeois world of capitalism con-
tinues and the bourgeoisie rules, so long are all
states necessarily class states, and all governments
class governments, serving the purposes and in-
terests of the ruling class, and destined to lead tho
class struggle for the bourgeoisie against the pro-
letariat — for capitalism against socialism, for our
enemies and against us. From the standpoint of
tho class struggle which is the foundation of mili-
tant socialism, that is a truth which has been
raised by the logic of thought and of facts be-
yond the possibility of a doubt. A socialist who
goes into a bourgeois government, either goes
over to the enemy or else puts himself in the



54 HO OOltPitOMISl.

power of the enemy, la any case th» socialist
who becomes a member of a bourgeois govern-
ment separates himself from us, the militant so-
cialists. He mar claim to be a socialist but he
is no longer such. He may be convinced of his
own sincerity, but in that case he has not com-
prehended the nature of the class struggle— does
not understand that the class struggle is the
basis of socialism.

" In these days, under the rule of capitalism, a
government, even if it is full of philanthropy
and animated by the best of intentions, can do
nothing of real value to our cause. One must
keep free from illusions. Decades ago, I said:
'If the way to hell is paved with good intentions,
the way to defeat is paved with illusions. ' In the
present society, a non-capitalist government is
an impossibility. The unfortunate socialist who
casts in his lot with such a government if he will
not betray his class only condemns himself to
impotency. The English bourgeoisie offers the
best example of weakening the opposition by per-
mitting them to participate in the government.
It has become the traditional policy of all parties
in England that the most radical member of the
opposition who is naive enough to be taken in
should be given a place in the government. This
man serves as a shield to the government and
disarms his friends who cannot shoot at him —
just as in battle one may not shoot at the host-
ages that the enemy has placed in front of itself.

"That is my answer concerning the question of
the entrance of a socialist into a bourgeois gov-
ernment.

' ' Now, aa to the second question : The question
of unity and agreement. The answer is dictated
to me by the interests and principles of the party.
I am for the unity of the party— for the national
and international unity of the party. But it must
be a unity of socialism and socialists. The unity
with opponents — with people who have other



1T0 POLITICAL TRADING. 65

aims and other interests, is no socialist unity. We
must strive for unity at any price and with all
sacrifices. But while we are uniting and organ-
izing, we must rid ourselves of all foreign and
antagonistic elements. What would one say of
a general who in the enemy's country sought
to fill the ranks of his army with recruits from
the ranks of the enemy! Would that not be the
height of foolishness f Very well, to take into
our army — which is an army for the class strug-
gle and the class war — opponents, soldiers with
aims and interests entirely opposite to our own,
—that would be madness, that would be suicide.

"On the ground of the class struggle we are
invincible; if we leave it we are lost, because we
are no longer socialists. The strength and power
of socialism rests in the fact that we are leading
a class struggle; that the laboring class is ex-
ploited and oppressed by the capitalist class, and
that within capitalist society effectual reforms,
which will put an end to class government and
class exploitation, are impossible.

"We cannot traffic in our principles, we can
make no compromise, no agreement with the rul-
ing system. We must break with the ruling
system and fight it to a finish. It must fall that
socialism may arise, and we certainly cannot ex-
pect from tho ruling class that it will give to
itself and its domination the death blow. The
International Workingmen's Association accord-
ingly preached that 'The emancipation of the
laboring class must be the work of the laborers
themselves. '

"Undoubtedly there are bourgeois who from a
feeling of justice and humanity place themselves
upon the side of the laborers and socialists, but
these are only the exceptions; the mass of the
bourgeoisie has class consciousness, a conscious-
ness of being the ruling and exploiting class.
Indeed, the mass of the bourgeoisie, just because
they are a ruling class, have a much sharper and



M NO COMPROMISE.

stronger class consciousness than the proletariat.

"I conclude: You have asked my opinion, and
I hare given it to you. It is for you to do what
the interests and principles of the party de-
mand that you should do.

"Fraternal greeting to the convention at Eper-
nay. Long live the France of the socialists and
the laborers 1 Long live international socialism 1

"Weimar, Aug. 10, 1899. W. Likbkmkcht. ' '

I have nothing to add to my letter. The events
since then have justified it. The presence of a
socialist in the government has accomplished
nothing and prevented nothing that could not
have been accomplished or prevented without
this presence. On the other hand, in so far as
the Social Democracy has caused or endorsed
the entrance of a socialist into the government it
has become in part responsible for all the sins of
omission and of commission done by the govern-
ment during the time in which a socialist was a
member.

THE SITUATION IN FBANCE.

It may be said in excuse or justification that
they have acted under extraordinary conditions,
—to rescue the republic, which would otherwise
have been lost. This excuse will not stand ex-
amination. The republic of France is not upheld
by a few men in the government, including the
socialist, but by the French laborers with whom
the greater part of the peasants and small bour-
geoisie stand side by side, and also by the great
majority of the French people, who do not allow
themselves to be led astray by the priests, nor
coerced by the reactionary capitalists. Militar-
ism is by far less strong and dangerous in France
than in Germany, and the French army is to a
much greater extent than in Germany a people's
army. The army is as large as in Germany, al-
though the population is fifteen million less; it
contains therefore a larger per cent of the total



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 57

population. France is actually at the point where
it must break with the Prussian-German military
system which it adopted after the war of 1870-71 ;
it must either do as the minister of war, General
Gallifet. has recommended — replace it with a
well-drilled Praetorian Guard — or enter at once
upon the militia system, and arm every person
capable of bearing arms. A coup d'etat is im-
possible with such an army. No matter how re-
actionary a portion of the officers may be, the
mass of soldiers are too close to the people
to be used for such purposes.

If, as has been represented to us, the actual
formation of the Waldcck-Rousseau Ministry
was necessary to protect the republic against a
coup d'etat, then the republican sentiment of the
French protetariat was security enough for the
government — in every way a far better security
than the participation of a socialist in the cabinet.

The circumstance that the chief of this min-
istry was a particularly clear-cut capitalist, and
that the Minister of War was one of the most
notorious "saberers M of the "Little Napoleon,"
and one of the most bloodthirsty murderers of
the Communists, made the impropriety of Miller-
and's action all the more evident. But even if
in place of Waldeck-Rousseau there had been a
genuine Democrat, as for example, Brisson, and
in place of Gallifet an honorable soldier not yet
stained with laborers' blood, the step would have
been no less objectionable from our standpoint,
though it would not have wounded the feelings
so much.

Class antagonism accompanied by the class strug-
gle is now an existing fact. The state is, so loug
as this class opposition and class struggle exists,
necessarily a class state, and the government of
this state, with like necessity, is a class govern-
ment. The socialist who allows himself to be-
come a member of such a government will soon
lose his class-consciousness, if he has not already



58 NO COMPROMISE.

laid it down at the door of the cabinet, like a
Mohammedan does his shoes at the entrance of
the mosque, unless he has the courage to seise
the first opportunity offered for a conflict and a
break.

I do not care to busy myself with the purely
scholastic question as to whether a case might
ever possibly arise in which a socialist should
enter into a non-socialist government. Such an
occasion could only arise after a catastrophic
overthrow of the state, for example, during the
course of a world war, when the government of
a class state had broken down without the neces-
sary elements being yet present for the formation
of a socialist state.

Such an occasion has certainly not yet arisen
in France, and perhaps the last persons whose
mission it is to "rescue the Republic" are just
these same Waldeck-Rousseau and Gallifet. It
is the Socialist party which was and is and re-
mains the only party whose mission it is to be
the rescuer and safeguard of the Republic, and
this with or without Millerand.

Guesde and Lafargue, the leading representa-
tives of scientific socialism in France, have set
forth in a scathing critique of " Ministerial ' ' op-
portunist socialism, the distinction between the
activity of a member of a popularly elected body
and an officer of an executive body of the govern-
ment itself of the established state. The officials
and the government are the organs of class rule,
who must from their very nature act in the inter-
ests of the ruling class. The participation in a
popularly elected body (Reichstag, legislature,
common council, etc.) is on the contrary an ex-
pression of popular sovereignty, which, though
it is subject to the influences of the class rule,
is really above it, and is the only power that can
make an end of it. The representatives of the
Social Democracy in such popular bodies are
like the basalt blocks, which, pushed up from the



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 59

interior of the earth, have broken through the
sandstone and slate strata:— they arise from tho
heart of the people, are a part of the people, and
have in themselves the right and the power of
popular sovereignty, which overtops and domin-
ates all political and social matters. They are
not there by the grace of the powers that be, but
against their will, and in spite of their power-
servants to be sure, but honorable servants, ser-
vants, not of the possessors of power, but of the
people, who have chosen them to secure the reali-
zation of their sovereign will. Therefore, it is
fundamentally incorrect to designate our activity
in the Reichstag and other representative bodies
as a compromise with the ruling powers. To bo
sure, wo have to work there together with our
enemies, but as an independent power, exercising
the mandates we have received from the people.
That is no co-operation upon the basis of com-
mon views and aims; it is a labor that is a
battle — a mutual struggle, a measuring of forces,
whose play, direction and intensity, according to
the eternal law of the parallelogram of forces,
results in legislation and government.

It is in the nature of things that out of this
mutual wrestling and struggle, changing groups
and momentary contacts should result; to call
such momentary groupings compromises is a
pure distortion of terms. A coming together
as a result of conditions, and a working and
striving in the same direction owing to circum-
stances, is just as little a contract, an alliance or
a compromise, as the reciprocal touching of the
pieces of glass in a kaleidoscope is a contract, an
alliance or a compromise. Whether the shaking
power is a mechanical one, or is the force of
organized law is all the same. Such approaches
are without any obligations, are productions of
the moment, born of the moment and swept away
with the moment.

It is no less incorrect to compare co-operation



6t NO COMPROMISE.

at iecond ballotings to Buch alliances as were
proposed for the Prussian legislative elections
and as were actually made for the Bavarian elec-
tions. Such co-operation is only an episode of
the battle at the polls which is fought by the
party as a whole. After the first and chief elec-
tion day an after battle follows, in which the un-
decided points are fought out. That we, in these
subsequent elections in electoral districts where
we cannot ourselves put up a candidate,
should vote for that one of the opposition can-
didates whose election offers the most advant-
ages to our party, is a requirement of elementary
intelligence. I previously advocated this as an
act of self-evident desirability at a time when
some of those who are to-day enthusiastic for a
participation in the Prussian legislative elections
accused me of a half-betrayal of our principles.
If, at a time when an exception law exists, or is
in sight, we did not give our votes in these special
elections to that one of two bourgeois candidates
who was opposed to the exception law, we should
be asses deserving the cudgel. But that is no
compromise. We pledge ourselves to nothing,
we sacrifice no principle, we sacrifice no interest;
on the contrary, we act solely in our own in-
terest, which we should have injured had we
acted otherwise. The obligations rest upon our
opponents. This tactics is so simple and natural
that it was only brought into question for a time
by an unclear hobby-riding of principles; as soon
as the party leaders ceased to recommend this
tactics, the rank and file of the party, following
a sound instinct, carried it out anyhow over the
heads of those leaders. And from time to time a
special line of action was decided upon for each
particular case. No trafficking, no underhand
work; open and above board we attack the ene-
my; and where two enemies stand in opposition,
ene of whom must win the mandate, we strike the
most dangerous of the two to earth. This is a



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 61

policy of fighting such as befits a fighting party.

In the original elections for the Reichs-
tag, we are a fighting party that by its own
strength wins its share in the popular representa-
tion. We offer battle front to all parties, not
even excepting those for whose members we may
vote at the supplemental elections as the interest
of our party may require. But in the Prussian
legislative elections it is impossible for us to win
a single representative by our own strength; in
order to gain ono or more it is necessary to turn
to a bourgeois party and make a political trade
with them. In the Reichstag elections we are
the strongest party in Germany, but in the Prus-
sian legislative elections we are the weakest of
all, indeed, completely helpless; because under
the "worst of all election laws' ' we have, to be
sure, a vote, but our vote is rendered nugatory,
and a mandate can only be secured under the
condition that we become dumb voting cattle of
a bourgeois party.

In the Bavarian legislative election things are
somewhat different. In Bavaria, the election laws
do not make it impossible to secure a mandate.
This does not argue in favor of a compromise,
butj on the contrary, places the "cattle trade,"
which took place this summer, in a still worse
light

I will not here enter upon the grounds of oppo-
sition to participating in the Prussian legislative
election. The demoralization through the change
of front in the Reichstag elections and the legis-
lative elections, the confusion in the minds, the
loosening of discipline, and above all the obliter-
ation of the class struggle character of our party
has been already, and by myself among others,
so often and so emphatically set forth that I will
not tire the reader by a repetition.

Only one thing more.

If the bourgeois parties still had any vitality
left they would not need our help to secure a



62 NO COMPROMISE.

victory in the Prussian legislative elections. The
first two classes belong to the bourgeois electors.
No one can rob them of a majority if they do not
themselves surrender it. How then can we help
themf Can one make the lame or the drunk
walkf One can help them up, but as soon as one
lets go they fall to the ground like an empty
sack. We cannot escape this dilemma; either the
bourgeoisie still has political vitality— in which
case they do not need our help; or they do not
have it, and in that case our help would be use-
less. Can we be expected to make an alliance
with a corpse!

INDEPENDENT ACTION IS THE ONLY
THING THAT IS PRACTICAL.

Fault has been found because I said in a news-
paper article that a new anti-socialist law would
be a less evil than the abolition of class antagon-
ism and party lines through fusion with the Prus-
sian Progressive party in the legislative elections.
The more I consider it the more I am convinced
of the correctness of this position. What is to
become of our party if we allow ourselves to be
pressed out of the path of our principles by
threatened or threatening dangers and disadvant-
ages! Fear is proverbially a poor adviser for
human action; for a party it is destruction. Fear
of the labor movement and socialism has caused
the political downfall of the German bourgeoisie;
and the days of the Social Democracy are num-
bered as soon as tho cry of fear finds a response
in us. We should not challenge, but we should
not sound the alarm and be misled by fear into
taking steps that do not accord with the princi-
ples, the nature and the honor of our party. One
does not disarm an enemy through timidity and
gentleness; one simply emboldens him. Not
that we should seek to run our heads through a
wall. We wish to be and must be "practical."
But has this ever been denied or questioned! We



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 63

have always been "practical," Bernstein to the
contrary notwithstanding. We have always based
our efforts on existing conditions and worked
methodically with our eye upon the goal. In
cities, states and empire, all reasonable improve-
ments have at least been supported, if not pro-
posed by the Social Democracy. Think only of
the greatest of all reforms, the reform of the
social evil, in which the government, if it does
not wish to build ruins or air castles, must take
hold of the demands made by us over ten years
ago.

We can say of ourselves, that not only are we
practical, but that we are the only practical party,
—practical in the sense of reasonable. Only those
who recognize the organic laws of development
and systematically strive in harmony with them
towards a definite goal are practical. And this is
the way we work. Our opponents either do not
know these laws, or else if they recognize them
they seek to bend or break them. Whoever seeks
to compel water to run up hill is certainly not
practical, and such is the foolish aim of our op-
ponents. To be sure it has been said that the
laborers cannot alone secure the emancipation of
the laboring class: that the intelligent and cul-
tured elements of the other classes must co-
operate with them. We are pointed to the many
measures useful to the laboring class which are
enacted or supported by the bourgeois parties.
But this is sophistical reasoning. For (and on
this point the evidence of Bismarck is decisive)
none of these social reform measures, and surely
they are few enough, would ever have been en-
acted without the initiative and the pressure of
the proletariat and the Social Democracy.

Bernstein claims that socialism is the ultimate
outcome of liberalism. To claim this is to abso-
lutely deny the existence of any class antagonism.

This sentence was reversed by Miquel, my
former comrade in communismo, and present



64 NO COMPROMISE.

Chancellor in re, so as to read, liberalism ifl
the ultimate outcome of communism. And that
the liberalism of Miquel is very near to conserv-
atism, in the German sense, that is, to the agra-
rian medieval ideal of personal bondage, every
one knows who has ears to hear and eyes to see.

No, Social Democracy must remain for itself,
must seek for and generate its power within itself.
Every power outside of ourselves on which we
seek to lean is for us only weakness. In the
consciousness of our strength, in our faith in the
world-conquering mission of socialism lies the
secret of our extraordinary, almost miraculous
success.

Islam was unconquerable so long as it trusted
in itself alone and saw an enemy in every non-
Mohammedan. From the moment when Islam
entered upon the path of compromise and united
with the non-Mohammedan, the so-called civil-
ized powers, its conquering power was gone. With
Islam it could not have been otherwise. It was
not the true world redeeming faith. Socialism,
however, is this, and socialism cannot conquer
nor redeem the world if it ceases to believe upon
itself alone.

Therefore, we will not turn from the old tactics,
nor from the old program. Ever advancing with
science and economic development, we are what
we were and we will remain what we are.

Or— the Social Democracy will cease to exist.



atil*



This book is a preservation photocopy

produced on Weyerhaeuser acid free

Cougar Opaque 50# book weight paper,

which meets the requirements of

ANSI/NISO 239.48-1992 (permanence of paper)

Preservation photocopying and binding

by

Acme Bookbinding

Charlestown, Massachusetts

£Q

1995



I
Capital: Volume One

CApiTAl

VoLume One

The Process of ProcHjctlon of Capita!

Written: 1867

Source: First english edition of 1887 (4th German edition changes included as indicated).

Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, USSR

First Published: 1887

Translated: Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling — edited by Fredrick Engels

Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1995, 1999

Transcribed: Zodiac, Hinrich Kuhls, Allan Thurrott, Bill McDorman, Bert Schultz and Martha Gimenez

(1995-1996)

HTML Markup: Stephen Baird and Brian Basgen (1999)

Download: Macintosh I Windows



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm (1 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:14:50]



Capital: Volume One



CO IN TEN IS:



Has Kapital



Kiritilt der politisclien O&konomiy.



V.n



Karl Marx.



Rr«iti Bind.

(■Ill br Prn<4iLlJrtilpT#etH Jll K If 11 1



Pu PHhl «rr g^hluljihl *ir4 "KHM



HjinL'Lr;

V^rfkg ™n OlLu M«Saaer-
l*6T,

Niir-Viit: J-. V. 3cbmi*. 11 B.«l»y-Sn**L.



Cover of the original 1 867
[German] edition



Prefaces and Afterwords

Part I: Commodities and Money

Ch. 1 : Commodities

Ch. 2: Exchange

Ch. 3: Money, or the Circulation of Commodities

Part II: The Transformation of Money in Capital

Ch. 4: The General Formula for Capital

Ch. 5: Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital

Ch. 6: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm (2 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:14:50]



Capital: Volume One



Part III: The Production of Absolute Surplus- Value

Ch. 7: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus-Value

Ch. 8: Constant Capital and Variable Capital

Ch. 9: The Rate of Surplus-Value

Ch. 10: The Working-Day

Ch. 1 1 : Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value



Part IV: Production of Relative Surplus Value

Ch. 12: The Concept of Relative Surplus- Value
Ch. 13: Co-operation

Ch. 14: Division of Labour and Manufacture
Ch. 15: Machinery and Modern Industry



Part V: The Production of Absolute and of Relative Surplus- Value

Ch. 16: Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value

Ch. 17: Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value

Ch. 18: Various Formula for the Rate of Surplus-Value



Part VI: Wages

Ch. 19: The Transformation of the Value (and Respective Price) of Labour-Power into Wages

Ch. 20: Time-Wages

Ch. 21: Piece-Wages

Ch. 22: National Differences of Wages



Part VII: The Accumulation of Capital

Ch. 23: Simple Reproduction

Ch. 24: Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital

Ch. 25: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation



Part VIII: Primitive Accumulation

Ch. 26: The Secret of Primitive Accumulation

Ch. 27: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land

Ch. 28: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing down of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm (3 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:14:50]



Capital: Volume One

Wages by Acts of Parliament

Ch. 29: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer

Ch. 30: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial

Capital

Ch. 31: Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist

Ch. 32: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation

Ch. 33: The Modern Theory of Colonisation

( full table of contents listing)

Marx/Engels Works Index I Marxists Internet Archive



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm (4 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:14:50]



Capital Vol. I — Prefaces and Afterwords

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Prefaces and Afterwords



1867: Dedication to Wilhelm Wolff

1867: Preface to the First German Edition (Marx)

1872: Preface to the French Edition (Marx)

1873: Afterword to the Second German Edition (Marx)

1875: Afterword to the French Edition (Marx)

1883: Preface to the Third German Edition (Engels)

1886: Preface to the English Edition (Engels)

1890: Preface to the Fourth German Edition (Engels)

1867: Marx's thank you letter to Engels



Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/part0.htm [23/08/2000 16:14:55]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Parti:

Commodities and Money



CHAPTER ONE:
COMMODITIES



Contents

Section 1 - The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use-Value and Value
Section 2 - The Two-fold Character of the Labour Embodied in Commodities
Section 3 - The Form of Value or Exchange-Value

A. Elementary or Accidental Form of Value

1. The Two Poles of the Expression of Value: Relative Form and Equivalent Form

2. The Relative Form of Value

a. The Nature and Import of this Form

b. Quantitative Determination of Relative Value

3. The Equivalent Form of Value

4. The Elementary Form of Value Considered as a Whole

B. Total or Expanded Form of Value

1. The Expanded Relative Form of Value

2. The Particular Equivalent Form

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded Form of Value

C. The General Form of Value

1. The Altered Character of the Form of Value

2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and of the Equivalent Form

3. Transition from the General Form of Value to the Money-Form

D. The Money-Form

Section 4 - The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (1 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One



SECTION 1

THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY:

USE-VALUE AND VALUE

(THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE)



The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails, presents itself as "an
immense accumulation of commodities," £1} its unit being a single commodity. Our investigation must
therefore begin with the analysis of a commodity.

A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by its properties satisfies human
wants of some sort or another. The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the
stomach or from fancy, makes no difference. [2} Neither are we here concerned to know how the object
satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence, or indirectly as means of production.

Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c, may be looked at from the two points of view of quality and
quantity. It is an assemblage of many properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways. To
discover the various uses of things is the work of history. [3] So also is the establishment of
socially-recognized standards of measure for the quantities of these useful objects. The diversity of these
measures has its origin partly in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured, partly in convention.

The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. [4] But this utility is not a thing of air. Being limited by the
physical properties of the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. A commodity, such
as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a use-value, something useful.
This property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful
qualities. When treating of use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite quantities, such as
dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The use-values of commodities furnish the material for
a special study, that of the commercial knowledge of commodities. [51 Use- values become a reality only
by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the social form
of that wealth. In the form of society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material
depositories of exchange- value.

Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative relation, as the proportion in which values
in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort, [6] a relation constantly changing with time
and place. Hence exchange-value appears to be something accidental and purely relative, and
consequently an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that is inseparably connected with, inherent in
commodities, seems a contradiction in terms. [71 Let us consider the matter a little more closely.

A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x blacking, y silk, or z gold, &c. — in
short, for other commodities in the most different proportions. Instead of one exchange-value, the wheat
has, therefore, a great many. But since x blacking, y silk, or z gold &c, each represents the
exchange- value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk, z gold, &c, must, as exchange- values, be



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (2 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

replaceable by each other, or equal to each other. Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given
commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, generally, is only the mode of
expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in it, yet distinguishable from it.

Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The proportions in which they are exchangeable,
whatever those proportions may be, can always be represented by an equation in which a given quantity
of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: e.g., 1 quarter corn = x cwt. iron. What does this equation tell
us? It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter of corn and x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal
quantities something common to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in itself is
neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far as it is exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to
this third.

A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In order to calculate and compare the areas of
rectilinear figures, we decompose them into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by
something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the product of the base multiplied by
the altitude. In the same way the exchange-values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in
terms of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or less quantity.

This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other natural property of
commodities. Such properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the utility of those
commodities, make them use-values. But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act characterised
by a total abstraction from use-value. Then one use-value is just as good as another, provided only it be
present in sufficient quantity. Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as another, if the
values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in things of equal value.... An hundred pounds'
worth of lead or iron, is of as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold. " [8] As
use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as exchange-values they are merely
different quantities, and consequently do not contain an atom of use-value.

If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of commodities, they have only one common property
left, that of being products of labour. But even the product of labour itself has undergone a change in our
hands. If we make abstraction from its use-value, we make abstraction at the same time from the material
elements and shapes that make the product a use-value; we see in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or
any other useful thing. Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight. Neither can it any longer be
regarded as the product of the labour of the joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of
productive labour. Along with the useful qualities of the products themselves, we put out of sight both
the useful character of the various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that
labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the same sort of
labour, human labour in the abstract.

Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists of the same unsubstantial reality in
each, a mere congelation of homogeneous human labour, of labour-power expended without regard to the
mode of its expenditure. All that these things now tell us is, that human labour-power has been expended
in their production, that human labour is embodied in them. When looked at as crystals of this social
substance, common to them all, they are — Values.

We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange-value manifests itself as something
totally independent of their use-value. But if we abstract from their use-value, there remains their Value
as defined above. Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in the exchange-value of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (3 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value. The progress of our investigation will show
that exchange-value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be
expressed. For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value independently of this, its
form.

A use- value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human labour in the abstract has been
embodied or materialised in it. How, then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Plainly, by the
quantity of the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article. The quantity of labour,
however, is measured by its duration, and labour-time in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and
hours.

Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour spent
on it, the more idle and unskilful the labourer, the more valuable would his commodity be, because more
time would be required in its production. The labour, however, that forms the substance of value, is
homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform labour-power. The total labour-power of
society, which is embodied in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that society,
counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labour-power, composed though it be of innumerable
individual units. Each of these units is the same as any other, so far as it has the character of the average
labour-power of society, and takes effect as such; that is, so far as it requires for producing a commodity,
no more time than is needed on an average, no more than is socially necessary. The labour-time socially
necessary is that required to produce an article under the normal conditions of production, and with the
average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time. The introduction of power-looms into England
probably reduced by one-half the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth. The
hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, continued to require the same time as before; but for all that, the
product of one hour of their labour represented after the change only half an hour's social labour, and
consequently fell to one-half its former value.

We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any article is the amount of labour
socially necessary, or the labour-time socially necessary for its production. \9]_ Each individual
commodity, in this connexion, is to be considered as an average sample of its class. flQl Commodities,
therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied, or which can be produced in the same time,
have the same value. The value of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the labour-time
necessary for the production of the one is to that necessary for the production of the other. "As values, all
commodities are only definite masses of congealed labour-time." fill

The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the labour-time required for its production
also remained constant. But the latter changes with every variation in the productiveness of labour. This
productiveness is determined by various circumstances, amongst others, by the average amount of skill
of the workmen, the state of science, and the degree of its practical application, the social organisation of
production, the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and by physical conditions. For
example, the same amount of labour in favourable seasons is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in
unfavourable, only in four. The same labour extracts from rich mines more metal than from poor mines.
Diamonds are of very rare occurrence on the earth's surface, and hence their discovery costs, on an
average, a great deal of labour- time. Consequently much labour is represented in a small compass. Jacob
doubts whether gold has ever been paid for at its full value. This applies still more to diamonds.
According to Eschwege, the total produce of the Brazilian diamond mines for the eighty years, ending in
1823, had not realised the price of one and-a-half years' average produce of the sugar and coffee

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (4 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

plantations of the same country, although the diamonds cost much more labour, and therefore represented
more value. With richer mines, the same quantity of labour would embody itself in more diamonds, and
their value would fall. If we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting carbon into
diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks. In general, the greater the productiveness of labour,
the less is the labour-time required for the production of an article, the less is the amount of labour
crystallised in that article, and the less is its value; and vice versa, the less the productiveness of labour,
the greater is the labour-time required for the production of an article, and the greater is its value. The
value of a commodity, therefore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the productiveness, of
the labour incorporated in it.

A thing can be a use-value, without having value. This is the case whenever its utility to man is not due
to labour. Such are air, virgin soil, natural meadows, &c. A thing can be useful, and the product of
human labour, without being a commodity. Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the produce of his
own labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not commodities. In order to produce the latter, he must not
only produce use-values, but use-values for others, social use-values. (And not only for others, without
more. The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson.
But neither the quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason of the fact that they had
been produced for others. To become a commodity a product must be transferred to another, whom it
will serve as a use-value, by means of an exchange.) |T21 Lastly nothing can have value, without being
an object of utility. If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour does not count as
labour, and therefore creates no value.



SECTION 2

THE TWO-FOLD CHARACTER OF

THE LABOUR EMBODIED IN COMMODITIES



At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two things-use- value and
exchange- value. Later on, we saw also that labour, too, possesses the same two-fold nature; for, so far as
it finds expression in value, it does not possess the same characteristics that belong to it as a creator of
use-values. I was the first to point out and to examine critically this two-fold nature of the labour
contained in commodities. As this point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of Political
Economy turns, we must go more into detail.

Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of linen, and let the former be double the value
of the latter, so that, if 10 yards of linen = W, the coat = 2W.

The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. Its existence is the result of a special sort of
productive activity, the nature of which is determined by its aim, mode of operation, subject, means, and
result. The labour, whose utility is thus represented by the value in use of its product, or which manifests
itself by making its product a use-value, we call useful labour In this connexion we consider only its



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (5 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

useful effect.

As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use- values, so also are the two forms of labour
that produce them, tailoring and weaving. Were these two objects not qualitatively different, not
produced respectively by labour of different quality, they could not stand to each other in the relation of
commodities. Coats are not exchanged for coats, one use-value is not exchanged for another of the same
kind.

To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as many different kinds of useful labour,
classified according to the order, genus, species, and variety to which they belong in the social division
of labour. This division of labour is a necessary condition for the production of commodities, but it does
not follow, conversely, that the production of commodities is a necessary condition for the division of
labour. In the primitive Indian community there is social division of labour, without production of
commodities. Or, to take an example nearer home, in every factory the labour is divided according to a
system, but this division is not brought about by the operatives mutually exchanging their individual
products. Only such products can become commodities with regard to each other, as result from different
kinds of labour, each kind being carried on independently and for the account of private individuals.

To resume, then: In the use-value of each commodity there is contained useful labour, i.e., productive
activity of a definite kind and exercised with a definite aim. Use-values cannot confront each other as
commodities, unless the useful labour embodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them. In a
community, the produce of which in general takes the form of commodities, i.e., in a community of
commodity producers, this qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are carried on
independently of individual producers, each on their own account, develops into a complex system, a
social division of labour.

Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer, in either case it operates as a
use- value. Nor is the relation between the coat and the labour that produced it altered by the circumstance
that tailoring may have become a special trade, an independent branch of the social division of labour.
Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the human race made clothes for thousands of years,
without a single man becoming a tailor. But coats and linen, like every other element of material wealth
that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, must invariably owe their existence to a special productive
activity, exercised with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates particular nature-given materials to
particular human wants. So far therefore as labour is a creator of use-value, is useful labour, it is a
necessary condition, independent of all forms of society, for the existence of the human race; it is an
eternal nature-imposed necessity, without which there can be no material exchanges between man and
Nature, and therefore no life.

The use-values, coat, linen, &c, i.e., the bodies of commodities, are combinations of two elements —
matter and labour. If we take away the useful labour expended upon them, a material substratum is
always left, which is furnished by Nature without the help of man. The latter can work only as Nature
does, that is by changing the form of matter, f 131 Nay more, in this work of changing the form he is
constantly helped by natural forces. We see, then, that labour is not the only source of material wealth, of
use-values produced by labour. As William Petty puts it, labour is its father and the earth its mother.

Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use-value to the value of commodities.

By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the linen. But this is a mere quantitative



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (6 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

difference, which for the present does not concern us. We bear in mind, however, that if the value of the
coat is double that of 10 yds. of linen, 20 yds. of linen must have the same value as one coat. So far as
they are values, the coat and the linen are things of a like substance, objective expressions of essentially
identical labour. But tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour. There are,
however, states of society in which one and the same man does tailoring and weaving alternately, in
which case these two forms of labour are mere modifications of the labour of the same individual, and no
special and fixed functions of different persons, just as the coat which our tailor makes one day, and the
trousers which he makes another day, imply only a variation in the labour of one and the same individual.
Moreover, we see at a glance that, in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour is, in
accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form of tailoring, at another in the form
of weaving. This change may possibly not take place without friction, but take place it must.

Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, viz., the useful character of the labour, is
nothing but the expenditure of human labour-power. Tailoring and weaving, though qualitatively
different productive activities, are each a productive expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles,
and in this sense are human labour. They are but two different modes of expending human labour-power.
Of course, this labour-power, which remains the same under all its modifications, must have attained a
certain pitch of development before it can be expended in a multiplicity of modes. But the value of a
commodity represents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of human labour in general. And just
as in society, a general or a banker plays a great part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby
part, |141 so here with mere human labour. It is the expenditure of simple labour-power, i.e., of the
labour-power which, on an average, apart from any special development, exists in the organism of every
ordinary individual. Simple average labour, it is true, varies in character in different countries and at
different times, but in a particular society it is given. Skilled labour counts only as simple labour
intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, a given quantity of skilled being considered equal to a
greater quantity of simple labour. Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made. A
commodity may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating it to the product of
simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity of the latter labour alone. |T51 The different
proportions in which different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled labour as their standard, are
established by a social process that goes on behind the backs of the producers, and, consequently, appear
to be fixed by custom. For simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be
unskilled, simple labour; by this we do no more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction.

Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, we abstract from their different use-values, so
it is with the labour represented by those values: we disregard the difference between its useful forms,
weaving and tailoring. As the use-values, coat and linen, are combinations of special productive activities
with cloth and yarn, while the values, coat and linen, are, on the other hand, mere homogeneous
congelations of undifferentiated labour, so the labour embodied in these latter values does not count by
virtue of its productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only as being expenditure of human labour-power.
Tailoring and weaving are necessary factors in the creation of the use- values, coat and linen, precisely
because these two kinds of labour are of different qualities; but only in so far as abstraction is made from
their special qualities, only in so far as both possess the same quality of being human labour, do tailoring
and weaving form the substance of the values of the same articles.

Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values of definite magnitude, and according to our
assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen. Whence this difference in their



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (7 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

values? It is owing to the fact that the linen contains only half as much labour as the coat, and
consequently, that in the production of the latter, labour-power must have been expended during twice
the time necessary for the production of the former.

While, therefore, with reference to use-value, the labour contained in a commodity counts only
qualitatively, with reference to value it counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced to human
labour pure and simple. In the former case, it is a question of How and What, in the latter of How much?
How long a time? Since the magnitude of the value of a commodity represents only the quantity of
labour embodied in it, it follows that all commodities, when taken in certain proportions, must be equal
in value.

If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful labour required for the production of a coat
remains unchanged, the sum of the values of the coats produced increases with their number. If one coat
represents x days' labour, two coats represent 2x days' labour, and so on. But assume that the duration of
the labour necessary for he production of a coat becomes doubled or halved. In the first case one coat is
worth as much as two coats were before; in the second case, two coats are only worth as much as one
was before, although in both cases one coat renders the same service as before, and the useful labour
embodied in it remains of the same quality. But the quantity of labour spent on its production has altered.

An increase in the quantity of use-values is an increase of material wealth. With two coats two men can
be clothed, with one coat only one man. Nevertheless, an increased quantity of material wealth may
correspond to a simultaneous fall in the magnitude of its value. This antagonistic movement has its origin
in the two-fold character of labour. Productive power has reference, of course, only to labour of some
useful concrete form, the efficacy of any special productive activity during a given time being dependent
on its productiveness. Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more or less abundant source of products, in
proportion to the rise or fall of its productiveness. On the other hand, no change in this productiveness
affects the labour represented by value. Since productive power is an attribute of the concrete useful
forms of labour, of course it can no longer have any bearing on that labour, so soon as we make
abstraction from those concrete useful forms. However then productive power may vary, the same
labour, exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal amounts of value. But it will yield,
during equal periods of time, different quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power rise,
fewer, if it fall. The same change in productive power, which increases the fruitfulness of labour, and, in
consequence, the quantity of use-values produced by that labour, will diminish the total value of this
increased quantity of use-values, provided such change shorten the total labour-time necessary for their
production; and vice versa.

On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an expenditure of human labour-power, and in
its character of identical abstract human labour, it creates and forms the value of commodities. On the
other hand, all labour is the expenditure of human labour-power in a special form and with a definite aim,
and in this, its character of concrete useful labour, it produces use-values. f!61



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (8 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

SECTION 3

THE FORM OF VALUE OR EXCHANGE-VALUE



Commodities come into the world in the shape of use-values, articles, or goods, such as iron, linen, corn,
&c. This is their plain, homely, bodily form. They are, however, commodities, only because they are
something two-fold, both objects of utility, and, at the same time, depositories of value. They manifest
themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form of commodities, only in so far as they have two
forms, a physical or natural form, and a value-form.

The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect from Dame Quickly, that we don't know
"where to have it." The value of commodities is the very opposite of the coarse materiality of their
substance, not an atom of matter enters into its composition. Turn and examine a single commodity, by
itself, as we will, yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it seems impossible to grasp it. If, however
we bear in mind that the value of commodities has a purely social reality, and that they acquire this
reality only in so far as they are expressions or embodiments of one identical social substance, viz.,
human labour, it follows as a matter of course, that value can only manifest itself in the social relation of
commodity to commodity. In fact we started from exchange-value, or the exchange relation of
commodities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it. We must now return to this form
under which value first appeared to us.

Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a value-form common to them all,
and presenting a marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use- values. I mean their
money-form. Here, however, a task is set us, the performance of which has never yet even been
attempted by bourgeois economy, the task of tracing the genesis of this money-form, of developing the
expression of value implied in the value-relation of commodities, from its simplest, almost imperceptible
outline, to the dazzling money-form. By doing this we shall, at the same time, solve the riddle presented
by money.

The simplest value-relation is evidently that of one commodity to some one other commodity of a
different kind. Hence the relation between the values of two commodities supplies us with the simplest
expression of the value of a single commodity.



A. Elementary or Accidental Form Of Value

x commodity A = y commodity B, or
x commodity A is worth y commodity B.

20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or

20 Yards of linen are worth 1 coat.



1. The two poles of the expression of value. Relative form and Equivalent form



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (9 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this elementary form. Its analysis, therefore, is our
real difficulty.

Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example the linen and the coat), evidently play two
different parts. The linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the material in which that
value is expressed. The former plays an active, the latter a passive, part. The value of the linen is
represented as relative value, or appears in relative form. The coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in
equivalent form.

The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately connected, mutually dependent and
inseparable elements of the expression of value; but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive,
antagonistic extremes — i.e., poles of the same expression. They are allotted respectively to the two
different commodities brought into relation by that expression. It is not possible to express the value of
linen in linen. 20 yards of linen = 20 yards of linen is no expression of value. On the contrary, such an
equation merely says that 20 yards of linen are nothing else than 20 yards of linen, a definite quantity of
the use-value linen. The value of the linen can therefore be expressed only relatively — i.e., in some
other commodity. The relative form of the value of the linen pre-supposes, therefore, the presence of
some other commodity — here the coat — under the form of an equivalent. On the other hand, the
commodity that figures as the equivalent cannot at the same time assume the relative form. That second
commodity is not the one whose value is expressed. Its function is merely to serve as the material in
which the value of the first commodity is expressed.

No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat, implies the
opposite relation. 1 coat = 20 yards of linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. But, in that case, I must
reverse the equation, in order to express the value of the coat relatively; and. so soon as I do that the linen
becomes the equivalent instead of the coat. A single commodity cannot, therefore, simultaneously
assume, in the same expression of value, both forms. The very polarity of these forms makes them
mutually exclusive.

Whether, then, a commodity assumes the relative form, or the opposite equivalent form, depends entirely
upon its accidental position in the expression of value — that is, upon whether it is the commodity whose
value is being expressed or the commodity in which value is being expressed.



2. The Relative Form of value

(a.) The nature and import of this form

In order to discover how the elementary expression of the value of a commodity lies hidden in the
value-relation of two commodities, we must, in the first place, consider the latter entirely apart from its
quantitative aspect. The usual mode of procedure is generally the reverse, and in the value-relation
nothing is seen but the proportion between definite quantities of two different sorts of commodities that
are considered equal to each other. It is apt to be forgotten that the magnitudes of different things can be
compared quantitatively, only when those magnitudes are expressed in terms of the same unit. It is only
as expressions of such a unit that they are of the same denomination, and therefore commensurable. |T71

Whether 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 20 coats or = x coats-that is, whether a given quantity of linen is
worth few or many coats, every such statement implies that the linen and coats, as magnitudes of value,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (10 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

are expressions of the same unit, things of the same kind. Linen = coat is the basis of the equation.

But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus assumed, do not play the same part. It is only
the value of the linen that is expressed. And how? By its reference to the coat as its equivalent, as
something that can be exchanged for it. In this relation the coat is the mode of existence of value, is value
embodied, for only as such is it the same as the linen. On the other hand, the linen's own value comes to
the front, receives independent expression, for it is only as being value that it is comparable with the coat
as a thing of equal value, or exchangeable with the coat. To borrow an illustration from chemistry,
butyric acid is a different substance from propyl formate. Yet both are made up of the same chemical
substances, carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and oxygen (O), and that, too, in like proportions — namely,
C 4 H 8 2 . If now we equate butyric acid to propyl formate, then, in the first place, propyl formate would

be, in this relation, merely a form of existence of C4H802; and in the second place, we should be stating
that butyric acid also consists of C4H802. Therefore, by thus equating the two substances, expression
would be given to their chemical composition, while their different physical forms would be neglected.

If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations of human labour, we reduce them by our
analysis, it is true, to the abstraction, value; but we ascribe to this value no form apart from their bodily
form. It is otherwise in the value-relation of one commodity to another. Here, the one stands forth in its
character of value by reason of its relation to the other.

By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate the labour embodied in the former to that in the
latter. Now, it is true that the tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete labour of a different sort from
the weaving which makes the linen. But the act of equating it to the weaving, reduces the tailoring to that
which is really equal in the two kinds of labour, to their common character of human labour. In this
roundabout way, then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so far as it weaves value, has nothing to
distinguish it from tailoring, and, consequently, is abstract human labour. It is the expression of
equivalence between different sorts of commodities that alone brings into relief the specific character of
value-creating labour, and this it does by actually reducing the different varieties of labour embodied in
the different kinds of commodities to their common quality of human labour in the abstract. fl81

There is, however, something else required beyond the expression of the specific character of the labour
of which the value of the linen consists. Human labour-power in motion, or human labour, creates value,
but is not itself value. It becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form of some
object. In order to express the value of the linen as a congelation of human labour, that value must be
expressed as having objective existence, as being a something materially different from the linen itself,
and yet a something common to the linen and all other commodities. The problem is already solved.

When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation of value, the coat ranks qualitatively as the
equal of the linen, as something of the same kind, because it is value. In this position it is a thing in
which we see nothing but value, or whose palpable bodily form represents value. Yet the coat itself, the
body of the commodity, coat, is a mere use-value. A coat as such no more tells us it is value, than does
the first piece of linen we take hold of. This shows that when placed in value-relation to the linen, the
coat signifies more than when out of that relation, just as many a man strutting about in a gorgeous
uniform counts for more than when in mufti.

In the production of the coat, human labour-power, in the shape of tailoring, must have been actually
expended. Human labour is therefore accumulated in it. In this aspect the coat is a depository of value,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (11 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

but though worn to a thread, it does not let this fact show through. And as equivalent of the linen in the
value equation, it exists under this aspect alone, counts therefore as embodied value, as a body that is
value. A, for instance, cannot be "your majesty" to B, unless at the same time majesty in B's eyes
assumes the bodily form of A, and, what is more, with every new father of the people, changes its
features, hair, and many other things besides.

Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equivalent of the linen, the coat officiates as the
form of value. The value of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the commodity coat,
the value of one by the use-value of the other. As a use-value, the linen is something palpably different
from the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and now has the appearance of a coat. Thus the linen
acquires a value-form different from its physical form. The fact that it is value, is made manifest by its
equality with the coat, just as the sheep's nature of a Christian is shown in his resemblance to the Lamb
of God.

We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commodities has already told us, is told us by the linen
itself, so soon as it comes into communication with another commodity, the coat. Only it betrays its
thoughts in that language with which alone it is familiar, the language of commodities. In order to tell us
that its own value is created by labour in its abstract character of human labour, it says that the coat, in so
far as it is worth as much as the linen, and therefore is value, consists of the same labour as the linen. In
order to inform us that its sublime reality as value is not the same as its buckram body, it says that value
has the appearance of a coat, and consequently that so far as the linen is value, it and the coat are as like
as two peas. We may here remark, that the language of commodities has, besides Hebrew, many other
more or less correct dialects. The German "Wertsein," to be worth, for instance, expresses in a less
striking manner than the Romance verbs "valere," "valer," "valoir," that the equating of commodity B to
commodity A, is commodity A's own mode of expressing its value. Paris vaut bien une messe.

By means, therefore, of the value-relation expressed in our equation, the bodily form of commodity B
becomes the value-form of commodity A, or the body of commodity B acts as a mirror to the value of
commodity A. f!91 By putting itself in relation with commodity B, as value in propria persona, as the
matter of which human labour is made up, the commodity A converts the value in use, B, into the
substance in which to express its, A's, own value. The value of A, thus expressed in the use- value of B,
has taken the form of relative value.



(b.) Quantitative determination of Relative value

Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a useful object of given quantity, as 15
bushels of corn, or 100 lbs. of coffee. And a given quantity of any commodity contains a definite
quantity of human labour. The value-form must therefore not only express value generally, but also value
in definite quantity. Therefore, in the value-relation of commodity A to commodity B, of the linen to the
coat, not only is the latter, as value in general, made the equal in quality of the linen, but a definite
quantity of coat (1 coat) is made the equivalent of a definite quantity (20 yards) of linen.

The equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth one coat, implies that the same
quantity of value-substance (congealed labour) is embodied in both; that the two commodities have each
cost the same amount of labour of the same quantity of labour-time. But the labour-time necessary for the
production of 20 yards of linen or 1 coat varies with every change in the productiveness of weaving or



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (12 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

tailoring. We have now to consider the influence of such changes on the quantitative aspect of the
relative expression of value.

I. Let the value of the linen vary, [201 that of the coat remaining constant. If, say in consequence of the
exhaustion of flax-growing soil, the labour-time necessary for the production of the linen be doubled, the
value of the linen will also be doubled. Instead of the equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, we should
have 20 yards of linen = 2 coats, since 1 coat would now contain only half the labour-time embodied in
20 yards of linen. If, on the other hand, in consequence, say, of improved looms, this labour-time be
reduced by one-half, the value of the linen would fall by one-half. Consequently, we should have 20
yards of linen = 1/2 coat. The relative value of commodity A, i.e., its value expressed in commodity B,
rises and falls directly as the value of A, the value of B being supposed constant.

II. Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the value of the coat varies. If, under these
circumstances, in consequence, for instance, of a poor crop of wool, the labour-time necessary for the
production of a coat becomes doubled, we have instead of 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, 20 yards of linen =
1/2 coat. If, on the other hand, the value of the coat sinks by one-half, then 20 yards of linen = 2 coats.
Hence, if the value of commodity A remain constant, its relative value expressed in commodity B rises
and falls inversely as the value of B.

If we compare the different cases in I. and II., we see that the same change of magnitude in relative value
may arise from totally opposite causes. Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, becomes 20 yards
of linen = 2 coats, either, because the value of the linen has doubled, or because the value of the coat has
fallen by one-half; and it becomes 20 yards of linen = 1/2 coat, either, because the value of the linen has
fallen by one-half, or because the value of the coat has doubled.

III. Let the quantities of labour-time respectively necessary for the production of the linen and the coat
vary simultaneously in the same direction and in the same proportion. In this case 20 yards of linen
continue equal to 1 coat, however much their values may have altered. Their change of value is seen as
soon as they are compared with a third commodity, whose value has remained constant. If the values of
all commodities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, their relative values would
remain unaltered. Their real change of value would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of
commodities produced in a given time.

IV. The labour-time respectively necessary for the production of the linen and the coat, and therefore the
value of these commodities may simultaneously vary in the same direction, but at unequal rates or in
opposite directions, or in other ways. The effect of all these possible different variations, on the relative
value of a commodity, may be deduced from the results of I., II. , and III.

Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither unequivocally nor exhaustively reflected in their
relative expression, that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude of relative value. The relative value
of a commodity may vary, although its value remains constant. Its relative value may remain constant,
although its value varies; and finally, simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that of its
relative expression by no means necessarily correspond in amount. f211



3. The Equivalent form of value

We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing its value in the use- value of a commodity

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (13 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

differing in kind (the coat), at the same time impresses upon the latter a specific form of value, namely
that of the equivalent. The commodity linen manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that the
coat, without having assumed a value-form different from its bodily form, is equated to the linen. The
fact that the latter therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly exchangeable with
it. Therefore, when we say that a commodity is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is
directly exchangeable with other commodities.

When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent of another, such as linen, and coats
consequently acquire the characteristic property of being directly exchangeable with linen, we are far
from knowing in what proportion the two are exchangeable. The value of the linen being given in
magnitude, that proportion depends on the value of the coat. Whether the coat serves as the equivalent
and the linen as relative value, or the linen as the equivalent and the coat as relative value, the magnitude
of the coat's value is determined, independently of its value-form, by the labour-time necessary for its
production. But whenever the coat assumes in the equation of value, the position of equivalent, its value
acquires no quantitative expression; on the contrary, the commodity coat now figures only as a definite
quantity of some article.

For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what? 2 coats. Because the commodity coat here plays the
part of equivalent, because the use-value coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an embodiment of
value, therefore a definite number of coats suffices to express the definite quantity of value in the linen.
Two coats may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, but they can never express
the quantity of their own value. A superficial observation of this fact, namely, that in the equation of
value, the equivalent figures exclusively as a simple quantity of some article, of some use-value, has
misled Bailey, as also many others, both before and after him, into seeing, in the expression of value,
merely a quantitative relation. The truth being, that when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative
determination of its value is expressed.

The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form of the equivalent, is this: use-value becomes
the form of manifestation, the phenomenal form of its opposite, value.

The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value-form. But, mark well, that this quid pro quo exists
in the case of any commodity B, only when some other commodity A enters into a value-relation with it,
and then only within the limits of this relation. Since no commodity can stand in the relation of
equivalent to itself, and thus turn its own bodily shape into the expression of its own value, every
commodity is compelled to choose some other commodity for its equivalent, and to accept the use-value,
that is to say, the bodily shape of that other commodity as the form of its own value.

One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material substances, as use-values, will serve to
illustrate this point. A sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: but we can neither see
nor touch this weight. We then take various pieces of iron, whose weight has been determined
beforehand. The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifestation of weight, than is the sugar-loaf.
Nevertheless, in order to express the sugar-loaf as so much weight, we put it into a weight-relation with
the iron. In this relation, the iron officiates as a body representing nothing but weight. A certain quantity
of iron therefore serves as the measure of the weight of the sugar, and represents, in relation to the
sugar-loaf, weight embodied, the form of manifestation of weight. This part is played by the iron only
within this relation, into which the sugar or any other body, whose weight has to be determined, enters
with the iron. Were they not both heavy, they could not enter into this relation, and the one could



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (14 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

therefore not serve as the expression of the weight of the other. When we throw both into the scales, we
see in reality, that as weight they are both the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper
proportions, they have the same weight. Just as the substance iron, as a measure of weight, represents in
relation to the sugar-loaf weight alone, so, in our expression of value, the material object, coat, in relation
to the linen, represents value alone.

Here, however, the analogy ceases. The iron, in the expression of the weight of the sugar-loaf, represents
a natural property common to both bodies, namely their weight; but the coat, in the expression of value
of the linen, represents a non-natural property of both, something purely social, namely, their value.

Since the relative form of value of a commodity — the linen, for example — expresses the value of that
commodity, as being something wholly different from its substance and properties, as being, for instance,
coat-like, we see that this expression itself indicates that some social relation lies at the bottom of it. With
the equivalent form it is just the contrary. The very essence of this form is that the material commodity
itself — the coat — just as it is, expresses value, and is endowed with the form of value by Nature itself.
Of course this holds good only so long as the value-relation exists, in which the coat stands in the
position of equivalent to the linen. f22] Since, however, the properties of a thing are not the result of its
relations to other things, but only manifest themselves in such relations, the coat seems to be endowed
with its equivalent form, its property of being directly exchangeable, just as much by Nature as it is
endowed with the property of being heavy, or the capacity to keep us warm. Hence the enigmatical
character of the equivalent form which escapes the notice of the bourgeois political economist, until this
form, completely developed, confronts him in the shape of money. He then seeks to explain away the
mystical character of gold and silver, by substituting for them less dazzling commodities, and by reciting,
with ever renewed satisfaction, the catalogue of all possible commodities which at one time or another
have played the part of equivalent. He has not the least suspicion that the most simple expression of
value, such as 20 yds. of linen = 1 coat, already propounds the riddle of the equivalent form for our
solution.

The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, figures as the materialisation of human labour
in the abstract, and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful concrete labour. This
concrete labour becomes, therefore, the medium for expressing abstract human labour. If on the one hand
the coat ranks as nothing but the embodiment of abstract human labour, so, on the other hand, the
tailoring which is actually embodied in it, counts as nothing but the form under which that abstract labour
is realised. In the expression of value of the linen, the utility of the tailoring consists, not in making
clothes, but in making an object, which we at once recognise to be Value, and therefore to be a
congelation of labour, but of labour indistinguishable from that realised in the value of the linen. In order
to act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must reflect nothing besides its own abstract
quality of being human labour generally.

In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour-power is expended. Both, therefore, possess the general
property of being human labour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in the production of value,
have to be considered under this aspect alone. There is nothing mysterious in this. But in the expression
of value there is a complete turn of the tables. For instance, how is the fact to be expressed that weaving
creates the value of the linen, not by virtue of being weaving, as such, but by reason of its general
property of being human labour? Simply by opposing to weaving that other particular form of concrete
labour (in this instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of the product of weaving. Just as the
coat in its bodily form became a direct expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (15 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human labour generally.

Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that concrete labour becomes the form under
which its opposite, abstract human labour, manifests itself.

But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks as, and is directly identified with,
undifferentiated human labour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and therefore with
that embodied in the linen. Consequently, although, like all other commodity producing labour, it is the
labour of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour directly social in its character. This
is the reason why it results in a product directly exchangeable with other commodities. We have then a
third peculiarity of the equivalent form, namely, that the labour of private individuals takes the form of
its opposite, labour directly social in its form.

The two latter peculiarities of the equivalent form will become more intelligible if we go back to the
great thinker who was the first to analyse so many forms, whether of thought, society, or Nature, and
amongst them also the form of value. I mean Aristotle.

In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money-form of commodities is only the further
development of the simple form of value- i.e., of the expression of the value of one commodity in some
other commodity taken at random; for he says:

5 beds = 1 house
(clinai petite anti oiciaV)

is not to be distinguished from

5 beds = so much money.

(clinai pente anti . . . dson ai pente clinai)

He further sees that the value-relation which gives rise to this expression makes it necessary that the
house should qualitatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such an equalisation, these two
clearly different things could not be compared with each other as commensurable quantities. "Exchange,"
he says, "cannot take place without equality, and equality not without commensurability". (out isothV mh
oushV snmmetriaV). Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further analysis of the form of
value. "It is, however, in reality, impossible (th men oun alhqeia adunaton), that such unlike things can
be commensurable" — i.e., qualitatively equal. Such an equalisation can only be something foreign to
their real nature, consequently only "a makeshift for practical purposes."

Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to his further analysis; it was the absence of any
concept of value. What is that equal something, that common substance, which admits of the value of the
beds being expressed by a house? Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle. And why not?
Compared with the beds, the house does represent something equal to them, in so far as it represents
what is really equal, both in the beds and the house. And that is — human labour.

There was, however, an important fact which prevented Aristotle from seeing that, to attribute value to
commodities, is merely a mode of expressing all labour as equal human labour, and consequently as
labour of equal quality. Greek society was founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural basis,
the inequality of men and of their labour-powers. The secret of the expression of value, namely, that all
kinds of labour are equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in general, cannot



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (16 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

be deciphered, until the notion of human equality has already acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice.
This, however, is possible only in a society in which the great mass of the produce of labour takes the
form of commodities, in which, consequently, the dominant relation between man and man, is that of
owners of commodities. The brilliancy of Aristotle's genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in
the expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality. The peculiar conditions of the society
in which he lived, alone prevented him from discovering what, "in truth," was at the bottom of this
equality.



4. The Elementary Form of value considered as a whole

The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained in the equation, expressing its value-relation
to another commodity of a different kind, or in its exchange-relation to the-same. The value of
commodity A, is qualitatively expressed, by the fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it.
Its value is quantitatively expressed by the fact, that a definite quantity of B is exchangeable with a
definite quantity of A. In other words, the value of a commodity obtains independent and definite
expression, by taking the form of exchange- value. When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in
common parlance, that a commodity is both a use-value and an exchange-value, we were, accurately
speaking, wrong. A commodity is a use-value or object of utility, and a value. It manifests itself as this
two-fold thing, that it is, as soon as its value assumes an independent form — viz., the form of
exchange- value. It never assumes this form when isolated, but only when placed in a value or exchange
relation with another commodity of a different kind. When once we know this, such a mode of
expression does no harm; it simply serves as an abbreviation.

Our analysis has shown, that the form or expression of the value of a commodity originates in the nature
of value, and not that value and its magnitude originate in the mode of their expression as
exchange- value. This, however, is the delusion as well of the mercantilists and their recent revivers,
Ferrier, Ganilh, f231 and others, as also of their antipodes, the modern bagmen of Free-trade, such as
Bastiat. The mercantilists lay special stress on the qualitative aspect of the expression of value, and
consequently on the equivalent form of commodities, which attains its full perfection in money. The
modern hawkers of Free-trade, who must get rid of their article at any price, on the other hand, lay most
stress on the quantitative aspect of the relative form of value. For them there consequently exists neither
value, nor magnitude of value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the exchange relation of
commodities, that is, in the daily list of prices current. Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up
the confused ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a successful cross between the
superstitious mercantilists, and the enlightened Free-trade bagmen.

A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms of B, contained in the equation expressing
the value-relation of A to B, has shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form of A figures only as
a use- value, the bodily form of B only as the form or aspect of value. The opposition or contrast existing
internally in each commodity between use- value and value, is, therefore, made evident externally by two
commodities being placed in such relation to each other, that the commodity whose value it is sought to
express, figures directly as a mere use- value, while the commodity in which that value is to be expressed,
figures directly as mere exchange- value. Hence the elementary form of value of a commodity is the
elementary form in which the contrast contained in that commodity, between use-value and value,
becomes apparent.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (17 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use-value; but it is only at a definite historical epoch
in a society's development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., at the epoch when the labour
spent on the production of a useful article becomes expressed as one of the objective qualities of that
article, i.e., as its value. It therefore follows that the elementary value-form is also the primitive form
under which a product of labour appears historically as a commodity, and that the gradual transformation
of such products into commodities, proceeds pari passu with the development of the value-form.

We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary form of value: it is a mere germ, which
must undergo a series of metamorphoses before it can ripen into the price-form.

The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any other commodity B, merely distinguishes
the value from the use-value of A, and therefore places A merely in a relation of exchange with a single
different commodity, B; but it is still far from expressing A's qualitative equality, and quantitative
proportionality, to all commodities. To the elementary relative value-form of a commodity, there
corresponds the single equivalent form of one other commodity. Thus, in the relative expression of value
of the linen, the coat assumes the form of equivalent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation
to a single commodity, the linen.

Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy transition into a more complete form. It is
true that by means of the elementary form, the value of a commodity A, becomes expressed in terms of
one, and only one, other commodity. But that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn, or
anything else. Therefore, according as A is placed in relation with one or the other, we get for one and
the same commodity, different elementary expressions of value. f241 The number of such possible
expressions is limited only by the number of the different kinds of commodities distinct from it. The
isolated expression of A's value, is therefore convertible into a series, prolonged to any length, of the
different elementary expressions of that value.



B. Total or Expanded Form of value

z Com. A = u Com. B or

= v Com. C or

= w Com. D or

= Com. E or

= &c. or



(20 yards of linen = 1 coat or

= 10 lbs. tea or

= 40 lbs. coffee or

= quarter corn or

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (18 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One



= 2 ounces gold or
= 1/2 ton iron or
= &c.) or



1. The Expanded Relative form of value

The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is now expressed in terms of numberless other
elements of the world of commodities. Every other commodity now becomes a mirror of the linen's
value. f25l It is thus, that for the first time, this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of
undifferentiated human labour. For the labour that creates it, now stands expressly revealed, as labour
that ranks equally with every other sort of human labour, no matter what its form, whether tailoring,
ploughing, mining, &c, and no matter, therefore, whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or gold. The
linen, by virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a social relation, no longer with only one other
kind of commodity, but with the whole world of commodities. As a commodity, it is a citizen of that
world. At the same time, the interminable series of value equations implies, that as regards the value of a
commodity, it is a matter of indifference under what particular form, or kind, of use- value it appears.

In the first form, 20 yds. of linen = 1 coat, it might, for ought that otherwise appears, be pure accident,
that these two commodities are exchangeable in definite quantities. In the second form, on the contrary,
we perceive at once the background that determines, and is essentially different from, this accidental
appearance. The value of the linen remains unaltered in magnitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or
iron, or in numberless different commodities, the property of as many different owners. The accidental
relation between two individual commodity-owners disappears. It becomes plain, that it is not the
exchange of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their value; but, on the contrary, that it is the
magnitude of their value which controls their exchange proportions.



2. The particular Equivalent form

Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &c, figures in the expression of value of the linen, as an
equivalent, and, consequently, as a thing that is value. The bodily form of each of these commodities
figures now as a particular equivalent form, one out of many. In the same way the manifold concrete
useful kinds of labour, embodied in these different commodities, rank now as so many different forms of
the realisation, or manifestation, of undifferentiated human labour.



3. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value

In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete because the series representing it is
interminable. The chain of which each equation of value is a link, is liable at any moment to be
lengthened by each new kind of commodity that comes into existence and furnishes the material for a
fresh expression of value. In the second place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and independent
expressions of value. And lastly, if, as must be the case, the relative value of each commodity in turn,
becomes expressed in this expanded form, we get for each of them a relative value-form, different in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (19 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

every case, and consisting of an interminable series of expressions of value. The defects of the expanded
relative value-form are reflected in the corresponding equivalent form. Since the bodily form of each
single commodity is one particular equivalent form amongst numberless others, we have, on the whole,
nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, each excluding the others. In the same way, also, the special,
concrete, useful kind of labour embodied in each particular equivalent, is presented only as a particular
kind of labour, and therefore not as an exhaustive representative of human labour generally. The latter,
indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its manifold, particular, concrete forms. But, in that
case, its expression in an infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity.

The expanded relative value-form is, however, nothing but the sum of the elementary relative
expressions or equations of the first kind, such as:

20 yards of linen = 1 coat

20 yards of linen = 10 lbs. of tea, etc.

Each of these implies the corresponding inverted equation,

1 coat = 20 yards of linen

10 lbs. of tea = 20 yards of linen, etc.

In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other commodities, and thus expresses its value in a
series of other commodities, it necessarily follows, that the various owners of the latter exchange them
for the linen, and consequently express the value of their various commodities in one and the same third
commodity, the linen. If then, we reverse the series, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 10 lbs. of tea, etc.,
that is to say, if we give expression to the converse relation already implied in the series, we get,

C. The General Form of Value

1 coat

10 lbs. of tea

40 lbs. of coffee

1 quarter of corn = 20 yards of linen

2 ounces of gold
1/2 a ton of iron

x Commodity A., etc.



1 . The altered character of the form of value



All commodities now express their value (1) in an elementary form, because in a single commodity; (2)
with unity, because in one and the same commodity. This form of value is elementary and the same for
all, therefore general.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (20 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

The forms A and B were fit only to express the value of a commodity as something distinct from its
use-value or material form.

The first- form, A, furnishes such equations as the following:

1 coat = 20 yards of linen,

10 lbs. of tea = 1/2 a ton of iron.

The value of the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron. But to be equated to linen, and again to
iron, is to be as different as are linen and iron. This forms it is plain, occurs practically only in the first
beginning, when the products of labour are converted into commodities by accidental and occasional
exchanges.

The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner than the first, the value of a commodity
from its use-value, for the value of the coat is there placed in contrast under all possible shapes with the
bodily form of the coat; it is equated to linen, to iron, to tea, in short, to everything else, only not to itself,
the coat. On the other hand, any general expression of value common to all is directly excluded; for, in
the equation of value of each commodity, all other commodities now appear only under the form of
equivalents. The expanded form of value comes into actual existence for the first time so soon as a
particular product of labour, such as cattle, is no longer exceptionally, but habitually, exchanged for
various other commodities.

The third and lastly developed form expresses the values of the whole world of commodities in terms of
a single commodity set apart for the purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents to us their values by
means of their equality with linen. The value of every commodity is now, by being equated to linen, not
only differentiated from its own use-value, but from all other use-values generally, and is, by that very
fact, expressed as that which is common to all commodities. By this form, commodities are, for the first
time, effectively brought into relation with one another as values, or made to appear as exchange-values.

The two earlier forms either express the value of each commodity in terms of a single commodity of a
different kind, or in a series of many such commodities. In both cases, it is, so to say, the special business
of each single commodity to find an expression for its value, and this it does without the help of the
others. These others, with respect to the former, play the passive parts of equivalents. The general form
of value, C, results from the joint action of the whole world of commodities, and from that alone. A
commodity can acquire a general expression of its value only by all other commodities, simultaneously
with it, expressing their values in the same equivalent; and every new commodity must follow suit. It
thus becomes evident that since the existence of commodities as values is purely social, this social
existence can be expressed by the totality of their social relations alone, and consequently that the form
of their value must be a socially recognised form.

All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only as qualitatively equal as values generally,
but also as values whose magnitudes are capable of comparison. By expressing the magnitudes of their
values in one and the same material, the linen, those magnitudes are also compared with each other For
instance, 10 lbs. of tea = 20 yards of linen, and 40 lbs. of coffee = 20 yards of linen. Therefore, 10 lbs of
tea = 40 lbs. of coffee. In other words, there is contained in 1 lb. of coffee only one-fourth as much
substance of value — labour — as is contained in 1 lb. of tea.

The general form of relative value, embracing the whole world of commodities, converts the single
commodity that is excluded from the rest, and made to play the part of equivalent — here the linen —

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (21 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

into the universal equivalent. The bodily form of the linen is now the form assumed in common by the
values of all commodities; it therefore becomes directly exchangeable with all and every of them. The
substance linen becomes the visible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of every kind of human labour.
Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individuals producing a particular article, linen, acquires
in consequence a social character, the character of equality with all other kinds of labour. The
innumerable equations of which the general form of value is composed, equate in turn the labour
embodied in the linen to that embodied in every other commodity, and they thus convert weaving into the
general form of manifestation of undifferentiated human labour. In this manner the labour realised in the
values of commodities is presented not only under its negative aspect, under which abstraction is made
from every concrete form and useful property of actual work, but its own positive nature is made to
reveal itself expressly. The general value-form is the reduction of all kinds of actual labour to their
common character of being human labour generally, of being the expenditure of human labour-power.

The general value-form, which represents all products of labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated
human labour, shows by its very structure that it is the social resume of the world of commodities. That
form consequently makes it indisputably evident that in the world of commodities the character
possessed by all labour of being human labour constitutes its specific social character.



2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and of the Equivalent Form

The degree of development of the relative form of value corresponds to that of the equivalent form. But
we must bear in mind that the development of the latter is only the expression and result of the
development of the former.

The primary or isolated relative form of value of one commodity converts some other commodity into an
isolated equivalent. The expanded form of relative value, which is the expression of the value of one
commodity in terms of all other commodities, endows those other commodities with the character of
particular equivalents differing in kind. And lastly, a particular kind of commodity acquires the character
of universal equivalent, because all other commodities make it the material in which they uniformly
express their value.

The antagonism between the relative form of value and the equivalent form, the two poles of the
value-form, is developed concurrently with that form itself.

The first form, 20 yds. of linen = one coat, already contains this antagonism, without as yet fixing it.
According as we read this equation forwards or backwards, the parts played by the linen and the coat are
different. In the one case the relative value of the linen is expressed in the coat, in the other case the
relative value of the coat is expressed in the linen. In this first form of value, therefore, it is difficult to
grasp the polar contrast.

Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can completely expand its relative value, and
that it acquires this expanded form only because, and in so far as, all other commodities are, with respect
to it, equivalents. Here we cannot reverse the equation, as we can the equation 20 yds. of linen = 1 coat,
without altering its general character, and converting it from the expanded form of value into the general
form of value.

Finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a general social relative form of value, because,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (22 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

and in so far as, thereby all commodities, with the exception of one, are excluded from the equivalent
form. A single commodity, the linen, appears therefore to have acquired the character of direct
exchangeability with every other commodity because, and in so far as, this character is denied to every
other commodity. f261

The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on the other hand, excluded from the relative
value-form. If the linen, or any other commodity serving as universal equivalent, were, at the same time,
to share in the relative form of value, it would have to serve as its own equivalent. We should then have
20 yds. of linen = 20 yds. of linen; this tautology expresses neither value, nor magnitude of value. In
order to express the relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather reverse the form C. This
equivalent has no relative form of value in common with other commodities, but its value is relatively
expressed by a never ending series of other commodities.

Thus, the expanded form of relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the specific form of relative
value for the equivalent commodity.



3. Transition from the General Form of Value to the Money-Form

The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. It can, therefore, be assumed by any
commodity. On the other hand, if a commodity be found to have assumed the universal equivalent form
(form C), this is only because and in so far as it has been excluded from the rest of all other commodities
as their equivalent, and that by their own act. And from the moment that this exclusion becomes finally
restricted to one particular commodity, from that moment only, the general form of relative value of the
world of commodities obtains real consistence and general social validity.

The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equivalent form is thus socially identified, now
becomes the money-commodity, or serves as money. It becomes the special social function of that
commodity, and consequently its social monopoly, to play within the world of commodities the part of
the universal equivalent. Amongst the commodities which, in form B, figure as particular equivalents of
the linen, and, in form C, express in common their relative values in linen, this foremost place has been
attained by one in particular- namely, gold. If, then, in form C we replace the linen by gold, we get,



D. The Money-Form

20 yards of linen

1 coat

10 lbs. of tea

40 lbs. of coffee

1 quarter of corn = 2 ounces of gold

1/2 a ton of iron

x commodity A., etc.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (23 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One



In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to form C, the changes are fundamental. On the
other hand, there is no difference between forms C and D, except that, in the latter, gold has assumed the
equivalent form in the place of linen. Gold is in form D, what linen was in form C — the universal
equivalent. The progress consists in this alone, that the character of direct and universal exchangeability
— in other words, that the universal equivalent form — has now, by social custom, become finally
identified with the substance, gold.

Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities only because it was previously, with
reference to them, a simple commodity. Like all other commodities, it was also capable of serving as an
equivalent, either as simple equivalent in isolated exchanges, or as particular equivalent by the side of
others. Gradually it began to serve, within varying limits, as universal equivalent. So soon as it
monopolises this position in the expression of value for the world of commodities, it becomes the money
commodity, and then, and not till then, does form D become distinct from form C, and the general form
of value become changed into the money-form.

The elementary expression of the relative value of a single commodity, such as linen, in terms of the
commodity, such as gold, that plays the part of money, is the price-form of that commodity. The
price-form of the linen is therefore

20 yards of linen = 2 ounces of gold, or,

if 2 ounces of gold when coined are £2, 20 yards of linen = £2.

The difficulty in forming a concept of the money-form, consists in clearly comprehending the universal
equivalent form, and as a necessary corollary, the general form of value, form C. The latter is deducible
from form B, the expanded form of value, the essential component element of which, we saw, is form A,
20 yards of linen = 1 coat or x commodity A = y commodity B. The simple commodity-form is therefore
the germ of the money-form.



SECTION 4

THE FETISHISM OF COMMODITIES
AND THE SECRET THEREOF



A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. Its analysis shows that it
is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties. So far as
it is a value in use, there is nothing mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the point of view
that by its properties it is capable of satisfying human wants, or from the point that those properties are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (24 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

the product of human labour. It is as clear as noon-day, that man, by his industry, changes the forms of
the materials furnished by Nature, in such a way as to make them useful to him. The form of wood, for
instance, is altered, by making a table out of it. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common,
every-day thing, wood. But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into something
transcendent. It not only stands with its feet on the ground, but, in relation to all other commodities, it
stands on its head, and evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than
"table-turning" ever was.

The mystical character of commodities does not originate, therefore, in their use-value. Just as little does
it proceed from the nature of the determining factors of value. For, in the first place, however varied the
useful kinds of labour, or productive activities, may be, it is a physiological fact, that they are functions
of the human organism, and that each such function, whatever may be its nature or form, is essentially
the expenditure of human brain, nerves, muscles, &c. Secondly, with regard to that which forms the
ground-work for the quantitative determination of value, namely, the duration of that expenditure, or the
quantity of labour, it is quite clear that there is a palpable difference between its quantity and quality. In
all states of society, the labour-time that it costs to produce the means of subsistence, must necessarily be
an object of interest to mankind, though not of equal interest in different stages of development. [271 And
lastly, from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their labour assumes a social form.

Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of
commodities? Clearly from this form itself. The equality of all sorts of human labour is expressed
objectively by their products all being equally values; the measure of the expenditure of labour-power by
the duration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value of the products of labour; and
finally the mutual relations of the producers, within which the social character of their labour affirms
itself, take the form of a social relation between the products.

A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men's labour
appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour; because the relation of
the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not
between themselves, but between the products of their labour. This is the reason why the products of
labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and
imperceptible by the senses. In the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as the
subjective excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of something outside the eye itself. But,
in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an actual passage of light from one thing to another, from the
external object to the eye. There is a physical relation between physical things. But it is different with
commodities. There, the existence of the things qua commodities, and the value-relation between the
products of labour which stamps them as commodities, have absolutely no connexion with their physical
properties and with the material relations arising therefrom. There it is a definite social relation between
men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, to
find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world. In that
world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering
into relation both with one another and the human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the
products of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour, so soon
as they are produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of
commodities.

This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (25 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

social character of the labour that produces them.

As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only because they are products of the labour of
private individuals or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently of each other. The
sum total of the labour of all these private individuals forms the aggregate labour of society. Since the
producers do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange their products, the specific
social character of each producer's labour does not show itself except in the act of exchange. In other
words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the labour of society, only by means of the
relations which the act of exchange establishes directly between the products, and indirectly, through
them, between the producers. To the latter, therefore, the relations connecting the labour of one
individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct social relations between individuals at work, but as
what they really are, material relations between persons and social relations between things. It is only by
being exchanged that the products of labour acquire, as values, one uniform social status, distinct from
their varied forms of existence as objects of utility. This division of a product into a useful thing and a
value becomes practically important, only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful
articles are produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and their character as values has therefore to be
taken into account, beforehand, during production. From this moment the labour of the individual
producer acquires socially a two-fold character. On the one hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of
labour, satisfy a definite social want, and thus hold its place as part and parcel of the collective labour of
all, as a branch of a social division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously. On the other hand, it can
satisfy the manifold wants of the individual producer himself, only in so far as the mutual
exchangeability of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social fact, and therefore the private
useful labour of each producer ranks on an equality with that of all others. The equalisation of the most
different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstraction from their inequalities, or of reducing
them to their common denominator, viz. expenditure of human labour-power or human labour in the
abstract. The two-fold social character of the labour of the individual appears to him, when reflected in
his brain, only under those forms which are impressed upon that labour in every-day practice by the
exchange of products. In this way, the character that his own labour possesses of being socially useful
takes the form of the condition, that the product must be not only useful, but useful for others, and the
social character that his particular labour has of being the equal of all other particular kinds of labour,
takes the form that all the physically different articles that are the products of labour, have one common
quality, viz., that of having value.

Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into relation with each other as values, it is not because
we see in these articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. Quite the contrary:
whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate,
as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon them. We are not aware of this,
nevertheless we do it. \2S] Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is. It is
value, rather, that converts every product into a social hieroglyphic. Later on, we try to decipher the
hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an object of utility as a
value, is just as much a social product as language. The recent scientific discovery, that the products of
labour, so far as they are values, are but material expressions of the human labour spent in their
production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the history of the development of the human race, but, by no
means, dissipates the mist through which the social character of labour appears to us to be an objective
character of the products themselves. The fact, that in the particular form of production with which we
are dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the specific social character of private labour carried on



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (26 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

independently, consists in the equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue of its being human labour,
which character, therefore, assumes in the product the form of value — this fact appears to the producers,
notwithstanding the discovery above referred to, to be just as real and final, as the fact, that, after the
discovery by science of the component gases of air, the atmosphere itself remained unaltered.

What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they make an exchange, is the question, how
much of some other product they get for their own? in what proportions the products are exchangeable?
When these proportions have, by custom, attained a certain stability, they appear to result from the nature
of the products, so that, for instance, one ton of iron and two ounces of gold appear as naturally to be of
equal value as a pound of gold and a pound of iron in spite of their different physical and chemical
qualities appear to be of equal weight. The character of having value, when once impressed upon
products, obtains fixity only by reason of their acting and re-acting upon each other as quantities of
value. These quantities vary continually, independently of the will, foresight and action of the producers.
To them, their own social action takes the form of the action of objects, which rule the producers instead
of being ruled by them. It requires a fully developed production of commodities before, from
accumulated experience alone, the scientific conviction springs up, that all the different kinds of private
labour, which are carried on independently of each other, and yet as spontaneously developed branches
of the social division of labour, are continually being reduced to the quantitative proportions in which
society requires them. And why? Because, in the midst of all the accidental and ever fluctuating
exchange-relations between the products, the labour-time socially necessary for their production forcibly
asserts itself like an over-riding law of Nature. The law of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls
about our ears. f291 The determination of the magnitude of value by labour- time is therefore a secret,
hidden under the apparent fluctuations in the relative values of commodities. Its discovery, while
removing all appearance of mere accidentality from the determination of the magnitude of the values of
products, yet in no way alters the mode in which that determination takes place.

Man's reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, also, his scientific analysis of those
forms, take a course directly opposite to that of their actual historical development. He begins, post
festum, with the results of the process of development ready to hand before him. The characters that
stamp products as commodities, and whose establishment is a necessary preliminary to the circulation of
commodities, have already acquired the stability of natural, self-understood forms of social life, before
man seeks to decipher, not their historical character, for in his eyes they are immutable, but their
meaning. Consequently it was the analysis of the prices of commodities that alone led to the
determination of the magnitude of value, and it was the common expression of all commodities in money
that alone led to the establishment of their characters as values. It is, however, just this ultimate
money-form of the world of commodities that actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the social
character of private labour, and the social relations between the individual producers. When I state that
coats or boots stand in a relation to linen, because it is the universal incarnation of abstract human labour,
the absurdity of the statement is self-evident. Nevertheless, when the producers of coats and boots
compare those articles with linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver, as the universal
equivalent, they express the relation between their own private labour and the collective labour of society
in the same absurd form.

The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like forms. They are forms of thought expressing
with social validity the conditions and relations of a definite, historically determined mode of production,
viz., the production of commodities. The whole mystery of commodities, all the magic and necromancy
that surrounds the products of labour as long as they take the form of commodities, vanishes therefore, so

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (27 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

soon as we come to other forms of production.

Since Robinson Crusoe's experiences are a favourite theme with political economists, f301 let us take a
look at him on his island. Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to satisfy, and must
therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing
and hunting. Of his prayers and the like we take no account, since they are a source of pleasure to him,
and he looks upon them as so much recreation. In spite of the variety of his work, he knows that his
labour, whatever its form, is but the activity of one and the same Robinson, and consequently, that it
consists of nothing but different modes of human labour. Necessity itself compels him to apportion his
time accurately between his different kinds of work. Whether one kind occupies a greater space in his
general activity than another, depends on the difficulties, greater or less as the case may be, to be
overcome in attaining the useful effect aimed at. This our friend Robinson soon learns by experience, and
having rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the wreck, commences, like a true-born Briton, to
keep a set of books. His stock-book contains a list of the objects of utility that belong to him, of the
operations necessary for their production; and lastly, of the labour-time that definite quantities of those
objects have, on an average, cost him. All the relations between Robinson and the objects that form this
wealth of his own creation, are here so simple and clear as to be intelligible without exertion, even to Mr.
Sedley Taylor. And yet those relations contain all that is essential to the determination of value.

Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson's island bathed in light to the European middle ages
shrouded in darkness. Here, instead of the independent man, we find everyone dependent, serfs and lords,
vassals and suzerains, laymen and clergy. Personal dependence here characterises the social relations of
production just as much as it does the other spheres of life organised on the basis of that production. But
for the very reason that personal dependence forms the ground-work of society, there is no necessity for
labour and its products to assume a fantastic form different from their reality. They take the shape, in the
transactions of society, of services in kind and payments in kind. Here the particular and natural form of
labour, and not, as in a society based on production of commodities, its general abstract form is the
immediate social form of labour. Compulsory labour is just as properly measured by time, as
commodity-producing labour; but every serf knows that what he expends in the service of his lord, is a
definite quantity of his own personal labour-power. The tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter
of fact than his blessing. No matter, then, what we may think of the parts played by the different classes
of people themselves in this society, the social relations between individuals in the performance of their
labour, appear at all events as their own mutual personal relations, and are not disguised under the shape
of social relations between the products of labour.

For an example of labour in common or directly associated labour, we have no occasion to go back to
that spontaneously developed form which we find on the threshold of the history of all civilised races.
f3 11 We have one close at hand in the patriarchal industries of a peasant family, that produces corn,
cattle, yarn, linen, and clothing for home use. These different articles are, as regards the family, so many
products of its labour, but as between themselves, they are not commodities. The different kinds of
labour, such as tillage, cattle tending, spinning, weaving and making clothes, which result in the various
products, are in themselves, and such as they are, direct social functions, because functions of the family,
which, just as much as a society based on the production of commodities, possesses a spontaneously
developed system of division of labour. The distribution of the work within the family, and the regulation
of the labour-time of the several members, depend as well upon differences of age and sex as upon
natural conditions varying with the seasons. The labour-power of each individual, by its very nature,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (28 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

operates in this case merely as a definite portion of the whole labour-power of the family, and therefore,
the measure of the expenditure of individual labour-power by its duration, appears here by its very nature
as a social character of their labour.

Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a community of free individuals, carrying on their
work with the means of production in common, in which the labour-power of all the different individuals
is consciously applied as the combined labour-power of the community. All the characteristics of
Robinson's labour are here repeated, but with this difference, that they are social, instead of individual.
Everything produced by him was exclusively the result of his own personal labour, and therefore simply
an object of use for himself. The total product of our community is a social product. One portion serves
as fresh means of production and remains social. But another portion is consumed by the members as
means of subsistence. A distribution of this portion amongst them is consequently necessary. The mode
of this distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the community, and the degree of
historical development attained by the producers. We will assume, but merely for the sake of a parallel
with the production of commodities, that the share of each individual producer in the means of
subsistence is determined by his labour-time. Labour-time would, in that case, play a double part. Its
apportionment in accordance with a definite social plan maintains the proper proportion between the
different kinds of work to be done and the various wants of the community. On the other hand, it also
serves as a measure of the portion of the common labour borne by each individual, and of his share in the
part of the total product destined for individual consumption. The social relations of the individual
producers, with regard both to their labour and to its products, are in this case perfectly simple and
intelligible, and that with regard not only to production but also to distribution.

The religious world is but the reflex of the real world. And for a society based upon the production of
commodities, in which the producers in general enter into social relations with one another by treating
their products as commodities and values, whereby they reduce their individual private labour to the
standard of homogeneous human labour-for such a society, Christianity with its cultus of abstract man,
more especially in its bourgeois developments, Protestantism, Deism, &c, is the most fitting form of
religion. In the ancient Asiatic and other ancient modes of production, we find that the conversion of
products into commodities, and therefore the conversion of men into producers of commodities, holds a
subordinate place, which, however, increases in importance as the primitive communities approach
nearer and nearer to their dissolution. Trading nations, properly so called, exist in the ancient world only
in its interstices, like the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews in the pores of Polish society.
Those ancient social organisms of production are, as compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple
and transparent. But they are founded either on the immature development of man individually, who has
not yet severed the umbilical cord that unites him with his fellowmen in a primitive tribal community, or
upon direct relations of subjection. They can arise and exist only when the development of the productive
power of labour has not risen beyond a low stage, and when, therefore, the social relations within the
sphere of material life, between man and man, and between man and Nature, are correspondingly narrow.
This narrowness is reflected in the ancient worship of Nature, and in the other elements of the popular
religions. The religious reflex of the real world can, in any case, only then finally vanish, when the
practical relations of every-day life offer to man none but perfectly intelligible and reasonable relations
with regard to his fellowmen and to Nature.

The life-process of society, which is based on the process of material production, does not strip off its
mystical veil until it is treated as production by freely associated men, and is consciously regulated by
them in accordance with a settled plan. This, however, demands for society a certain material

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (29 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

ground-work or set of conditions of existence which in their turn are the spontaneous product of a long
and painful process of development.

Political Economy has indeed analysed, however incompletely, f321 value and its magnitude, and has
discovered what lies beneath these forms. But it has never once asked the question why labour is
represented by the value of its product and labour-time by the magnitude of that value. f331 These
formulae, which bear it stamped upon them in unmistakable letters that they belong to a state of society,
in which the process of production has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by him, such
formulae appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a self-evident necessity imposed by Nature as
productive labour itself. Hence forms of social production that preceded the bourgeois form, are treated
by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as the Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian religions.
[341

To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism inherent in commodities, or by the
objective appearance of the social characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, by the dull
and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature in the formation of exchange-value. Since
exchange- value is a definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour bestowed upon an object,
Nature has no more to do with it, than it has in fixing the course of exchange.

The mode of production in which the product takes the form of a commodity, or is produced directly for
exchange, is the most general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. It therefore makes its
appearance at an early date in history, though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner as
now-a-days. Hence its Fetish character is comparatively easy to be seen through. But when we come to
more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity vanishes. Whence arose the illusions of the
monetary system? To it gold and silver, when serving as money, did not represent a social relation
between producers, but were natural objects with strange social properties. And modern economy, which
looks down with such disdain on the monetary system, does not its superstition come out as clear as
noon-day, whenever it treats of capital? How long is it since economy discarded the physiocratic illusion,
that rents grow out of the soil and not out of society?

But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet another example relating to the
commodity-form. Could commodities themselves speak, they would say: Our use-value may be a thing
that interests men. It is no part of us as objects. What, however, does belong to us as objects, is our value.
Our natural intercourse as commodities proves it. In the eyes of each other we are nothing but
exchange- values. Now listen how those commodities speak through the mouth of the economist. "Value"
— (i.e., exchange-value) "is a property of things, riches" — (i.e., use-value) "of man. Value, in this
sense, necessarily implies exchanges, riches do not." f351 "Riches" (use-value) "are the attribute of men,
value is the attribute of commodities. A man or a community is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable... A
pearl or a diamond is valuable" as a pearl or a diamond. f361 So far no chemist has ever discovered
exchange- value either in a pearl or a diamond. The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who
by-the-by lay special claim to critical acumen, find however that the use-value of objects belongs to them
independently of their material properties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a part of them as
objects. What confirms them in this view, is the peculiar circumstance that the use-value of objects is
realised without exchange, by means of a direct relation between the objects and man, while, on the other
hand, their value is realised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social process. Who fails here to call
to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who informs neighbour Seacoal, that, "To be a well-favoured man is



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (30 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by Nature." [371



Footnotes

T 1 1 Karl Marx, " Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie ." Berlin, 1859, p. 3.

[21 "Desire implies want, it is the appetite of the mind, and as natural as hunger to the body.... The
greatest number (of things) have their value from supplying the wants of the mind." Nicholas Barbon: "A
Discourse Concerning Coining the New Money Lighter. In Answer to Mr. Locke's Considerations, &c ",
London, 1696, pp. 2, 3. [off-site link]

[31 "Things have an intrinsick vertue" (this is Barbon's special term for value in use) "which in all places
have the same vertue; as the loadstone to attract iron" ( I.e., p. 6) . The property which the magnet
possesses of attracting iron, became of use only after by means of that property the polarity of the magnet
had been discovered.

[41 "The natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to supply the necessities, or serve the
conveniencies of human life." (John Locke, " Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering
of Interest, 1691L [off-site link]," in Works Edit. Lond., 1777, Vol. II., p. 28.) In English writers of the
17th century we frequently find "worth" in the sense of value in use, and "value" in the sense of
exchange- value. This is quite in accordance with the spirit of a language that likes to use a Teutonic word
for the actual thing, and a Romance word for its reflexion.

[5] In bourgeois societies the economic fictio juris prevails, that every one, as a buyer, possesses an
encyclopedic knowledge of commodities.

[6] "La valeur consiste dans le rapport d'echange qui se trouve entre telle chose et telle autre entre telle
mesure d'une production et telle mesure d'une autre." (Le Trosne: "De l'lnteret Social." Physiocrates , Ed.
Daire. Paris, 1846. P. 889.)

[71 "Nothing can have an intrinsick value." ( N. Barbon, t. c, p. 6 ); or as Butler says — "The value of a
thing Is just as much as it will bring."

[81 N. Barbon, I.e., p. 53 and 7 .

[91 "The value of them (the necessaries of life), when they are exchanged the one for another, is regulated
by the quantity of labour necessarily required, and commonly taken in producing them." ("Some
Thoughts on the Interest of Money in General, and Particularly in the Publick Funds, &." Lond., p. 36)
This remarkable anonymous work written in the last century, bears no date. It is clear, however, from
internal evidence that it appeared in the reign of George II, about 1739 or 1740.

[101 "Toutes les productions d'un meme genre ne forment proprement qu'une masse, dont le prix se
determine en general et sans egard aux circonstances particulieres." (Le Trosne, I.e., p. 893.)

[Ill K.Marx. I.e., p.6.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (31 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

[121 I am inserting the parenthesis because its omission has often given rise to the misunderstanding that
every product that is consumed by some one other than its producer is considered in Marx a commodity.
[Engels, 4th German Edition]

f 131 Tutti i fenomeni dell'universo, sieno essi prodotti della mano dell'uomo, ovvero delle universali
leggi della fisica, non ci danno idea di attuale creazione, ma unicamente di una modificazione della
materia. Accostare e separare sono gli unici elementi che l'ingegno umano ritrova analizzando l'idea della
riproduzione: e tanto e riproduzione di valore (value in use, although Verri in this passage of his
controversy with the Physiocrats is not himself quite certain of the kind of value he is speaking of) e di
ricchezze se la terra, I'aria e I'acqua ne' campi si trasmutino in grano, come se colla mano dell'uomo il
glutine di un insetto si trasmuti in velluto ovvero alcuni pezzetti di metalio si organizzino a formare una
ripetizione."-Pietro Verri, "Meditazioni sulla Economia Politica" [first printed in 1773] in Custodi's
edition of the Italian Economists, Parte Moderna, t. XV., p. 22.

[14] Comp. Hegel, " Philosophic des Rechts ." Berlin, 1840. P. 250

fl51 The reader must note that we are not speaking here of the wages or value that the labourer gets for a
given labour-time, but of the value of the commodity in which that labour-time is materialised. Wages is
a category that, as yet, has no existence at the present stage of our investigation.

fl61 In order to prove that labour alone is that all-sufficient and real measure, by which at all times the
value of all commodities can be estimated and compared, Adam Smith says, "Equal quantities of labour
must at all times and in all places have the same value for the labourer. In his normal state of health,
strength, and activity, and with the average degree of skill that he may possess, he must always give up
the same portion of his rest his freedom, and his happiness." ( "Wealth of Nations," b. I. ch. V. ) On the
one hand Adam Smith here (but not everywhere) confuses the determination of value by means of the
quantity of labour expended in the production of commodities, with the determination of the values of
commodities by means of the value of labour, and seeks in consequence to prove that equal quantities of
labour have always the same value. On the other hand he has a presentiment, that labour, so far as it
manifests itself in the value of commodities, counts only as expenditure of labour-power, but he treats
this expenditure as the mere sacrifice of rest, freedom, and happiness, not as at the same time the normal
activity of living beings. But then, he has the modern wage-labourer in his eye. Much more aptly, the
anonymous predecessor of Adam Smith, quoted above in Note 1, p. 39 [note 9 etext]. says "one man has
employed himself a week in providing this necessary of life ... and he that gives him some other in
exchange cannot make a better estimate of what is a proper equivalent, than by computing what cost him
just as much labour and time which in effect is no more than exchanging one man's labour in one thing
for a time certain, for another man's labour in another thing for the same time." (I.e., p. 39.) [The English
language has the advantage of possessing different words for the two aspects of labour here considered.
The labour which creates Use- Value, and counts qualitatively, is Work, as distinguished from Labour,
that which creates Value and counts quantitatively, is Labour as distinguished from Work - Engels]

[171 The few economists, amongst whom is S. Bailey, who have occupied themselves with the analysis
of the form of value, have been unable to arrive at any result, first, because they confuse the form of
value with value itself; and second, because, under the coarse influence of the practical bourgeois, they
exclusively give their attention to the quantitative aspect of the question. "The command of quantity ...
constitutes value." ("Money and its Vicissitudes." London, 1837, p. 11. By S. Bailey.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (32 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

f 181 The celebrated Franklin, one of the first economists, after Wm. Petty, who saw through the nature of
value, says: "Trade in general being nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all
things is ... most justly measured by labour." ("The works of B. Franklin, &c," edited by Sparks. Boston,
1836, Vol. II., p. 267.) Franklin is unconscious that by estimating the value of everything in labour, he
makes abstraction from any difference in the sorts of labour exchanged, and thus reduces them all to
equal human labour. But although ignorant of this, yet he says it. He speaks first of "the one labour," then
of "the other labour," and finally of "labour," without further qualification, as the substance of the value
of everything.

f 191 In a sort of way, it is with man as with commodities. Since he comes into the world neither with a
looking glass in his hand, nor as a Fichtian philosopher, to whom "I am I" is sufficient, man first sees and
recognises himself in other men. Peter only establishes his own identity as a man by first comparing
himself with Paul as being of like kind. And thereby Paul, just as he stands in his Pauline personality,
becomes to Peter the type of the genus homo.

f2Q1 Value is here, as occasionally in the preceding pages, used in sense of value determined as to
quantity, or of magnitude of value.

f211 This incongruity between the magnitude of value and its relative expression has, with customary
ingenuity, been exploited by vulgar economists. For example -"Once admit that A falls, because B, with
which it is exchanged, rises, while no less labour is bestowed in the meantime on A, and your general
principle of value falls to the ground.... If he [Ricardo] allowed that when A rises in value relatively to B,
B falls in value relatively to A, he cut away the ground on which he rested his grand proposition, that the
value of a commodity is ever determined by the labour embodied in it, for if a change in the cost of A
alters not only its own value in relation to B, for which it is exchanged, but also the value of B relatively
to that of A, though no change has taken place in the quantity of labour to produce B, then not only the
doctrine falls to the ground which asserts that the quantity of labour bestowed on an article regulates its
value, but also that which affirms the cost of an article to regulate its value' (J. Broadhurst: "Political
Economy," London, 1842, pp. 11 and 14.) Mr. Broadhurst might just as well say: consider the fractions
10/20, 10/50, 10/100, &c, the number 10 remains unchanged, and yet its proportional magnitude, its
magnitude relatively to the numbers 20, 50, 100 &c, continually diminishes. Therefore the great
principle that the magnitude of a whole number, such as 10, is "regulated" by the number of times unity
is contained in it, falls to the ground. [The author explains in section 4 of this chapter, pp. 80- 81, note 2
(note 33 etext), what he understands by "Vulgar Economy." - Engels]

f221 Such expressions of relations in general, called by Hegel reflex-categories , form a very curious
class. For instance, one man is king only because other men stand in the relation of subjects to him.
They, on the contrary, imagine that they are subjects because he is king.

f231 F. L. A. Ferrier, sous-inspecteur des douanes, "Du gouvernement considere dans ses rapports avec le
commerce," Paris, 1805; and Charles Ganilh, "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique, — 2nd ed., Paris,
1821.

f241 In Homer, for instance, the value of an article is expressed in a series of different things II. Vll.

472-475.

f251 For this reason, we can speak of the coat- value of the linen when its value is expressed in coats, or



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (33 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

of its corn- value when expressed in corn, and so on. Every such expression tells us, that what appears in
the use-values, cost, corn, &c, is the value of the linen. "The value of any commodity denoting its
relation in exchange, we may speak of it as ... corn-value, cloth- value, according to the commodity with
which it is compared; and hence there are a thousand different kinds of value, as many kinds of value as
there are commodities in existence, and all are equally real and equally nominal." ("A Critical
Dissertation on the Nature, Measures and Causes of Value: chiefly in reference to the writings of Mr.
Ricardo and his followers." By the author of "Essays on the Formation, &c, of Opinions. ' London, 1825,
p. 39.) S. Bailey, the author of this anonymous work, a work which in its day created much stir in
England, fancied that, by thus pointing out the various relative expressions of one and the same value, he
had proved the impossibility of any determination of the concept of value. However narrow his own
views may have been, yet, that he laid his finger on some serious defects in the Ricardian Theory, is
proved by the animosity with which he was attacked by Ricardo's followers. See the Westminster Review
for example.

f261 It is by no means self-evident that this character of direct and universal exchangeability is, so to
speak, a polar one, and as intimately connected with its opposite pole, the absence of direct
exchangeability, as the positive pole of the magnet is with its negative counterpart. It may therefore be
imagined that all commodities can simultaneously have this character impressed upon them, just as it can
be imagined that all Catholics can be popes together. It is, of course, highly desirable in the eyes of the
petit bourgeois, for whom the production of commodities is the nee plus ultra of human freedom and
individual independence, that the inconveniences resulting from this character of commodities not being
directly exchangeable, should be removed. Proudhon's socialism is a working out of this Philistine
Utopia, a form of socialism which, as I have elsewhere shown, does not possess even the merit of
originality. Long before his time, the task was attempted with much better success by Gray, Bray, and
others. But, for all that, wisdom of this kind flourishes even now in certain circles under the name of
"science." Never has any school played more tricks with the word science, than that of Proudhon, for "wo
Begriffe fehlen, Da stellt zur rechten Zeit ein Wort sich ein." [See Proudhon's " Philosophy of Poverty "
— off- site link)

\27] Among the ancient Germans the unit for measuring land was what could be harvested in a day, and
was called Tagwerk, Tagwanne (jurnale, or terra jurnalis, or diornalis), Mannsmaad, &c. (See G. L. von
Maurer, "Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, &c. Verfassung," Munchen, 1854, p. 129 sq.)

\2S] When, therefore, Galiani says: Value is a relation between persons — "La Ricchezza e una ragione
tra due persone," — he ought to have added: a relation between persons expressed as a relation between
things. (Galiani: Delia Moneta [off-site link], p. 221, V. III. of Custodi's collection of "Scrittori Classici
Italiani di Economia Politica." Parte Moderna, Milano 1803.)

f291 What are we to think of a law that asserts itself only by periodical revolutions? It is just nothing but
a law of Nature, founded on the want of knowledge of those whose action is the subject of it." (Friedrich
Engels: "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," in the "Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbucher,"
edited by Arnold Ruge and Karl Marx. Paris. 1844.)

POI Even Ricardo has his stories a la Robinson. "He makes the primitive hunter and the primitive fisher
straightway, as owners of commodities, exchange fish and game in the proportion in which labour-time
is incorporated in these exchange-values. On this occasion he commits the anachronism of making these
men apply to the calculation, so far as their implements have to be taken into account, the annuity tables

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (34 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

in current use on the London Exchange in the year 1817. The parallelograms of Mr. Owen' appear to be
the only form of society, besides the bourgeois form, with which he was acquainted." (Karl Marx: " Zur
Kritik, &c ." pp. 38, 39)

f3 11 'A ridiculous presumption has latterly got abroad that common property in its primitive form is
specifically a Slavonian, or even exclusively Russian form. It is the primitive form that we can prove to
have existed amongst Romans, Teutons, and Celts, and even to this day we find numerous examples,
ruins though they be, in India. A more exhaustive study of Asiatic, and especially of Indian forms of
common property, would show how from the different forms of primitive common property, different
forms of its dissolution have been developed. Thus, for instance, the various original types of Roman and
Teutonic private property are deducible from different forms of Indian common property." (Karl Marx,
" Zur Kritik, &c ," p. 10.)

f321 The insufficiency of Ricardo's analysis of the magnitude of value, and his analysis is by far the best,
will appear from the 3rd and 4th books of this work. As regards value in general, it is the weak point of
the classical school of Political Economy that it nowhere expressly and with full consciousness,
distinguishes between labour, as it appears in the value of a product, and the same labour, as it appears in
the use-value of that product. Of course the distinction is practically made, since this school treats labour,
at one time under its quantitative aspect, at another under its qualitative aspect. But it has not the least
idea, that when the difference between various kinds of labour is treated as purely quantitative, their
qualitative unity or equality, and therefore their reduction to abstract human labour, is implied. For
instance, Ricardo declares that he agrees with Destutt de Tracy in this proposition: "As it is certain that
our physical and moral faculties are alone our original riches, the employment of those faculties, labour
of some kind, is our only original treasure, and it is always from this employment that all those things are
created which we call riches.... It is certain, too, that all those things only represent the labour which has
created them, and if they have a value, or even two distinct values, they can only derive them from that
(the value) of the labour from which they emanate." (Ricardo, " The Principles of Pol. Econ. ," [off-site
link] 3 Ed. Lond. 1821, p. 334.) We would here only point out, that Ricardo puts his own more profound
interpretation upon the words of Destutt. What the latter really says is, that on the one hand all things
which constitute wealth represent the labour that creates them, but that on the other hand, they acquire
their "two different values" (use-value and exchange-value) from "the value of labour." He thus falls into
the commonplace error of the vulgar economists, who assume the value of one commodity (in this case
labour) in order to determine the values of the rest. But Ricardo reads him as if he had said, that labour
(not the value of labour) is embodied both in use-value and exchange- value. Nevertheless, Ricardo
himself pays so little attention to the two-fold character of the labour which has a two-fold embodiment,
that he devotes the whole of his chapter on "Value and Riches, Their Distinctive Properties," to a
laborious examination of the trivialities of a J.B. Say. And at the finish he is quite astonished to find that
Destutt on the one hand agrees with him as to labour being the source of value, and on the other hand
with J. B. Say as to the notion of value.

f331 It is one of the chief failings of classical economy that it has never succeeded, by means of its
analysis of commodities, and, in particular, of their value, in discovering that form under which value
becomes exchange- value. Even Adam Smith and Ricardo , the best representatives of the school, treat the
form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connexion with the inherent nature of
commodities. The reason for this is not solely because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis
of the magnitude of value. It lies deeper. The value-form of the product of labour is not only the most

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (35 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

abstract, but is also the most universal form, taken by the product in bourgeois production and stamps
that production as a particular species of social production, and thereby gives it its special historical
character. If then we treat this mode of production as one eternally fixed by Nature for every state of
society, we necessarily overlook that which is the differentia specifica of the value-form, and
consequently of the commodity-form, and of its further developments, money-form, capital-form, &c.
We consequently find that economists, who are thoroughly agreed as to labour-time being the measure of
the magnitude of value, have the most strange and contradictory ideas of money, the perfected form of
the general equivalent. This is seen in a striking manner when they treat of banking, where the
commonplace definitions of money will no longer hold water. This led to the rise of a restored mercantile
system (Ganilh, &c), which sees in value nothing but a social form, or rather the unsubstantial ghost of
that form. Once for all I may here state, that by classical Political Economy, I understand that economy
which, since the time of W. Petty , has investigated the real relations of production in bourgeois society in
contradistinction to vulgar economy, which deals with appearances only, ruminates without ceasing on
the materials long since provided by scientific economy, and there seeks plausible explanations of the
most obtrusive phenomena, for bourgeois daily use, but for the rest, confines itself to systematising in a
pedantic way, and proclaiming for everlasting truths, the trite ideas held by the self-complacent
bourgeoisie with regard to their own world, to them the best of all possible worlds.

f341 "Les economistes ont une singuliere maniere de proceder. II n'y a pour eux que deux sortes
d'institutions, celles de l'art et celles de la nature. Les institutions de la feodalite sont des institutions
artificielles celles de la bourgeoisie sont des institutions naturelles. lis ressemblent en ceci aux
theologiens, qui eux aussi etablissent deux sortes de religions. Toute religion qui n'est pas la leur, est une
invention des hommes tandis que leur propre religion est une emanation de Dieu -Ainsi il y a eu de
l'histoire, mais il n'y en a plus." (Karl Marx. Misere de la Philosophie. Reponse a la Philosophic de la
Misere par M. Proudhon , 1847, p. 113.) Truly comical is M. Bastiat, who imagines that the ancient
Greeks and Romans lived by plunder alone. But when people plunder for centuries, there must always be
something at hand for them to seize; the objects of plunder must be continually reproduced. It would thus
appear that even Greeks and Romans had some process of production, consequently, an economy, which
just as much constituted the material basis of their world, as bourgeois economy constitutes that of our
modern world. Or perhaps Bastiat means, that a mode of production based on slavery is based on a
system of plunder. In that case he treads on dangerous ground. If a giant thinker like Aristotle erred in his
appreciation of slave labour, why should a dwarf economist like Bastiat be right in his appreciation of
wage-labour? I seize this opportunity of shortly answering an objection taken by a German paper in
America, to my work, "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oekonomie, 1859." In the estimation of that paper, my view
that each special mode of production and the social relations corresponding to it, in short, that the
economic structure of society, is the real basis on which the juridical and political superstructure is raised
and to which definite social forms of thought correspond; that the mode of production determines the
character of the social, political, and intellectual life generally, all this is very true for our own times, in
which material interests preponderate, but not for the middle ages, in which Catholicism, nor for Athens
and Rome, where politics, reigned supreme. In the first place it strikes one as an odd thing for any one to
suppose that these well-worn phrases about the middle ages and the ancient world are unknown to
anyone else. This much, however, is clear, that the middle ages could not live on Catholicism, nor the
ancient world on politics. On the contrary, it is the mode in which they gained a livelihood that explains
why here politics, and there Catholicism, played the chief part. For the rest, it requires but a slight
acquaintance with the history of the Roman republic, for example, to be aware that its secret history is



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (36 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:15]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

the history of its landed property. On the other hand, Don Quixote long ago paid the penalty for wrongly
imagining that knight errantry was compatible with all economic forms of society.

f351 "Observations on certain verbal disputes in Pol. Econ., particularly relating to value and to demand
and supply" Lond., 1821, p. 16.

£361 S. Bailey, I.e., p. 165.

\37] The author of "Observations" and S. Bailey accuse Ricardo of converting exchange-value from
something relative into something absolute. The opposite is the fact. He has explained the apparent
relation between objects, such as diamonds and pearls, in which relation they appear as exchange-values,
and disclosed the true relation hidden behind the appearances, namely, their relation to each other as
mere expressions of human labour. If the followers of Ricardo answer Bailey somewhat rudely, and by
no means convincingly, the reason is to be sought in this, that they were unable to find in Ricardo's own
works any key to the hidden relations existing between value and its form, exchange- value.



Transcribed by Bert Schultz (1993)

Html Markup by Brian Basgen & Andy Blunden (1999)

Next: Chapter Two: Exchange
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (37 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:15]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Parti:

Commodities and Money



CHAPTER TWO:
EXCHANGE



It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make exchanges of their own account. We must,
therefore, have recourse to their guardians, who are also their owners Commodities are things, and
therefore without power of resistance against man. If they are wanting in docility he can use force; in
other words, he can take possession of them. JJJ In order that these objects may enter into relation with
each other as commodities, their guardians must place themselves in relation to one another, as persons
whose will resides in those object, and must behave in such a way that each does not appropriate the
commodity of the other, and part with his own, except by means of an act done by mutual consent. They
must therefore, mutually recognise in each other the rights of private proprietors. This juridical relation,
which thus expresses itself in a contract, whether such contract be part of a developed legal system or
not, is a relation between two wills, and is but the reflex of the real economic relation between the two. It
is this economic relation that determines the subject-matter comprised in each such juridical act. \2\

The persons exist for one another merely as representatives of, and, therefore, as owners of,
commodities. In the course of our investigation we shall find, in general, that the characters who appear
on the economic stage are but the personifications of the economic relations that exist between them.

What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the fact, that it looks upon every other
commodity as but the form of appearance of its own value. A born leveller and a cynic, it is always ready
to exchange not only soul, but body, with any and every other commodity, be the same more repulsive
than Maritornes herself. The owner makes up for this lack in the commodity of a sense of the concrete,
by his own five and more senses. His commodity possesses for himself no immediate use- value.
Otherwise, he would not bring it to the market. It has use- value for others; but for himself its only direct
use-value is that of being a depository of exchange-value, and, consequently, a means of exchange. f31
Therefore, he makes up his mind to part with it for commodities whose value in use is of service to him.
All commodities are non-use-values for their owners, and use- values for their non-owners. Consequently,
they must all change hands. But this change of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter
puts them in relation with each other as values, and realises them as values. Hence commodities must be
realised as values before they can be realised as use-values.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

On the other hand, they must show that they are use- values before they can be realised as values. For the
labour spent upon them counts effectively, only in so far as it is spent in a form that is useful for others.
Whether that labour is useful for others, and its product consequently capable of satisfying the wants of
others, can be proved only by the act of exchange.

Every owner of a commodity wishes to part with it in exchange only for those commodities whose
use-value satisfies some want of his. Looked at in this way, exchange is for him simply a private
transaction. On the other hand, he desires to realise the value of his commodity, to convert it into any
other suitable commodity of equal value, irrespective of whether his own commodity has or has not any
use-value for the owner of the other. From this point of view, exchange is for him a social transaction of
a general character. But one and the same set of transactions cannot be simultaneously for all owners of
commodities both exclusively private and exclusively social and general.

Let us look at the matter a little closer. To the owner of a commodity, every other commodity is, in
regard to his own, a particular equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is the universal
equivalent for all the others. But since this applies to every owner, there is, in fact, no commodity acting
as universal equivalent, and the relative value of commodities possesses no general form under which
they can be equated as values and have the magnitude of their values compared. So far, therefore, they do
not confront each other as commodities, but only as products or use-values. In their difficulties our
commodity owners think like Faust: "Im Anfang war die That." They therefore acted and transacted
before they thought. Instinctively they conform to the laws imposed by the nature of commodities. They
cannot bring their commodities into relation as values, and therefore as commodities, except by
comparing them with some one other commodity as the universal equivalent. That we saw from the
analysis of a commodity. But a particular commodity cannot become the universal equivalent except by a
social act. The social action therefore of all other commodities, sets apart the particular commodity in
which they all represent their values. Thereby the bodily form of this commodity becomes the form of
the socially recognised universal equivalent. To be the universal equivalent, becomes, by this social
process, the specific function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. Thus it becomes — money. "Illi
unum consilium habent et virtutem et potestatem suam bestiae tradunt. Et ne quis possit emere aut
vendere, nisi qui habet characterem aut nomen bestiae aut numerum nominis ejus." (Apocalypse.)

Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course of the exchanges, whereby different products of
labour are practically equated to one another and thus by practice converted into commodities. The
historical progress and extension of exchanges develops the contrast, latent in commodities, between
use-value and value. The necessity for giving an external expression to this contrast for the purposes of
commercial intercourse, urges on the establishment of an independent form of value, and finds no rest
until it is once for all satisfied by the differentiation of commodities into commodities and money. At the
same rate, then, as the conversion of products into commodities is being accomplished, so also is the
conversion of one special commodity into money. \4]

The direct barter of products attains the elementary form of the relative expression of value in one
respect, but not in another. That form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B. The form of direct barter is x
use-value A = y use-value B.£52 The articles A and B in this case are not as yet commodities, but become
so only by the act of barter. The first step made by an object of utility towards acquiring exchange-value
is when it forms a non-use- value for its owner, and that happens when it forms a superfluous portion of
some article required for his immediate wants. Objects in themselves are external to man, and
consequently alienable by him. In order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is only necessary for

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each other as private owners of those alienable objects, and by
implication as independent individuals. But such a state of reciprocal independence has no existence in a
primitive society based on property in common, whether such a society takes the form of a patriarchal
family, an ancient Indian community, or a Peruvian Inca State. The exchange of commodities, therefore,
first begins on the boundaries of such communities, at their points of contact with other similar
communities, or with members of the latter. So soon, however, as products once become commodities in
the external relations of a community, they also, by reaction, become so in its internal intercourse. The
proportions in which they are exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance. What makes them
exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to alienate them. Meantime the need for foreign objects
of utility gradually establishes itself. The constant repetition of exchange makes it a normal social act. In
the course of time, therefore, some portion at least of the products of labour must be produced with a
special view to exchange. From that moment the distinction becomes firmly established between the
utility of an object for the purposes of consumption, and its utility for the purposes of exchange. Its
use-value becomes distinguished from its exchange-value. On the other hand, the quantitative proportion
in which the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on their production itself. Custom stamps
them as values with definite magnitudes.

In the direct barter of products, each commodity is directly a means of exchange to its owner, and to all
other persons an equivalent, but that only in so far as it has use-value for them. At this stage, therefore,
the articles exchanged do not acquire a value-form independent of their own use-value, or of the
individual needs of the exchangers. The necessity for a value-form grows with the increasing number and
variety of the commodities exchanged. The problem and the means of solution arise simultaneously.
Commodity-owners never equate their own commodities to those of others, and exchange them on a
large scale, without different kinds of commodities belonging to different owners being exchangeable
for, and equated as values to, one and the same special article. Such last-mentioned article, by becoming
the equivalent of various other commodities, acquires at once, though within narrow limits, the character
of a general social equivalent. This character comes and goes with the momentary social acts that called
it into life. In turns and transiently it attaches itself first to this and then to that commodity. But with the
development of exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular sorts of commodities, and
becomes crystallised by assuming the money-form. The particular kind of commodity to which it sticks
is at first a matter of accident. Nevertheless there are two circumstances whose influence is decisive. The
money-form attaches itself either to the most important articles of exchange from outside, and these in
fact are primitive and natural forms in which the exchange-value of home products finds expression; or
else it attaches itself to the object of utility that forms, like cattle, the chief portion of indigenous
alienable wealth. Nomad races are the first to develop the money-form, because all their worldly goods
consist of moveable objects and are therefore directly alienable; and because their mode of life, by
continually bringing them into contact with foreign communities, solicits the exchange of products. Man
has often made man himself, under the form of slaves, serve as the primitive material of money, but has
never used land for that purpose. Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois society already well
developed. It dates from the last third of the 17th century, and the first attempt to put it in practice on a
national scale was made a century afterwards, during the French bourgeois revolution.

In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the value of commodities more and more expands
into an embodiment of human labour in the abstract, in the same proportion the character of money
attaches itself to commodities that are by Nature fitted to perform the social function of a universal
equivalent. Those commodities are the precious metals.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

The truth of the proposition that, "although gold and silver are not by Nature money, money is by Nature
gold and silver, "[6] is shown by the fitness of the physical properties of these metals for the functions of
money .JT[ Up to this point, however, we are acquainted only with one function of money, namely, to
serve as the form of manifestation of the value of commodities, or as the material in which the
magnitudes of their values are socially expressed. An adequate form of manifestation of value, a fit
embodiment of abstract, undifferentiated, and therefore equal human labour, that material alone can be
whose every sample exhibits the same uniform qualities. On the other hand, since the difference between
the magnitudes of value is purely quantitative, the money commodity must be susceptible of merely
quantitative differences, must therefore be divisible at will, and equally capable of being reunited. Gold
and silver possess these properties by Nature.

The use-value of the money-commodity becomes two-fold. In addition to its special use-value as a
commodity (gold, for instance, serving to stop teeth, to form the raw material of articles of luxury, &c),
it acquires a formal use- value, originating in its specific social function.

Since all commodities are merely particular equivalents of money, the latter being their universal
equivalent, they, with regard to the latter as the universal commodity, play the parts of particular
commodities. [8]

We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown upon one single commodity, of the value
relations between all the rest. That money is a commodity £9] is therefore a new discovery only for those
who, when they analyse it, start from its fully developed shape. The act of exchange gives to the
commodity converted into money, not its value, but its specific value-form. By confounding these two
distinct things some writers have been led to hold that the value of gold and silver is imaginary, f 101 The
fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced by mere symbols of itself, gave rise to that other
mistaken notion, that it is itself a mere symbol. Nevertheless under this error lurked a presentiment that
the money-form of an object is not an inseparable part of that object, but is simply the form under which
certain social relations manifest themselves. In this sense every commodity is a symbol, since, in so far
as it is value, it is only the material envelope of the human labour spent upon it.JJJJ But if it be declared
that the social characters assumed by objects, or the material forms assumed by the social qualities of
labour under the regime of a definite mode of production, are mere symbols, it is in the same breath also
declared that these characteristics are arbitrary fictions sanctioned by the so-called universal consent of
mankind. This suited the mode of explanation in favour during the 18th century. Unable to account for
the origin of the puzzling forms assumed by social relations between man and man, people sought to
denude them of their strange appearance by ascribing to them a conventional origin.

It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form of a commodity does not imply the
determination of the magnitude of its value. Therefore, although we may be aware that gold is money,
and consequently directly exchangeable for all other commodities, yet that fact by no means tells how
much 10 lbs., for instance, of gold is worth. Money, like every other commodity, cannot express the
magnitude of its value except relatively in other commodities. This value is determined by the
labour-time required for its production, and is expressed by the quantity of any other commodity that
costs the same amount of labour-time. |T21 Such quantitative determination of its relative value takes
place at the source of its production by means of barter. When it steps into circulation as money, its value
is already given. In the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown that money is a
commodity, but this step marks only the infancy of the analysis. The difficulty lies, not in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

comprehending that money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what means a
commodity becomes money, f 131

We have already seen, from the most elementary expression of value, x commodity A = y commodity B,
that the object in which the magnitude of the value of another object is represented, appears to have the
equivalent form independently of this relation, as a social property given to it by Nature. We followed up
this false appearance to its final establishment, which is complete so soon as the universal equivalent
form becomes identified with the bodily form of a particular commodity, and thus crystallised into the
money-form. What appears to happen is, not that gold becomes money, in consequence of all other
commodities expressing their values in it, but, on the contrary, that all other commodities universally
express their values in gold, because it is money. The intermediate steps of the process vanish in the
result and leave no trace behind. Commodities find their own value already completely represented,
without any initiative on their part, in another commodity existing in company with them. These objects,
gold and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of the earth, are forthwith the direct incarnation of all
human labour. Hence the magic of money. In the form of society now under consideration, the behaviour
of men in the social process of production is purely atomic. Hence their relations to each other in
production assume a material character independent of their control and conscious individual action.
These facts manifest themselves at first by products as a general rule taking the form of commodities. We
have seen how the progressive development of a society of commodity-producers stamps one privileged
commodity with the character of money. Hence the riddle presented by money is but the riddle presented
by commodities; only it now strikes us in its most glaring form.



Footnotes

T 1 1 In the 12th century, so renowned for its piety, they included amongst commodities some very delicate
things. Thus a French poet of the period enumerates amongst the goods to be found in the market of
Landit, not only clothing shoes, leather, agricultural implements, &c, but also "femmes folles de leur
corps."

\2] Proudhon begins by taking his ideal of Justice, of "justice eternelle," from the juridical relations that
correspond to the production of commodities: thereby, it may be noted, he proves, to the consolation of
all good citizens, that the production of commodities is a form of production as everlasting as justice.
Then he turns round and seeks to reform the actual production of commodities, and the actual legal
system corresponding thereto, in accordance with this ideal. What opinion should we have of a chemist,
who, instead of studying the actual laws of the molecular changes in the composition and decomposition
of matter, and on that foundation solving definite problems, claimed to regulate the composition and
decomposition of matter by means of the "eternal ideas," of "naturalite" and "affinite"? Do we really
know any more about "usury," when we say it contradicts "justice eternelle," equite eternelle "mutualite
eternelle," and other verites eternelle than the fathers of the church did when they said it was
incompatible with '-grace eternelle," "foi eternelle," and "la volonte eternelle de Dieu"?

\3] "For two-fold is the use of every object.... The one is peculiar to the object as such, the other is not, as
a sandal which may be worn, and is also exchangeable. Both are uses of the sandal, for even he who
exchanges the sandal for the money or food he is in want of, makes use of the sandal as a sandal. But not



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

in its natural way. For it has not been made for the sake of being exchanged." (Aristoteles, "De Rep." 1. i.
c. 9.)

\4] From this we may form an estimate of the shrewdness of the petit-bourgeois socialism, which, while
perpetuating the production of commodities, aims at abolishing the "antagonism" between money and
commodities, and consequently, since money exists only by virtue of this antagonism, at abolishing
money itself. We might just as well try to retain Catholicism without the Pope. For more on this point see
my work, "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oekon.", p. 61, sq.

[51 So long as, instead of two distinct use-values being exchanged, a chaotic mass of articles are offered
as the equivalent of a single article, which is often the case with savages, even the direct barter of
products is in its first infancy.

[61 Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 135. "I metalli ... naturalmente moneta." (Galiani, "Delia moneta" in Custodi's
Collection: Parte Moderna t. iii.)

[7} For further details on this subject see in my work cited above, the chapter on "The precious metals."

[81 "II danaro e la merce universale "(Verri, 1. c, p. 16).

[9J "Silver and gold themselves (which we may call by the general name of bullion) are ... commodities
... rising and falling in ... value ... Bullion, then, may be reckoned to be of higher value where the smaller
weight will purchase the greater quantity of the product or manufacture of the countrey," &c. ("A
Discourse of the General Notions of Money, Trade, and Exchanges, as They Stand in Relation each to
other." By a Merchant. Lond., 1695, p. 7.) "Silver and gold, coined or uncoined, though they are used for
a measure of all other things, are no less a commodity than wine, oil, tobacco, cloth, or stuffs." ("A
Discourse concerning Trade, and that in particular of the East Indies," &c. London, 1689, p. 2.) "The
stock and riches of the kingdom cannot properly be confined to money, nor ought gold and silver to be
excluded from being merchandise." ("The East-India Trade a Most Profitable Trade." London, 1677, p.
4.)

f 101 "L'oro e l'argento hanno valore come metalli anteriore all'esser moneta." (Galiani, 1. c.) Locke says,
"The universal consent of mankind gave to silver, on account of its qualities which made it suitable for
money, an imaginary value." Law, on the other hand. "How could different nations give an imaginary
value to any single thing... or how could this imaginary value have maintained itself?" But the following
shows how little he himself understood about the matter: "Silver was exchanged in proportion to the
value in use it possessed, consequently in proportion to its real value. By its adoption as money it
received an additional value (une valeur additionnelle)". (Jean Law: "Considerations sur le numeraire et
le commerce" in E. Daire's Edit, of "Economistes Financiers du XVIII siecle," p. 470.)

fill "L' Argent en (des denrees) est le signe." (V. de Forbonnais: "Elements du Commerce, Nouv. Edit.
Leyde, 1766," t. II., p. 143.) "Comme signe il est attire par les denrees." (1. c, p. 155.) "L'argent est un
signe d'une chose et la represente." (Montesquieu: "Esprit des Lois," (Oeuvres, Lond. 1767, t. II, p. 2.)
"L'argent n'est pas simple signe, car il est lui-meme richesse, il ne represente pas les valeurs, il les
equivaut." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 910.) "The notion of value contemplates the valuable article as a mere
symbol- the article counts not for what it is, but for what it is worth." (Hegel, 1. c, p. 100.) Lawyers
started long before economists the idea that money is a mere symbol, and that the value of the precious
metals is purely imaginary. This they did in the sycophantic service of the crowned heads, supporting the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

right of the latter to debase the coinage, during the whole of the middle ages, by the traditions of the
Roman Empire and the conceptions of money to be found in the Pandects. "Qu'aucun puisse ni doive
faire doute," says an apt scholar of theirs Philip of Valois, in a decree of 1346, "que a nous et a notre
majeste royale n'appartiennent seulement ... le mestier, le fait, l'etat, la provision et toute l'ordonnance des
monnaies, de donner tel cours, et pour tel prix comme il nous plait et bon nous semble." It was a maxim
of the Roman Law that the value of money was fixed by decree of the emperor. It was expressly
forbidden to treat money as a commodity. "Pecunias vero nulli emere fas erit, nam in usu publico
constitutas oportet non esse mercem." Some good work on this question has been done by G. F. Pagnini:
"Saggio sopra il giusto pregio delle cose, 1751"; Custodi "Parte Moderna," t. II. In the second part of his
work Pagnini directs his polemics especially against the lawyers.

fl21 "If a man can bring to London an ounce of Silver out of the Earth in Peru, in the same time that he
can produce a bushel of Corn, then the one is the natural price of the other; now, if by reason of new or
more easier mines a man can procure two ounces of silver as easily as he formerly did one, the corn will
be as cheap at ten shillings the bushel as it was before at five shillings, caeteris paribus." William Petty.
"A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions." Lond., 1667, p. 32.

f 131 The learned Professor Roscher, after first informing us that "the false definitions of money may be
divided into two main groups: those which make it more, and those which make it less, than a
commodity," gives us a long and very mixed catalogue of works on the nature of money, from which it
appears that he has not the remotest idea of the real history of the theory; and then he moralises thus:
"For the rest, it is not to be denied that most of the later economists do not bear sufficiently in mind the
peculiarities-that distinguish money from other commodities" (it is then, after all, either more or less than
a commodity!)... 'So far, the semi-mercantilist reaction of Ganilh is not altogether without foundation."
(Wilhelm Roscher: "Die Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie," 3rd Edn. 1858, pp. 207-210.) More! less!
not sufficiently! so far! not altogether! What clearness and precision of ideas and language! And such
eclectic professorial twaddle is modestly baptised by Mr. Roscher, "the anatomico-physiological method"
of Political Economy! One discovery however, he must have credit for, namely, that money is "a pleasant
commodity."

Transcribed by Bert Shultz

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Three: Money, or the Circulation of Commodities
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Parti:

Commodities and Money



CHAPTER THREE:

MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES



Contents

Section 1 — The Measure of Values
Section 2 — The Medium of Circulation

A. The Metamorphosis of Commodities

B. The Currency of Money

C. Coin and Symbols of Value

Section 3 — Money

A. Hoarding

B. Means of Payment

C. Universal Money

SECTION 1

THE MEASURE OF VALUES



Throughout this work, I assume, for the sake of simplicity, gold as the money-commodity.

The first chief function of money is to supply commodities with the material for the expression of their
values, or to represent their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, qualitatively equal, and
quantitatively comparable. It thus serves as a universal measure of value. And only by virtue of this
function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excellence, become money.

It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. Just the contrary. It is because all
commodities, as values, are realised human labour, and therefore commensurable, that their values can be

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (1 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

measured by one and the same special commodity, and the latter be converted into the common measure
of their values, i.e., into money. Money as a measure of value, is the phenomenal form that must of
necessity be assumed by that measure of value which is immanent in commodities, labour-time. [JJ

The expression of the value of a commodity in gold — x commodity A = y money-commodity — is its
money-form or price. A single equation, such as 1 ton of iron = 2 ounces of gold, now suffices to express
the value of the iron in a socially valid manner. There is no longer any need for this equation to figure as
a link in the chain of equations that express the values of all other commodities, because the equivalent
commodity, gold, now has the character of money. The general form of relative value has resumed its
original shape of simple or isolated relative value. On the other hand, the expanded expression of relative
value, the endless series of equations, has now become the form peculiar to the relative value of the
money-commodity. The series itself, too, is now given, and has social recognition in the prices of actual
commodities. We have only to read the quotations of a price-list backwards, to find the magnitude of the
value of money expressed in all sorts of commodities. But money itself has no price. In order to put it on
an equal footing with all other commodities in this respect, we should be obliged to equate it to itself as
its own equivalent.

The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form of value generally, a form quite distinct from
their palpable bodily form; it is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form. Although invisible, the value of
iron, linen and corn has actual existence in these very articles: it is ideally made perceptible by their
equality with gold, a relation that, so to say, exists only in their own heads. Their owner must, therefore,
lend them his tongue, or hang a ticket on them, before their prices can be communicated to the outside
world. [2J Since the expression of the value of commodities in gold is a merely ideal act, we may use for
this purpose imaginary or ideal money. Every trader knows, that he is far from having turned his goods
into money, when he has expressed their value in a price or in imaginary money, and that it does not
require the least bit of real gold, to estimate in that metal millions of pounds' worth of goods. When,
therefore, money serves as a measure of value; it is employed only as imaginary or ideal money. This
circumstance has given rise to the wildest theories. [3] But, although the money that performs the
functions of a measure of value is only ideal money, price depends entirely upon the actual substance that
is money. The value, or in other words, the quantity of human labour contained in a ton of iron, is
expressed in imagination by such a quantity of the money-commodity as contains the same amount of
labour as the iron. According, therefore, as the measure of value is gold, silver, or copper, the value of
the ton of iron will be expressed by very different prices, or will be represented by very different
quantities of those metals respectively.

If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and silver, are simultaneously measures of value,
all commodities have two prices — one a gold-price, the other a silver-price. These exist quietly side by
side, so long as the ratio of The value of silver to that of gold remains unchanged, say, at 15:1. Every
change in their ratio disturbs the ratio which exists between the gold-prices and the silver-prices of
commodities, and thus proves, by facts, that a double standard of value is inconsistent with the functions
of a standard. \4]

Commodities with definite prices present themselves under the form; a commodity A = x gold; b
commodity B = z gold; c commodity C = y gold, &c, where a, b, c, represent definite quantities of the
commodities A, B, C and x, z, y, definite quantities of gold. The values of these commodities are,
therefore, changed in imagination into so many different quantities of gold. Hence, in spite of the
confusing variety of the commodities themselves, their values become magnitudes of the same

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (2 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

denomination, gold-magnitudes. They are now capable of being compared with each other and measured,
and the want becomes technically felt of comparing them with some fixed quantity of gold as a unit
measure. This unit, by subsequent division into aliquot parts, becomes itself the standard or scale. Before
they become money, gold, silver, and copper already possess such standard measures in their standards
of weight, so that, for example, a pound weight, while serving as the unit, is, on the one hand, divisible
into ounces, and, on the other, may be combined to make up hundredweights. £51 It is owing to this that,
in all metallic currencies, the names given to the standards of money or of price were originally taken
from the pre-existing names of the standards of weight.

As measure of Value, and as standard of price, money has two entirely distinct functions to perform. It is
the measure of value inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation of human labour; it is the
standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight of metal. As the measure of value it serves to convert
the values of all the manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quantities of gold; as the standard
of price it measures those quantities of gold. The measure of values measures commodities considered as
values; the standard of price measures, on the contrary, quantities of gold by a unit quantity of gold, not
the value of one quantity of gold by the weight of another. In order to make gold a standard of price, a
certain weight must be fixed upon as the unit. In this case, as in all cases of measuring quantities of the
same denomination, the establishment of an unvarying unit of measure is all-important. Hence, the less
the unit is subject to variation, so much the better does the standard of price fulfil its office. But only in
so far as it is itself a product of labour, and, therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a
measure of value. £6]

It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value of gold does not, in any way, affect its
function as a standard of price. No matter how this value varies, the proportions between the values of
different quantities of the metal remain constant. However great the fall in its value, 12 ounces of gold
still have 12 times the value of 1 ounce; and in prices, the only thing considered is the relation between
different quantities of gold. Since, on the other hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can
alter its weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its aliquot parts. Thus gold always renders
the same service as an invariable standard of price, however much its value may vary.

In the second place, a change in the value of gold does not interfere with its functions as a measure of
value. The change affects all commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, caeteris paribus, leaves their
relative values inter se, unaltered, although those values are now expressed in higher or lower
gold-prices.

Just as when we estimate the value of any commodity by a definite quantity of the use-value of some
other commodity, so in estimating the value of the former in gold, we assume nothing more than that the
production of a given quantity of gold costs, at the given period, a given amount of labour. As regards the
fluctuations of prices generally, they are subject to the laws of elementary relative value investigated in a
former chapter.

A general rise in the prices of commodities can result only, either from a rise in their values — the value
of money remaining constant — or from a fall in the value of money, the values of commodities
remaining constant. On the other hand, a general fall in prices can result only, either from a fall in the
values of commodities — the value of money remaining constant — or from a rise in the value of money,
the values of commodities remaining constant. It therefore by no means follows, that a rise in the value
of money necessarily implies a proportional fall in the prices of commodities; or that a fall in the value of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (3 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

money implies a proportional rise in prices. Such change of price holds good only in the case of
commodities whose value remains constant. With those, for example, whose value rises, simultaneously
with, and proportionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in price. And if their value rise either
slower or faster than that of money, the fall or rise in their prices will be determined by the difference
between the change in their value and that of money; and so on.

Let us now go back to the consideration of the price-form.

By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current moneynames of the various weights of the
precious metal figuring as money, and the actual weights which those names originally represented. This
discrepancy is the result of historical causes, among which the chief are: — (1) The importation of
foreign money into an imperfectly developed community. This happened in Rome in its early days,
where gold and silver coins circulated at first as foreign commodities. The names of these foreign coins
never coincide with those of the indigenous weights. (2) As wealth increases, the less precious metal is
thrust out by the more precious from its place as a measure of value, copper by silver, silver by gold,
however much this order of sequence may be in contradiction with poetical chronology. [7] The word
pound, for instance, was the money-name given to an actual pound weight of silver. When gold replaced
silver as a measure of value, the same name was applied according to the ratio between the values of
silver and gold, to perhaps l-15th of a pound of gold. The word pound, as a money-name, thus becomes
differentiated from the same word as a weight-name. [8] (3) The debasing of money carried on for
centuries by kings and princes to such an extent that, of the original weights of the coins, nothing in fact
remained but the names. \9]

These historical causes convert the separation of the money-name from the weight-name into an
established habit with the community. Since the standard of money is on the one hand purely
conventional, and must on the other hand find general acceptance, it is in the end regulated by law. A
given weight of one of the precious metals, an ounce of gold, for instance, becomes officially divided
into aliquot parts, with legally bestowed names, such as pound, dollar, &c. These aliquot parts, which
thenceforth serve as units of money, are then subdivided into other aliquot parts with legal names, such
as shilling, penny, &c. flOl But, both before and after these divisions are made, a definite weight of
metal is the standard of metallic money. The sole alteration consists in the subdivision and denomination.

The prices, or quantities of gold, into which the values of commodities are ideally changed, are therefore
now expressed in the names of coins, or in the legally valid names of the subdivisions of the gold
standard. Hence, instead of saying: A quarter of wheat is worth an ounce of gold; we say, it is worth £3
17s. 10 l/2d. In this way commodities express by their prices how much they are worth, and money
serves as money of account whenever it is a question of fixing the value of an article in its money-form.

mi

The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities of that thing. I know nothing of a man, by
knowing that his name is Jacob. In the same way with regard to money, every trace of a value-relation
disappears in the names pound, dollar, franc, ducat, &c. The confusion caused by attributing a hidden
meaning to these cabalistic signs is all the greater, because these money-names express both the values of
commodities, and, at the same time, aliquot parts of the weight of the metal that is the standard of money.
fl21 On the other hand, it is absolutely necessary that value, in order that it may be distinguished from
the varied bodily forms of commodities, should assume this material and unmeaning, but, at the same
time, purely social form. |T31

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (4 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commodity. Hence the expression of the equivalence
of a commodity with the sum of money constituting its price, is a tautology, £14] just as in general the
expression of the relative value of a commodity is a statement of the equivalence of two commodities.
But although price, being the exponent of the magnitude of a commodity's value, is the exponent of its
exchange-ratio with money, it does not follow that the exponent of this exchange-ratio is necessarily the
exponent of the magnitude of the commodity's value. Suppose two equal quantities of socially necessary
labour to be respectively represented by 1 quarter of wheat and £2 (nearly 1/2 oz. of gold), £2 is the
expression in money of the magnitude of the value of the quarter of wheat, or is its price. If now
circumstances allow of this price being raised to £3, or compel it to be reduced to £1, then although £1
and £3 may be too small or too great properly to express the magnitude of the wheat's value; nevertheless
they are its prices, for they are, in the first place, the form under which its value appears, i.e., money; and
in the second place, the exponents of its exchange-ratio with money. If the conditions of production, in
other words, if the productive power of labour remain constant, the same amount of social labour-time
must, both before and after the change in price, be expended in the reproduction of a quarter of wheat.
This circumstance depends, neither on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that of the owners of other
commodities.

Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, it expresses the connexion that necessarily
exists between a certain article and the portion of the total labour-time of society required to produce it.
As soon as magnitude of value is converted into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape of a
more or less accidental exchange-ratio between a single commodity and another, the money-commodity.
But this exchange-ratio may express either the real magnitude of that commodity's value, or the quantity
of gold deviating from that value, for which, according to circumstances, it may be parted with. The
possibility, therefore, of quantitative incongruity between price and magnitude of value, or the deviation
of the former from the latter, is inherent in the price-form itself. This is no defect, but, on the contrary,
admirably adapts the price-form to a mode of production whose inherent laws impose themselves only as
the mean of apparently lawless irregularities that compensate one another.

The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the possibility of a quantitative incongruity
between magnitude of value and price, i.e., between the former and its expression in money, but it may
also conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so much so, that, although money is nothing but the value-form
of commodities, price ceases altogether to express value. Objects that in themselves are no commodities,
such as conscience, honour, &c, are capable of being offered for sale by their holders, and of thus
acquiring, through their price, the form of commodities. Hence an object may have a price without
having value. The price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathematics. On the other
hand, the imaginary price-form may sometimes conceal either a direct or indirect real value-relation; for
instance, the price of uncultivated land, which is without value, because no human labour has been
incorporated in it.

Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of a commodity (e.g., a ton of iron), by stating
that a given quantity of the equivalent (e.g., an ounce of gold), is directly exchangeable for iron. But it by
no means states the converse, that iron is directly exchangeable for gold. In order, therefore, that a
commodity may in practice act effectively as exchange-value, it must quit its bodily shape, must
transform itself from mere imaginary into real gold, although to the commodity such transubstantiation
may be more difficult than to the Hegelian "concept," the transition from "necessity" to "freedom," or to
a lobster the casting of his shell, or to Saint Jerome the putting off of the old Adam. |T51 Though a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (5 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

commodity may, side by side with its actual form (iron, for instance), take in our imagination the form of
gold, yet it cannot at one and the same time actually be both iron and gold. To fix its price, it suffices to
equate it to gold in imagination. But to enable it to render to its owner the service of a universal
equivalent, it must be actually replaced by gold. If the owner of the iron were to go to the owner of some
other commodity offered for exchange, and were to refer him to the price of the iron as proof that it was
already money, he would get the same answer as St. Peter gave in heaven to Dante, when the latter
recited the creed —

"Assad bene e trascorsa

D'esta moneta gia la lega e'l peso,

Ma dimmi se tu Thai nella tua borsa."

A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchangeable for money, and also that it must be so
exchanged. On the other hand, gold serves as an ideal measure of value, only because it has already, in
the process of exchange, established itself as the money-commodity. Under the ideal measure of values
there lurks the hard cash.



SECTION 2

THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION



A. The Metamorphosis of Commodities

We saw in a former chapter that the exchange of commodities implies contradictory and mutually
exclusive conditions. The differentiation of commodities into commodities and money does not sweep
away these inconsistencies, but develops a modus vivendi, a form in which they can exist side by side.
This is generally the way in which real contradictions are reconciled. For instance, it is a contradiction to
depict one body as constantly falling towards another, and as, at the same time, constantly flying away
from it. The ellipse is a form of motion which, while allowing this contradiction to go on, at the same
time reconciles it.

In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are transferred from hands in which they are
non-use-values, to hands in which they become use-values, it is a social circulation of matter. The
product of one form of useful labour replaces that of another. When once a commodity has found a
resting-place, where it can serve as a use-value, it falls out of the sphere of exchange into that of
consumption. But the former sphere alone interests us at present. We have, therefore, now to consider
exchange from a formal point of view; to investigate the change of form or metamorphosis of
commodities which effectuates the social circulation of matter.

The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very imperfect. The cause of this imperfection is,
apart from indistinct notions of value itself, that every change of form in a commodity results from the
exchange of two commodities, an ordinary one and the money-commodity. If we keep in view the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (6 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

material fact alone that a commodity has been exchanged for gold, we overlook the very thing that we
ought to observe — namely, what has happened to the form of the commodity. We overlook the facts
that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and that when other commodities express their prices
in gold, this gold is but the money-form of those commodities themselves.

Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange just as they are. The process then
differentiates them into commodities and money, and thus produces an external opposition corresponding
to the internal opposition inherent in them, as being at once use-values and values. Commodities as
use-values now stand opposed to money as exchange-value. On the other hand, both opposing sides are
commodities, unities of use-value and value. But this unity of differences manifests itself at two opposite
poles, and at each pole in an opposite way. Being poles they are as necessarily opposite as they are
connected. On the one side of the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in reality a
use-value. Its value is expressed only ideally in its price, by which it is equated to its opponent, the gold,
as to the real embodiment of its value. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic reality, ranks as the
embodiment of value, as money. Gold, as gold, is exchange-value itself. As to its use- value, that has only
an ideal existence, represented by the series of expressions of relative value in which it stands face to
face with all other commodities, the sum of whose uses makes up the sum of the various uses of gold.
These antagonistic forms of commodities are the real forms in which the process of their exchange
moves and takes place.

Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, our old friend the weaver of linen — to the
scene of action, the market. His 20 yards of linen has a definite price, £2. He exchanges it for the £2, and
then, like a man of the good old stamp that he is, he parts with the £2 for a family Bible of the same
price. The linen, which in his eyes is a mere commodity, a depository of value, he alienates in exchange
for gold, which is the linen's value-form, and this form he again parts with for another commodity, the
Bible, which is destined to enter his house as an object of utility and of edification to its inmates. The
exchange becomes an accomplished fact by two metamorphoses of opposite yet supplementary character
— the conversion of the commodity into money, and the re-conversion of the money into a commodity.
fl61 The two phases of this metamorphosis are both of them distinct transactions of the weaver —
selling, or the exchange of the commodity for money; buying, or the exchange of the money for a
commodity; and, the unity of the two acts, selling in order to buy.

The result of the whole transaction, as regards the weaver, is this, that instead of being in possession of
the linen, he now has the Bible; instead of his original commodity, he now possesses another of the same
value but of different utility. In like manner he procures his other means of subsistence and means of
production. From his point of view, the whole process effectuates nothing more than the exchange of the
product of his labour for the product of some one else's, nothing more than an exchange of products.

The exchange of commodities is therefore accompanied by the following changes in their form.

Commodity — Money — Commodity.
C M C.

The result of the whole process is, so far as concerns the objects themselves, C — C, the exchange of one
commodity for another, the circulation of materialised social labour. When this result is attained, the
process is at an end.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (7 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

C — M. First metamorphosis, or sale

The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, into the body of the gold, is, as I have
elsewhere called it, the salto mortale of the commodity. If it falls short, then, although the commodity
itself is not harmed, its owner decidedly is. The social division of labour causes his labour to be as
one-sided as his wants are many-sided. This is precisely the reason why the product of his labour serves
him solely as exchange- value. But it cannot acquire the properties of a socially recognised universal
equivalent, except by being converted into money. That money, however, is in some one else's pocket. In
order to entice the money out of that pocket, our friend's commodity must, above all things, be a
use-value to the owner of the money. For this, it is necessary that the labour expended upon it, be of a
kind that is socially useful, of a kind that constitutes a branch of the social division of labour. But
division of labour is a system of production which has grown up spontaneously and continues to grow
behind the backs of the producers. The commodity to be exchanged may possibly be the product of some
new kind of labour, that pretends to satisfy newly arisen requirements, or even to give rise itself to new
requirements. A particular operation, though yesterday, perhaps, forming one out of the many operations
conducted by one producer in creating a given commodity, may to-day separate itself from this
connexion, may establish itself as an independent branch of labour and send its incomplete product to
market as an independent commodity. The circumstances may or may not be ripe for such a separation.
To-day the product satisfies a social want. Tomorrow the article may, either altogether or partially, be
superseded by some other appropriate product. Moreover, although our weaver's labour may be a
recognised branch of the social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means sufficient to guarantee the
utility of his 20 yards of linen. If the community's want of linen, and such a want has a limit like every
other want, should already be saturated by the products of rival weavers, our friend's product is
superfluous, redundant, and consequently useless. Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth,
our friend does not frequent the market for the purpose of making presents. But suppose his product turn
out a real use-value, and thereby attracts money? The question arises, how much will it attract? No doubt
the answer is already anticipated in the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of its value.
We leave out of consideration here any accidental miscalculation of value by our friend, a mistake that is
soon rectified in the market. We suppose him to have spent on his product only that amount of
labour-time that is on an average socially necessary. The price then, is merely the moneyname of the
quantity of social labour realised in his commodity. But without the leave, and behind the back, of our
weaver, the old-fashioned mode of weaving undergoes a change. The labour-time that yesterday was
without doubt socially necessary to the production of a yard of linen, ceases to be so to-day, a fact which
the owner of the money is only too eager to prove from the prices quoted by our friend's competitors.
Unluckily for him, weavers are not few and far between. Lastly, suppose that every piece of linen in the
market contains no more labour-time than is socially necessary. In spite of this, all these pieces taken as a
whole, may have had superfluous labour-time spent upon them. If the market cannot stomach the whole
quantity at the normal price of 2 shillings a yard, this proves that too great a portion of the total labour of
the community has been expended in the form of weaving. The effect is the same as if each individual
weaver had expended more labour-time upon his particular product than is socially necessary. Here we
may say, with the German proverb: caught together, hung together. All the linen in the market counts but
as one article of commerce, of which each piece is only an aliquot part. And as a matter of fact, the value
also of each single yard is but the materialised form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of
homogeneous human labour. |T71

We see then, commodities are in love with money, but "the course of true love never did run smooth. "

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (8 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

The quantitative division of labour is brought about in exactly the same spontaneous and accidental
manner as its qualitative division. The owners of commodities therefore find out, that the same division
of labour that turns them into independent private producers, also frees the social process of production
and the relations of the individual producers to each other within that process, from all dependence on the
will of those producers, and that the seeming mutual independence of the individuals is supplemented by
a system of general and mutual dependence through or by means of the products.

The division of labour converts the product of labour into a commodity, and thereby makes necessary its
further conversion into money. At the same time it also makes the accomplishment of this
transubstantiation quite accidental. Here, however, we are only concerned with the phenomenon in its
integrity, and we therefore assume its progress to be normal. Moreover, if the conversion take place at
all, that is, if the commodity be not absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis does take place although the
price realised may be abnormally above or below the value.

The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer has his gold replaced by a commodity. The fact
which here stares us in the face is, that a commodity and gold, 20 yards of linen and £2, have changed
hands and places, in other words, that they have been exchanged. But for what is the commodity
exchanged? For the shape assumed by its own value, for the universal equivalent. And for what is the
gold exchanged? For a particular form of its own use-value. Why does gold take the form of money face
to face with the linen? Because the linen's price of £2, its denomination in money, has already equated
the linen to gold in its character of money. A commodity strips off its original commodity-form on being
alienated, i.e., on the instant its use-value actually attracts the gold, that before existed only ideally in its
price. The realisation of a commodity's price, or of its ideal value-form, is therefore at the same time the
realisation of the ideal use-value of money; the conversion of a commodity into money, is the
simultaneous conversion of money into a commodity. The apparently single process is in reality a double
one. From the pole of the commodity-owner it is a sale, from the opposite pole of the money-owner, it is
a purchase. In other words, a sale is a purchase, C — M is also M — C. |181

Up to this point we have considered men in only one economic capacity, that of owners of commodities,
a capacity in which they appropriate the produce of the labour of others, by alienating that of their own
labour. Hence, for one commodity-owner to meet with another who has money, it is necessary, either,
that the product of the labour of the latter person, the buyer, should be in itself money, should be gold,
the material of which money consists, or that his product should already have changed its skin and have
stripped off its original form of a useful object. In order that it may play the part of money, gold must of
course enter the market at some point or other. This point is to be found at the source of production of the
metal, at which place gold is bartered, as the immediate product of labour, for some other product of
equal value. From that moment it always represents the realised price of some commodity. [191 Apart
from its exchange for other commodities at the source of its production, gold, in whose-so-ever hands it
may be, is the transformed shape of some commodity alienated by its owner; it is the product of a sale or
of the first metamorphosis C — M. [201 Gold, as we saw, became ideal money, or a measure of values, in
consequence of all commodities measuring their values by it, and thus contrasting it ideally with their
natural shape as useful objects, and making it the shape of their value. It became real money, by the
general alienation of commodities, by actually changing places with their natural forms as useful objects,
and thus becoming in reality the embodiment of their values. When they assume this money-shape,
commodities strip off every trace of their natural use-value, and of the particular kind of labour to which
they owe their creation, in order to transform themselves into the uniform, socially recognised



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (9 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

incarnation of homogeneous human labour. We cannot tell from the mere look of a piece of money, for
what particular commodity it has been exchanged. Under their money-form all commodities look alike.
Hence, money may be dirt, although dirt is not money. We will assume that the two gold pieces, in
consideration of which our weaver has parted with his linen, are the metamorphosed shape of a quarter of
wheat. The sale of the linen, C — M, is at the same time its purchase, M — C. But the sale is the first act
of a process that ends with a transaction of an opposite nature, namely, the purchase of a Bible; the
purchase of the linen, on the other hand, ends a movement that began with a transaction of an opposite
nature, namely, with the sale of the wheat. C — M (linen — money), which is the first phase of
C — M' — C (linen — money — Bible), is also M — C (money — linen), the last phase of another
movement C — M — C (wheat — money — linen). The first metamorphosis of one commodity, its
transformation from a commodity into money, is therefore also invariably the second metamorphosis of
some other commodity, the retransformation of the latter from money into a commodity. f211

M — C, or purchase.

The second and concluding metamorphosis of a commodity

Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other commodities, the result of their general
alienation, for this reason it is alienable itself without restriction or condition. It reads all prices
backwards, and thus, so to say, depicts itself in the bodies of all other commodities, which offer to it the
material for the realisation of its own use-value. At the same time the prices, wooing glances cast at
money by commodities, define the limits of its convertibility, by pointing to its quantity. Since every
commodity, on becoming money, disappears as a commodity, it is impossible to tell from the money
itself, how it got into the hands of its possessor, or what article has been changed into it. Non olet, from
whatever source it may come. Representing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents on the other
a commodity to be bought. \22\

M — C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C — M, a sale; the concluding metamorphosis of one
commodity is the first metamorphosis of another. With regard to our weaver, the life of his commodity
ends with the Bible, into which he has reconverted his £2. But suppose the seller of the Bible turns the £2
set free by the weaver into brandy M — C, the concluding phase of C — M — C

(linen — money — Bible), is also C — M, the first phase of C — M — C (Bible — money — brandy). The
producer of a particular commodity has that one article alone to offer; this he sells very often in large
quantities, but his many and various wants compel him to split up the price realised, the sum of money
set free, into numerous purchases. Hence a sale leads to many purchases of various articles. The
concluding metamorphosis of a commodity thus constitutes an aggregation of first metamorphoses of
various other commodities.

If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a commodity, as a whole, it appears in the first
place, that it is made up of two opposite and complementary movements, C — M and M — C. These two
antithetical transmutations of a commodity are brought about by two antithetical social acts on the part of
the owner, and these acts in their turn stamp the character of the economic parts played by him. As the
person who makes a sale, he is a seller; as the person who makes a purchase, he is a buyer. But just as,
upon every such transmutation of a commodity, its two forms, commodity-form and money-form, exist
simultaneously but at opposite poles, so every seller has a buyer opposed to him, and every buyer a
seller. While one particular commodity is going through its two transmutations in succession, from a
commodity into money and from money into another commodity, the owner of the commodity changes
in succession his part from that of seller to that of buyer. These characters of seller and buyer are

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (10 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to the various persons engaged in the circulation
of commodities.

The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest form, implies four extremes, and three
dramatic personae. First, a commodity comes face to face with money; the latter is the form taken by the
value of the former, and exists in all its hard reality, in the pocket of the buyer. A commodity-owner is
thus brought into contact with a possessor of money. So soon, now, as the commodity has been changed
into money, the money becomes its transient equivalent-form, the use-value of which equivalent-form is
to be found in the bodies of other commodities. Money, the final term of the first transmutation, is at the
same time the starting-point for the second. The person who is a seller in the first transaction thus
becomes a buyer in the second, in which a third commodity-owner appears on the scene as a seller. f231

The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the metamorphosis of a commodity constitute
together a circular movement, a circuit: commodity-form, stripping off of this form, and return to the
commodity-form. No doubt, the commodity appears here under two different aspects. At the
starting-point it is not a use-value to its owner; at the finishing point it is. So, too, the money appears in
the first phase as a solid crystal of value, a crystal into which the commodity eagerly solidifies, and in the
second, dissolves into the mere transient equivalent-form destined to be replaced by a use-value.

The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the same time two inverse partial metamorphoses
of two other commodities. One and the same commodity, the linen, opens the series of its own
metamorphoses, and completes the metamorphosis of another (the wheat). In the first phase or sale, the
linen plays these two parts in its own person. But, then, changed into gold, it completes its own second
and final metamorphosis, and helps at the same time to accomplish the first metamorphosis of a third
commodity. Hence the circuit made by one commodity in the course of its metamorphoses is inextricably
mixed up with the circuits of other commodities. The total of all the different circuits constitutes the
circulation of commodities.

The circulation of commodities differs from the direct exchange of products (barter), not only in form,
but in substance. Only consider the course of events. The weaver has, as a matter of fact, exchanged his
linen for a Bible, his own commodity for that of some one else. But this is true only so far as he himself
is concerned. The seller of the Bible, who prefers something to warm his inside, no more thought of
exchanging his Bible for linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been exchanged for his linen. B's
commodity replaces that of A, but A and B do not mutually exchange those commodities. It may, of
course, happen that A and B make simultaneous purchases, the one from the other; but such exceptional
transactions are by no means the necessary result of the general conditions of the circulation of
commodities. We see here, on the one hand, how the exchange of commodities breaks through all local
and personal bounds inseparable from direct barter, and develops the circulation of the products of social
labour; and on the other hand, how it develops a whole network of social relations spontaneous in their
growth and entirely beyond the control of the actors. It is only because the farmer has sold his wheat that
the weaver is enabled to sell his linen, only because the weaver has sold his linen that our Hotspur is
enabled to sell his Bible, and only because the latter has sold the water of everlasting life that the distiller
is enabled to sell his eau-de-vie, and so on.

The process of circulation, therefore, does not, like direct barter of products, become extinguished upon
the use-values changing places and hands. The money does not vanish on dropping out of the circuit of
the metamorphosis of a given commodity. It is constantly being precipitated into new places in the arena



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (11 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

of circulation vacated by other commodities. In the complete metamorphosis of the linen, for example,
linen — money — Bible, the linen first falls out of circulation, and money steps into its place. Then the
Bible falls out of circulation, and again money takes its place. When one commodity replaces another,
the money-commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person. f241 Circulation sweats money
from every pore.

Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a
sale, therefore the circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of sales and purchases.
If this means that the number of actual sales is equal to the number of purchases, it is mere tautology. But
its real purport is to prove that every seller brings his buyer to market with him. Nothing of the kind. The
sale and the purchase constitute one identical act, an exchange between a commodity-owner and an
owner of money, between two persons as opposed to each other as the two poles of a magnet. They form
two distinct acts, of polar and opposite characters, when performed by one single person. Hence the
identity of sale and purchase implies that the commodity is useless, if, on being thrown into the
alchemistical retort of circulation, it does not come out again in the shape of money; if, in other words, it
cannot be sold by its owner, and therefore be bought by the owner of the money. That identity further
implies that the exchange, if it do take place, constitutes a period of rest, an interval, long or short, in the
life of the commodity. Since the first metamorphosis of a commodity is at once a sale and a purchase, it
is also an independent process in itself. The purchaser has the commodity, the seller has the money, i.e., a
commodity ready to go into circulation at any time. No one can sell unless some one else purchases. But
no one is forthwith bound to purchase, because he has just sold. Circulation bursts through all restrictions
as to time, place, and individuals, imposed by direct barter, and this it effects by splitting up, into the
antithesis of a sale and a purchase, the direct identity that in barter does exist between the alienation of
one's own and the acquisition of some other man's product. To say that these two independent and
antithetical acts have an intrinsic unity, are essentially one, is the same as to say that this intrinsic
oneness expresses itself in an external antithesis. If the interval in time between the two complementary
phases of the complete metamorphosis of a commodity become too great, if the split between the sale
and the purchase become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between them, their oneness, asserts
itself by producing — a crisis. The antithesis, use-value and value; the contradictions that private labour
is bound to manifest itself as direct social labour, that a particularised concrete kind of labour has to pass
for abstract human labour; the contradiction between the personification of objects and the representation
of persons by things; all these antitheses and contradictions, which are immanent in commodities, assert
themselves, and develop their modes of motion, in the antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a
commodity. These modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than the possibility, of crises. The
conversion of this mere possibility into a reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, from our
present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet no existence. f251



B. The currency [26] of money

The change of form, C — M — C, by which the circulation of the material products of labour is brought
about, requires that a given value in the shape of a commodity shall begin the process, and shall, also in
the shape of a commodity, end it. The movement of the commodity is therefore a circuit. On the other
hand, the form of this movement precludes a circuit from being made by the money. The result is not the
return of the money, but its continued removal further and further away from its starting-point. So long



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (12 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

as the seller sticks fast to his money, which is the transformed shape of his commodity, that commodity
is still in the first phase of its metamorphosis, and has completed only half its course. But so soon as he
completes the process, so soon as he supplements his sale by a purchase, the money again leaves the
hands of its possessor. It is true that if the weaver, after buying the Bible, sell more linen, money comes
back into his hands. But this return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen; that
circulation resulted in the money getting into the hands of the seller of the Bible. The return of money
into the hands of the weaver is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of the process of
circulation with a fresh commodity, which renewed process ends with the same result as its predecessor
did. Hence the movement directly imparted to money by the circulation of commodities takes the form of
a constant motion away from its starting-point, of a course from the hands of one commodity-owner into
those of another. This course constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie).

The currency of money is the constant and monotonous repetition of the same process. The commodity is
always in the hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase, always in the hands of the buyer.
And money serves as a means of purchase by realising the price of the commodity. This realisation
transfers the commodity from the seller to the buyer and removes the money from the hands of the buyer
into those of the seller, where it again goes through the same process with another commodity. That this
one-sided character of the money's motion arises out of the two-sided character of the commodity's
motion, is a circumstance that is veiled over. The very nature of the circulation of commodities begets
the opposite appearance. The first metamorphosis of a commodity is visibly, not only the money's
movement, but also that of the commodity itself; in the second metamorphosis, on the contrary, the
movement appears to us as the movement of the money alone. In the first phase of its circulation the
commodity changes place with the money. Thereupon the commodity, under its aspect of a useful object,
falls out of circulation into consumption. \27] In its stead we have its value-shape — the money. It then
goes through the second phase of its circulation, not under its own natural shape, but under the shape of
money. The continuity of the movement is therefore kept up by the money alone, and the same
movement that as regards the commodity consists of two processes of an antithetical character, is, when
considered as the movement of the money, always one and the same process, a continued change of
places with ever fresh commodities. Hence the result brought about by the circulation of-commodities,
namely, the replacing of one commodity by another, takes the appearance of having been effected not by
means of the change of form of the commodities but rather by the money acting as a medium of
circulation, by an action that circulates commodities, to all appearance motionless in themselves, and
transfers them from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which they are use-values; and
that in a direction constantly opposed to the direction of the money. The latter is continually withdrawing
commodities from circulation and stepping into their places, and in thus way continually moving further
and further from its starting-point Hence although the movement of the money is merely the expression
of the circulation of commodities, yet the contrary appears to be the actual fact, and the circulation of
commodities seems to be the result of the movement of the money. f281

Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because in it the values of commodities have
independent reality. Hence its movement, as the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely the movement
of commodities while changing their forms. This fact must therefore make itself plainly visible in the
currency of money. Thus the linen for instance, first of all changes its commodity-form into its
moneyform. The second term of its first metamorphosis, C — M, the money form, then becomes the first
term of its final metamorphosis, M — C, its re-conversion into the Bible. But each of these two changes
of form is accomplished by an exchange between commodity and money, by their reciprocal



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (13 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

displacement. The same pieces of 'coin come into the seller's hand as the alienated form of the commodity
and leave it as the absolutely alienable form of the commodity. They are displaced twice. The first
metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into the weaver's pocket, the second draws them out of it.
The two inverse changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected in the displacement, twice
repeated, but in opposite directions, of the same pieces of coin.

If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is gone through, if there are only sales or only
purchases, then a given piece of money changes its place only once. Its second change of place always
expresses the second metamorphosis of the commodity, its re-conversion from money. The frequent
repetition of the displacement of the same coins reflects not only the series of metamorphoses that a
single commodity has gone through, but also the intertwining of the innumerable metamorphoses in the
world of commodities in general. It is a matter of course, that all this is applicable to the simple
circulation of commodities alone, the only form that we are now considering.

Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and undergoes its first change of form, does so
only to fall out of circulation again and to be replaced by other commodities. Money, on the contrary, as
the medium of circulation, keeps continually within the sphere of circulation, and moves about in it. The
question therefore arises, how much money this sphere constantly absorbs?

In a given country there take place every day at the same time, but in different localities, numerous
one-sided metamorphoses of commodities, or, in other words, numerous sales and numerous purchases.
The commodities are equated beforehand in imagination, by their prices, to definite quantities of money.
And since, in the form of circulation now under consideration, money and commodities always come
bodily face to face, one at the positive pole of purchase, the other at the negative pole of sale, it is clear
that the amount of the means of circulation required, is determined beforehand by the sum of the prices
of all these commodities. As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents the quantity or sum of gold
ideally expressed beforehand by the sum of the prices of the commodities. The equality of these two
sums is therefore self-evident. We know, however, that, the values of commodities remaining constant,
their prices vary with the value of gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, and falling
in proportion as it rises. Now if, in consequence of such a rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the
prices of commodities fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency must fall or rise to the same extent.
The change in the quantity of the circulating medium is, in this case, it is true, caused by the money
itself, yet not in virtue of its function as a medium of circulation, but of its function as a measure of
value. First, the price of the commodities varies inversely as the value of the money, and then the
quantity of the medium of circulation varies directly as the price of the commodities. Exactly the same
thing would happen if, for instance, instead of the value of gold falling, gold were replaced by silver as
the measure of value, or if, instead of the value of silver rising, gold were to thrust silver out from being
the measure of value. In the one case, more silver would be current than gold was before; in the other
case, less gold would be current than silver was before. In each case the value of the material of money, i.
e., the value of the commodity that serves as the measure of value, would have undergone a change, and
therefore so, too, would the prices of commodities which express their values in money, and so, too,
would the quantity of money current whose function it is to realise those prices. We have already seen,
that the sphere of circulation has an opening through which gold (or the material of money generally)
enters into it as a commodity with a given value. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a
measure of value, when it expresses prices, its value is already determined. If now its value fall, this fact
is first evidenced by a change in the prices of those commodities that are directly bartered for the
precious metals at the sources of their production. The greater part of all other commodities, especially in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (14 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

the imperfectly developed stages of civil society, will continue for a long time to be estimated by the
former antiquated and illusory value of the measure of value. Nevertheless, one commodity infects
another through their common value-relation, so that their prices, expressed in gold or in silver, gradually
settle down into the proportions determined by their comparative values, until finally the values of all
commodities are estimated in terms of the new value of the metal that constitutes money. This process is
accompanied by the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, an increase caused by their
streaming in to replace the articles directly bartered for them at their sources of production. In proportion
therefore as commodities in general acquire their true prices, in proportion as their values become
estimated according to the fallen value of the precious metal, in the same proportion the quantity of that
metal necessary for realising those new prices is provided beforehand. A one-sided observation of the
results that followed upon the discovery of fresh supplies of gold and silver, led some economists in the
17th, and particularly in the 18th century, to the false conclusion, that the prices of commodities had
gone up in consequence of the increased quantity of gold and silver serving as means of circulation.
Hence momentarily whenever we estimate the price of a commodity. On this supposition then, the
quantity of the medium of circulation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to be realised. If
now we further suppose the price of each commodity to be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends
on the mass of commodities in circulation. It requires but little racking of brains to comprehend that if
one quarter of wheat costs £2, 100 quarters will cost £200, 200 quarters £400, and so on, that
consequently the quantity of money that changes place with the wheat, when sold, must increase with the
quantity of that wheat.

If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of circulating money varies with the
fluctuations in the prices of those commodities. It increases and diminishes because the sum of the prices
increases or diminishes in consequence of the change of price. To produce this effect, it is by no means
requisite that the prices of all commodities should rise or fall simultaneously. A rise or a fall in the prices
of a number of leading articles, is sufficient in the one case to increase, in the other to diminish, the sum
of the prices of all commodities, and, therefore, to put more or less money in circulation. Whether the
change in the price correspond to an actual change of value in the commodities, or whether it be the
result of mere fluctuations in market-prices, the effect on the quantity of the medium of circulation
remains the same. Suppose the following articles to be sold or partially metamorphosed simultaneously
in different localities: say, one quarter of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of brandy. If
the price of each article be £2, and the sum of the prices to be realised be consequently £8, it follows that
£8 in money must go into circulation. If, on the other hand, these same articles are links in the following
chain of metamorphoses: 1 quarter of wheat — £2 — 20 yards of linen — £2 — 1 Bible — £2 — 4
gallons of brandy — £2, a chain that is already well known to us, in that case the £2 cause the different
commodities to circulate one after the other, and after realising their prices successively, and therefore
the sum of those prices, £8, they come to rest at last in the pocket of the distiller. The £2 thus make four
moves. This repeated change of place of the same pieces of money corresponds to the double change in
form of the commodities, to their motion in opposite directions through two stages of circulation, and to
the interlacing of the metamorphoses of different commodities. f291 These antithetic and complementary
phases, of which the process of metamorphosis consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but
successively. Time is therefore required for the completion of the series. Hence the velocity of the
currency of money is measured by the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a given time.
Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day. The sum of the prices to be realised in the day is £8,
the number of moves of the two pieces of money is four, and the quantity of money circulating is £2.
Hence, for a given interval of time during the process of circulation, we have the following relation: the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (15 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

quantity of money functioning as the circulating medium is equal to the sum of the prices of the
commodities divided by the number of moves made by coins of the same denomination. This law holds
generally.

The total circulation of commodities in a given country during a given period is made up on the one hand
of numerous isolated and simultaneous partial metamorphoses, sales which are at the same time
purchases, in which each coin changes its place only once, or makes only one move; on the other hand,
of numerous distinct series of metamorphoses partly running side by side, and partly coalescing with
each other, in each of which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number being greater or less
according to circumstances. The total number of moves made by all the circulating coins of one
denomination being given, we can arrive at the average number of moves made by a single coin of that
denomination, or at the average velocity of the currency of money. The quantity of money thrown into
the circulation at the beginning of each day is of course determined by the sum of the prices of all the
commodities circulating simultaneously side by side. But once in circulation, coins are, so to say, made
responsible for one another. If the one increase its velocity, the other either retards its own, or altogether
falls out of circulation; for the circulation can absorb only such a quantity of gold as when multiplied by
the mean number of moves made by one single coin or element, is equal to the sum of the prices to be
realised. Hence if the number of moves made by the separate pieces increase, the total number of those
pieces in circulation diminishes. If the number of the moves diminish, the total number of pieces
increases. Since the quantity of money capable of being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given
mean velocity of currency, all that is necessary in order to abstract a given number of sovereigns from
the circulation is to throw the same number of one-pound notes into it, a trick well known to all bankers.

Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but a reflex of the circulation of commodities, or
of the antithetical metamorphoses they undergo, so, too, the velocity of that currency reflects the rapidity
with which commodities change their forms, the continued interlacing of one series of metamorphoses
with another, the hurried social interchange of matter, the rapid disappearance of commodities from the
sphere of circulation, and the equally rapid substitution of fresh ones in their places. Hence, in the
velocity of the currency we have the fluent unity of the antithetical and complementary phases, the unity
of the conversion of the useful aspect of commodities into their value-aspect, and their re-conversion
from the latter aspect to the former, or the unity of the two processes of sale and purchase. On the other
hand, the retardation of the currency reflects the separation of these two processes into isolated
antithetical phases, reflects the stagnation in the change of form, and therefore, in the social interchange
of matter. The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue to the origin of this stagnation; it merely puts in
evidence the phenomenon itself. The general public, who, simultaneously with the retardation of the
currency, see money appear and disappear less frequently at the periphery of circulation, naturally
attribute this retardation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium. [301

The total quantity of money functioning during a given period as the circulating medium, is determined,
on the one hand, by the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities, and on the other hand, by the
rapidity with which the antithetical phases of the metamorphoses follow one another. On this rapidity
depends what proportion of the sum of the prices can, on the average, be realised by each single coin. But
the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the quantity, as well as on the prices, of
the commodities. These three factors, however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities, and
velocity of money-currency, are all variable. Hence, the sum of the prices to be realisedj and
consequently the quantity of the circulating medium depending on that sum, will vary with the numerous
variations of these three factors in combination. Of these variations we shall consider those alone that

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (16 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

have been the most important in the history of prices.

While prices remain constant, She quantity of the circulating medium may increase owing to the number
of circulating commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreasing, or to a combination of
the two. On the other hand the quantity of the circulating medium may decrease with a decreasing
number of commodities, or with an increasing rapidity of their circulation.

With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the circulating medium will remain
constant, provided the number of commodities in circulation decrease proportionally to the increase in
their prices, or provided the velocity of currency increase at the same rate as prices rise, the number of
commodities in circulation remaining constant. The quantity of the circulating medium may decrease,
owing to the number of commodities decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity of currency rise.

With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the circulating medium will remain
constant, provided the number of commodities increase proportionally to their fall in price, or provided
the velocity of currency decrease in the same proportion. The quantity of the circulating medium will
increase, provided the number of commodities increase quicker, or the rapidity of circulation decrease
quicker, than the prices fall.

The variations of the different factors may mutually compensate each other, so that notwithstanding their
continued instability, the sum of the prices to be realised and the quantity of money in circulation remain
constant; consequently, we find, especially if we take long periods into consideration, that the deviations
from the average level, of the quantity of money current in any country, are much smaller than we should
at first sight expect, apart of course from excessive perturbations periodically arising from industrial and
commercial crises, or less frequently, from fluctuations in the value of money.

The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is determined by the sum of the prices of the
commodities circulating, and the average increasing more rapidly, than prices velocity of currency f311
may also be stated as follows: given the sum of the values of commodities, and the average rapidity of
their metamorphoses, the quantity of precious metal current as money depends on the value of that
precious metal. The erroneous opinion that it is, on the contrary, prices that are determined by the
quantity of the circulating medium, and that the latter depends on the quantity of the precious metals in a
country; f321 this opinion was based by those who first held it, on the absurd hypothesis that
commodities are without a price, and money without a value, when they first enter into circulation, and
that, once in the circulation, an aliquot part of the medley of commodities is exchanged for an aliquot
part of the heap of precious metals. f331



C. Coin and symbols of value

That money takes the shape of coin, springs from its function as the circulating medium. The weight of
gold represented in imagination by the prices or money-names of commodities, must confront those
commodities, within the circulation, in the shape of coins or pieces of gold of a given denomination.
Coining, like the establishment of a standard of prices, is the business of the State. The different national
uniforms worn at home by gold and silver as coins, and doffed again in the market of the world, indicate
the separation between the internal or national spheres of the circulation of commodities, and their
universal sphere.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (17 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is one of shape, and gold can at any time pass
from one form to the other. f341 But no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it immediately finds itself
on the high-road to the melting pot. During their currency, coins wear away, some more, others less.
Name and substance, nominal weight and real weight, begin their process of separation. Coins of the
same denomination become different in value, because they are different in weight. The weight of gold
fixed upon as the standard of prices, deviates from the weight that serves as the circulating medium, and
the latter thereby ceases any longer to be a real equivalent of the commodities whose prices it realises.
The history of coinage during the middle ages and down into the 18th century, records the ever renewed
confusion arising from this cause. The natural tendency of circulation to convert coins into a mere
semblance of what they profess to be, into a symbol of the weight of metal they are officially supposed to
contain, is recognised by modern legislation, which fixes the loss of weight sufficient to demonetise a
gold coin, or to make it no longer legal tender.

The fact that the currency of coins itself effects a separation between their nominal and their real weight,
creating a distinction between them as mere pieces of metal on the one hand, and as coins with a definite
function on the other — this fact implies the latent possibility of replacing metallic coins by tokens of
some other material, by symbols serving the same purposes as coins. The practical difficulties in the way
of coining extremely minute quantities of gold or silver, and the circumstance that at first the less
precious metal is used as a measure of value instead of the-more precious, copper instead of silver, silver
instead of gold, and that the less precious circulates as money until dethroned by the more precious — all
these facts explain the parts historically played by silver and copper tokens as substitutes for gold coins.
Silver and copper tokens take the place of gold in those regions of the circulation where coins pass from
hand to hand most rapidly, and are subject to the maximum amount of wear and tear. This occurs where
sales and purchases on a very small scale are continually happening. In order to prevent these satellites
from establishing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive enactments determine the extent
to which they must be compulsorily received as payment instead of gold. The particular tracks pursued
by the different species of coin in currency, run naturally into each other. The tokens keep company with
gold, to pay fractional parts of the smallest gold coin; gold is, on the one hand, constantly pouring into
retail circulation, and on the other hand is as constantly being thrown out again by being changed into
tokens. f351

The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbitrarily fixed by law. When in currency, they
wear away even more rapidly than gold coins. Hence their functions are totally independent of their
weight, and consequently of all value. The function of gold as coin becomes completely independent of
the metallic value of that gold. Therefore things that are relatively without value, such as paper notes, can
serve as coins in its place. This purely symbolic character is to a certain extent masked in metal tokens.
In paper money it stands out plainly. In fact, ce n'est que le premier pas qui codte.

We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by the State and having compulsory circulation.
It has its immediate origin in the metallic currency. Money based upon credit implies on the other hand
conditions, which, from our standpoint of the simple circulation of commodities, are as yet totally
unknown to us. But we may affirm this much, that just as true paper money takes its rise in the function
of money as the circulating medium, so money based upon credit takes root spontaneously in the
function of money as the means of payment. f361

The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their various denominations, say £1, £5, &c, are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (18 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

printed. In so far as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their movement is subject to
the laws that regulate the currency of money itself. A law peculiar to the circulation of paper money can
spring up only from the proportion in which that paper money represents gold. Such a law exists; stated
simply, it is as follows: the issue of paper money must not exceed in amount the gold (or silver as the
case may be) which would actually circulate if not replaced by symbols. Now the quantity of gold which
the circulation can absorb, constantly-fluctuates about a given level. Still, the mass of the circulating
medium in a given country never sinks below a certain minimum easily ascertained by actual experience.
The fact that this minimum mass continually undergoes changes in its constituent parts, or that the pieces
of gold of which it consists are being constantly replaced by fresh ones, causes of course no change
either in its amount or in the continuity of its circulation. It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols.
If, on the other hand, all the conduits of circulation were to-day filled with paper money to the full extent
of their capacity for absorbing money, they might to-morrow be overflowing in consequence of a
fluctuation in the circulation of commodities. There would no longer be any standard. If the paper money
exceed its proper limit, which is the amount in gold coins of the like denomination that can actually be
current, it would, apart from the danger of falling into general disrepute, represent only that quantity of
gold, which, in accordance with the laws of the circulation of commodities, is required, and is alone
capable of being represented by paper. If the quantity of paper money issued be double what it ought to
be, then, as a matter of fact, £1 would be the money-name not of 1/4 of an ounce, but of 1/8 of an ounce
of gold. The effect would be the same as if an alteration had taken place in the function of gold as a
standard of prices. Those values that were previously expressed by the price of £1 would now be
expressed by the price of £2.

Paper money is a token representing gold or money. The relation between it and the values of
commodities is this, that the latter are ideally expressed in the same quantities of gold that are
symbolically represented by the paper. Only in so far as paper money represents gold, which like all
other commodities has value, is it a symbol of value. \31]

Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being replaced by tokens that have no value? But, as
we have already seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so &r as it functions exclusively as coin,
or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else. Now, money has other functions besides this one, and
the isolated function of serving as the mere circulating medium is not necessarily the only one attached to
gold coin, although this is the case with those abraded coins that continue to circulate. Each piece of
money is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only so long as it actually circulates. But this is just the
case with that minimum mass of gold, which is capable of being replaced by paper money. That mass
remains constantly within the sphere of circulation, continually functions as a circulating medium, and
exists exclusively for that purpose. Its movement therefore represents nothing but the continued
alternation of the inverse phases of the metamorphosis C — M — C, phases in which commodities
confront their value-forms, only to disappear again immediately. The independent existence of the
exchange- value of a commodity is here a transient apparition, by means of which the commodity is
immediately replaced by another commodity. Hence, in this process which continually makes money
pass from hand to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money suffices. Its functional existence
absorbs, so to say, its material existence. Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of
commodities, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore capable of being replaced by a token.
\3S] One thing is, however, requisite; this token must have an objective social validity of its own, and
this the paper symbol acquires by its forced currency. This compulsory action of the State can take effect
only within that inner sphere of circulation which is coterminous with the territories of the community,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (19 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

but it is also only within that sphere that money completely responds to its function of being the
circulating medium, or becomes coin.



SECTION 3

MONEY



The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, either in its own person or by a representative,
as the medium of circulation, is money. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. It functions as money, on the
one hand, when it has to be present in its own golden person. It is then the money-commodity, neither
merely ideal, as in its function of a measure of value, nor capable of being represented, as in its function
of circulating medium. On the other hand, it also functions as money, when by virtue of its function,
whether that function be performed in person or by representative, it congeals into the sole form of value,
the only adequate form of existence of exchange- value, in opposition to use-value, represented by all
other commodities.



A. Hoarding

The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical metamorphoses of commodities, or the never
ceasing alternation of sale and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of money, or in the function
that money performs of a perpetuum mobile of circulation. But so soon as the series of metamorphoses is
interrupted, so soon as sales are not supplemented by subsequent purchases, money ceases to be
mobilised; it is transformed, as Boisguillebert says, from "meuble" into "immouble", from movable into
immovable, from coin into money.

With the very earliest development of the circulation of commodities, there is also developed the
necessity, and the passionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis. This product is
the transformed shape of the commodity, or its gold-chrysalis. f391 Commodities are thus sold not for the
purpose of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity-form by their money-form. From being
the mere means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this change of form becomes the end and
aim. The changed form of the commodity is thus prevented from functioning as its unconditionally
alienable form, or as its merely transient money-form. The money becomes petrified into a hoard, and the
seller becomes a hoarder of money.

In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is the surplus use-values alone that are converted
into money. Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions for superfluity or wealth. This
naive form of hoarding becomes perpetuated in those communities in which the traditional mode of
production is carried on for the supply of a fixed and limited circle of home wants. It is thus with the
people of Asia, and particularly of the East Indies. Vanderlint, who fancies that the prices of
commodities in a country are determined by the quantity of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (20 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

why Indian commodities are so cheap. Answer: Because the Hindus bury their money. From 1602 to
1734, he remarks, they buried 150 millions of pounds sterling of silver, which originally came from
America to Europe. [401 In the 10 years from 1856 to 1866, England exported to India and China
(120,000,000 in silver, which had been received in exchange for Australian gold. Most of the silver
exported to China makes its way to India.

As the production of commodities further develops, every producer of commodities is compelled, to
make sure of the nexus rerum or the social pledge. f411 His wants are constantly making themselves felt,
and necessitate the continual purchase of other people's commodities, while the production and sale of
his own goods require time, and depend upon circumstances. In order then to be able to buy without
selling, he must have sold previously without buying. This operation, conducted on a general scale,
appears to imply a contradiction. But the precious metals at the sources of their production are directly
exchanged for other commodities. And here we have sales (by the owners of commodities) without
purchases (by the owners of gold or silver). f421 And subsequent sales, by other producers, unfollowed
by purchases, merely bring about the distribution of the newly produced precious metals among all the
owners of commodities. In this way, all along the line of exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied
extent are accumulated. With the possibility of holding and storing up exchange-value in the shape of a
particular commodity, arises also the greed for gold. Along with the extension of circulation, increases
the power of money, that absolutely social form of wealth ever ready for use. "Gold is a wonderful thing!
Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. By means of gold one can even get souls into Paradise."
(Columbus in his letter from Jamaica, 1503.) Since gold does not disclose what has been transformed
into it, everything, commodity or not, is convertible into gold. Everything becomes saleable and buyable.
The circulation becomes the great social retort into which everything is thrown, to come out again as a
gold-crystal. Not even are the bones of saints, and still less are more delicate res sacrosanctae, extra
commercium hominum able to withstand this alchemy. f431 Just as every qualitative difference between
commodities is extinguished in money, so money, on its side, like the radical leveller that it is, does away
with all distinctions. f43al But money itself is a commodity, an external object, capable of becoming the
private property of any individual. Thus social power becomes the private power of private persons. The
ancients therefore denounced money as subversive of the economic and moral order of things. f43bl
Modern society, which, soon after its birth, pulled Plutus by the hair of his head from the bowels of the
earth, f441 greets gold as its Holy Grail, as the glittering incarnation of the very principle of its own life.

A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a particular want, and is a particular element of
material wealth. But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its attraction for all other elements
of material wealth, and therefore measures the social wealth of its owner. To a barbarian owner of
commodities, and even to a West-European peasant, value is the same as value-form, and therefore, to
him the increase in his hoard of gold and silver is an increase in value. It is true that the value of money
varies, at one time in consequence of a variation in its own value, at another, in consequence of a change
in the values of commodities. But this, on the one hand, does not prevent 200 ounces of gold from still
containing more value than 100 ounces, nor, on the other hand, does it hinder the actual metallic form of
this article from continuing to be the universal equivalent form of all other commodities, and the
immediate social incarnation of all human labour. The desire after hoarding is in its very nature
unsatiable. In its qualitative aspect, or formally considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, i.e., it is
the universal representative of material wealth, because it is directly convertible into any other
commodity. But, at the same time, every actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, as a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (21 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

means of purchasing, has only a limited efficacy. This antagonism between the quantitative limits of
money and its qualitative boundlessness, continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his Sisyphus-like
labour of accumulating. It is with him as it is with a conqueror who sees in every new country annexed,
only a new boundary.

In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it must be prevented from
circulating, or from transforming itself into a means of enjoyment. The hoarder, therefore, makes a
sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. On
the other hand, he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of
commodities. The more he produces, the more he is able to sell. Hard work, saving, and avarice are,
therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy. f451

By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its aesthetic form in the possession of gold and
silver articles. This grows with the wealth of civil society. "Soyons riches ou paraissons riches"
(Diderot).

In this way there is created, on the one hand, a constantly extending market for gold and silver,
unconnected with their functions as money, and, on the other hand, a latent source of supply, to which
recourse is had principally in times of crisis and social disturbance.

Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the metallic circulation. Its first function arises out
of the conditions to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. We have seen how, along with
the continual fluctuations in the extent and rapidity of the circulation of commodities and in their prices,
the quantity of money current unceasingly ebbs and flows. This mass must, therefore, be capable of
expansion and contraction. At one time money must be attracted in order to act as circulating coin, at
another, circulating coin must be repelled in order to act again as more or less stagnant money. In order
that the mass of money, actually current, may constantly saturate the absorbing power of the circulation,
it is necessary that the quantity of gold and silver in a country be greater than the quantity required to
function as coin. This condition is fulfilled by money taking the form of hoards. These reserves serve as
conduits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the circulation, which in this way never
overflows its banks. f461



B. Means of Payment

In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto considered, we found a given value always
presented to us in a double shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the opposite pole. The owners
of commodities came therefore into contact as the respective representatives of what were already
equivalents. But with the development of circulation, conditions arise under which the alienation of
commodities becomes separated, by an interval of time, from the realisation of their prices. It will be
sufficient to indicate the most simple of these conditions. One sort of article requires a longer, another a
shorter time for its production. Again, the production of different commodities depends on different
seasons of the year. One sort of commodity may be born on its own market place, another has to make a
long journey to market. Commodity-owner No. 1, may therefore be ready to sell, before No. 2 is ready to
buy. When the same transactions are continually repeated between the same persons, the conditions of
sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions of production. On the other hand, the use of a given
commodity, of a house, for instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a definite period. Here, it is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (22 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

only at the end of the term that the buyer has actually received the use-value of the commodity. He
therefore buys it before he pays for it. The vendor sells an existing commodity, the purchaser buys as the
mere representative of money, or rather of future money. The vendor becomes a creditor, the purchaser
becomes a debtor. Since the metamorphosis of commodities, or the development of their value-form,
appears here under a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh function; it becomes the means of payment.

The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the simple circulation. The change in the form of
that circulation stamps buyer and seller with this new die. At first, therefore, these new parts are just as
transient and alternating as those of seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors. But the
opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more capable of crystallisation. \41] The same characters
can, however, be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities. The class-struggles of the
ancient world took the form chiefly of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome ended in
the ruin of the plebeian debtors. They were displaced by slaves. In the middle ages the contest ended with
the ruin of the feudal debtors, who lost their political power together with the economic basis on which it
was established. Nevertheless, the money relation of debtor and creditor that existed at these two periods
reflected only the deeper-lying antagonism between the general economic conditions of existence of the
classes in question.

Let us return to the circulation of commodities. The appearance of the two equivalents, commodities and
money, at the two poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous. The money functions now,
first as a measure of value in the determination of the price of the commodity sold; the price fixed by the
contract measures the obligation of the debtor, or the sum of money that he has to pay at a fixed date.
Secondly, it serves as an ideal means of purchase. Although existing only in the promise of the buyer to
pay, it causes the commodity to change hands. It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means
of payment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer for that of the seller. The
circulating medium was transformed into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first phase,
because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the money, was withdrawn from circulation. The
means of payment enters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left it. The money is no longer
the means that brings about the process. It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the absolute form of
existence of exchange-value, or as the universal commodity. The seller turned his commodity into
money, in order thereby to satisfy some want, the hoarder did the same in order to keep his commodity in
its money-shape, and the debtor in order to be able to pay; if he do not pay, his goods will be sold by the
sheriff. The value-form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim of a sale, and that
owing to a social necessity springing out of the process of circulation itself.

The buyer converts money back into commodities before he has turned commodities into money: in other
words, he achieves the second metamorphosis of commodities before the first. The seller's commodity
circulates, and realises its price, but only in the shape of a legal claim upon money. It is converted into a
use-value before it has been converted into money. The completion of its first metamorphosis follows
only at a later period. K81

The obligations falling due within a given period, represent the sum of the prices of the commodities, the
sale of which gave rise to those obligations. The quantity of gold necessary to realise this sum, depends,
in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency of the means of payment. That quantity is conditioned by
two circumstances: first the relations between debtors and creditors form a sort of chain, in such a way
that A, when he receives money from his debtor B, straightway hands it over to C his creditor, and so on;
the second circumstance is the length of the intervals between the different due-days of the obligations.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (23 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

The continuous chain of payments, or retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially different from that
interlacing of the series of metamorphoses which we considered on a former page. By the currency of the
circulating medium, the connexion between buyers and sellers, is not merely expressed. This connexion
is originated by, and exists in, the circulation alone. Contrariwise, the movement of the means of
payment expresses a social relation that was in existence long before.

The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, and side by side, limits the extent to which
coin can be replaced by the rapidity of currency. On the other hand, this fact is a new lever in
economising the means of payment. In proportion as payments are concentrated at one spot, special
institutions and methods are developed for their liquidation. Such in the middle ages were the virements
at Lyons. The debts due to A from B, to B from C, to C from A, and so on, have only to be confronted
with each other, in order to annul each other to a certain extent like positive and negative quantities.
There thus remains only a single balance to pay. The greater the amount of the payments concentrated,
the less is this balance relatively to that amount, and the less is the mass of the means of payment in
circulation.

The function of money as the means of payment implies a contradiction without a terminus medius. In so
far as the payments balance one another, money functions only ideally as money of account, as a
measure of value. In so far as actual payments have to be made, money does not serve as a circulating
medium, as a mere transient agent in the interchange of products, but as the individual incarnation of
social labour, as the independent form of existence of exchange-value, as the universal commodity. This
contradiction comes to a head in those phases of industrial and commercial crises which are known as
monetary crises. f491 Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-lengthening chain of payments, and an
artificial system of settling them, has been fully developed. Whenever there is a general and extensive
disturbance of this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money becomes suddenly and immediately
transformed, from its merely ideal shape of money of account, into hard cash. Profane commodities can
no longer replace it. The use-value of commodities becomes valueless, and their value vanishes in the
presence of its own independent form. On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with the self-sufficiency
that springs from intoxicating prosperity, declares money to be a vain imagination. Commodities alone
are money. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a commodity! As the hart pants after fresh
water, so pants his soul after money, the only wealth. \5Q\ In a crisis, the antithesis between commodities
and their value-form, money, becomes heightened into an absolute contradiction. Hence, in such events,
the form under which money appears is of no importance. The money famine continues, whether
payments have to be made in gold or in credit money such as bank-notes. \5Y\

If we now consider the sum total of the money current during a given period, we shall find that, given the
rapidity of currency of the circulating medium and of the means of payment, it is equal to the sum of the
prices to be realised, plus the sum of the payments falling due, minus the payments that balance each
other, minus finally the number of circuits in which the same piece of coin serves in turn as means of
circulation and of payment. Hence, even when prices, rapidity of currency, and the extent of the economy
in payments, are given, the quantity of money current and the mass of commodities circulating during a
given period, such as a day, no longer correspond. Money that represents commodities long withdrawn
from circulation, continues to be current. Commodities circulate, whose equivalent in money will not
appear on the scene till some future day. Moreover, the debts contracted each day, and the payments
falling due on the same day, are quite incommensurable quantities. \51\

Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money as a means of payment. Certificates of the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (24 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

debts owing for the purchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring those debts to others.
On the other hand, to the same extent as the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money as a
means of payment. In that character it takes various forms peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at
home in the sphere of great commercial transactions. Gold and silver coin, on the other hand, are mostly
relegated to the sphere of retail trade. f531

When the production of commodities has sufficiently extended itself, money begins to serve as the means
of payment beyond the sphere of the circulation of commodities. It becomes the commodity that is the
universal subject-matter of all contracts. f541 Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed from
payments in kind into money payments. To what extent this transformation depends upon the general
conditions of production, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the Roman Empire twice failed
in its attempt to levy all contributions in money. The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural
population under Louis XIV., a misery so eloquently denounced by Boisguillebert, Marshal Vauban, and
others, was due not only to the weight of the taxes, but also to the conversion of taxes in kind into money
taxes. f551 In Asia, on the other hand, the fact that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents payable in
kind, depends on conditions of production that are reproduced with the regularity of natural phenomena.
And this mode of payment tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production. It is one of the
secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire. If the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans,
should lead to the substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will be all up with the exemplary
agriculture of that country. The narrow economic conditions under which that agriculture is carried on,
will be swept away.

In every country, certain days of the year become by habit recognised settling days for various large and
recurrent payments. These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel of reproduction, on
conditions closely connected with the seasons. They also regulate the dates for payments that have no
direct connexion with the circulation of commodities such as taxes, rents, and so on. The quantity of
money requisite to make the-payments, falling due on those dates all over the country, causes periodical,
though merely superficial, perturbations in the economy of the medium of payment. f561

From the law of the rapidity of currency of the means of payment, it follows that the quantity of the
means of payment required for all periodical payments, whatever their source, is in inverse \57]
proportion to the length of their periods. \5S]

The development of money into a medium of payment makes it necessary to accumulate money against
the dates fixed for the payment of the sums owing. While hoarding, as a distinct mode of acquiring
riches, vanishes with the progress of civil society, the formation of reserves of the means of payment
grows with that progress.



C. Universal Money

When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it strips off the local garbs which it there assumes, of
a standard of prices, of coin, of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and returns to its original form of
bullion. In the trade between the markets of the world, the value of commodities is expressed so as to be
universally recognised. Hence their independent value-form also, in these cases, confronts them under
the shape of universal money. It is only in the markets of the world that money acquires to the full extent



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (25 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

the character of the commodity whose bodily form is also the immediate social incarnation of human
labour in the abstract. Its real mode of existence in this sphere adequately corresponds to its ideal
concept.

Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one commodity which, by serving as a measure
of value, becomes money. In the markets of the world a double measure of value holds sway, gold and
silver. f591

Money of the world serves as the universal medium of payment, as the universal means of purchasing,
and as the universally recognised embodiment of all wealth. Its function as a means of payment in the
settling of international balances is its chief one. Hence the watchword of the mercantilists, balance of
trade. r601 Gold and silver serve as international means of purchasing chiefly and necessarily in those
periods when the customary equilibrium in the interchange of products between different nations is
suddenly disturbed. And lastly, it serves as the universally recognised embodiment of social wealth,
whenever the question is not of buying or paying, but of transferring wealth from one country to another,
and whenever this transference in the form of commodities is rendered impossible, either by special
conjunctures in the markets or by the purpose itself that is intended. f611

Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home circulation so, too, it requires one for
external circulation in the markets of the world. The functions of hoards, therefore, arise in part out of the
function of money, as the medium of the home circulation and home payments, and in part out of its
function of money of the world. f621 For this latter function, the genuine money-commodity, actual gold
and silver, is necessary. On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to distinguish them from their purely
local substitutes, calls gold and silver "money of the world."

The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one. On the one hand, it spreads itself from its
sources over all the markets of the world, in order to become absorbed, to various extents, into the
different national spheres of circulation, to fill the conduits of currency, to replace abraded gold and
silver coins, to supply the material of articles of luxury, and to petrify into hoards. f631 This first current
is started by the countries that exchange their labour, realised in commodities, for the labour embodied in
the precious metals by gold and silver-producing countries. On the other hand, there is a continual
flowing backwards and forwards of gold and silver between the different national spheres of circulation,
a current whose motion depends on the ceaseless fluctuations in the course of exchange. f641

Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is developed to a certain extent, limit the hoards
concentrated in the strong rooms of the banks to the minimum required for the proper performance of
their peculiar functions. f651 Whenever these hoards are strikingly above their average level, it is, with
some exceptions, an indication of stagnation in the circulation of commodities, of an interruption in the
even flow of their metamorphoses. f661



Footnotes

T 1 1 The question — Why does not money directly represent labour-time, so that a piece of paper may
represent, for instance, x hours' labour, is at bottom the same as the question why, given the production



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (26 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

of commodities, must products take the form of commodities? This is evident, since their taking the form
of commodities implies their differentiation into commodities and money. Or, why cannot private labour
— labour for the account of private individuals — be treated as its opposite, immediate social labour? I
have elsewhere examined thoroughly the Utopian idea of "labour-money" in a society founded on the
production of commodities (1. c, p. 61, seq.). On this point I will only say further, that Owen's
"labour-money," for instance, is no more "money" than a ticket for the theatre. Owen pre-supposes
directly associated labour, a form of production that is entirely in consistent with the production of
commodities. The certificate of labour is merely evidence of the part taken by the individual in the
common labour, and of his right to a certain portion of the common produce destined for consumption.
But it never enters into Owen's head to pre-suppose the production of commodities, and at the same time,
by juggling with money, to try to evade the necessary conditions of that production.

\2] Savages and half-civilised races use the tongue differently. Captain Parry says of the inhabitants on
the west coast of Baffin's Bay: "In this case (he refers to barter) they licked it (the thing represented to
them) twice to their tongues, after which they seemed to consider the bargain satisfactorily concluded."
In the same way, the Eastern Esquimaux licked the articles they received in exchange. If the tongue is
thus used in the North as the organ of appropriation, no wonder that, in the South, the stomach serves as
the organ of accumulated property, and that a Kaffir estimates the wealth of a man by the size of his
belly. That the Kaffirs know what they are about is shown by the following: at the same time that the
official British Health Report of 1864 disclosed the deficiency of fat-forming food among a large part of
the working-class, a certain Dr. Harvey (not, however, the celebrated discoverer of the circulation of the
blood), made a good thing by advertising recipes for reducing the superfluous fat of the bourgeoisie and
aristocracy.

[31 See Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &c." "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Gelda," p. 53, seq.

[4J "Wherever gold and silver have by law been made to perform the function of money or of a measure
of value side by side, it has always been tried, but in vain, to treat them as one and the same material. To
assume that there is an invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in which a given quantity
of labour-time is incorporated, is to assume in fact, that gold and silver are of one and the same material,
and that a given mass of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a given mass of gold.
From the reign of Edward III. to the time of George II., The history of money in England consists of one
long series of perturbations caused by the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between The values of gold
and silver, with the fluctuations in their real values. At one time gold was too high, at another, silver. The
metal that for the time being was estimated below its value, was withdrawn from circulation, mated and
exported. The ratio between the two metals was then again altered by law, but the new nominal ratio
soon came into conflict again with the real one. In our own times, the slight and transient fall in the value
of gold compared with silver, which was a consequence of The Indo-Chinese demand for silver,
produced on a far more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver, and its expulsion
from circulation by gold. During the years 1855, 1856 and 1857, the excess in France of gold-imports
over gold-exports amounted to £41,580,000, while the excess of silver-exports over silver-imports was
£14,704,000. In fact, in those countries in which both metals are legally measures of value, and therefore
both legal tender so that everyone has the option of paying in either metal, the metal That rise in value is
at a premium, and, like every other commodity, measures its price in the over-estimated metal which
alone serve in reality as The standard of value. The result of all experience and history with regard to this
equation is simply that, where two commodities perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (27 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

practice one alone maintains that position." (Karl Marx, 1. c, pp. 52, 53.)

[51 The peculiar circumstance, that while the ounce of gold serves in England as the unit of the standard
of money, the pound sterling does not form an aliquot part of it, has been explained as follows: "Our
coinage was originally adapted to the employment of silver only, hence, an ounce of silver can always be
divided into a certain adequate number of pieces of coin, but as gold was introduced at a later period into
a coinage adapted only to silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an aliquot number of pieces."
Maclaren, "A Sketch of the History of the Currency." London, 1858, p. 16.

[61 With English writers the confusion between measure of value and standard of price (standard of
value! is indescribable. Their functions, as well as their names, are constantly interchanged.

[T[ Moreover, it has not general historical validity.

[81 It is thus that the pound sterling in English denotes less than one-third of its original weight; the
pound Scot, before the union, only l-36th; the French livre, l-74th; the Spanish maravedi, less than
1- 1,000th; and the Portuguese rei a still smaller fraction.

[91 "Le monete le quali oggi sono ideal) sono le piu antiche d'ogni nazione, e tutte furono un tempo real),
e perche erano reali con esse si contava" (Galiani: Delia moneta, 1. c, p. 153.)

f 101 David Urquhart remarks in his "Familiar Words" on the monstrosity (!) that now-a-days a pound
(sterling), which is the unit of the English standard of money, is equal to about a quarter of an ounce of
gold. "This is falsifying a measure, not establishing a standard." He sees in this "false denomination" of
the weight of gold, as in everything else, the falsifying hand of civilisation.

fill When Anacharsis was asked for what purposes the Greeks used money, he replied, "For reckoning."
(Ashen. Deipn. 1. iv. 49 v. 2. ed. Schweighauser, 1802.)

f 121 "Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard of price, appears under the same
reckoning names as do the prices of commodities, and that therefore the sum of £3 17s. 10 l/2d. may
signify on the one hand an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value of a ton of iron, this
reckoning name of money has been called its mint-price. Hence there sprang up the extraordinary notion,
that the value of gold is estimated in its own material, and that, in contradistinction to all other
commodities, its price is fixed by the State. It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning
names to definite weights of gold, is the same thing as fixing the value of those weights." (Karl Marx, 1.
c.,p. 52.)

f 131 See "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes" in "Zur Kritik der Poll Oekon. &c," p. 53, seq. The
fantastic notions about raising or lowering the mint-price of money by transferring to greater or smaller
weights of gold or silver, the names already legally appropriated to fixed weights of those metals; such
notions, at least in those cases in which they aim, not at clumsy financial operations against creditors,
both public and private but at economic quack remedies, have been so exhaustively treated by Wm. Petty
in his "Quantulumcunque concerning money: To the Lord Marquis of Halifax, 1682," that even his
immediate followers, Sir Dudley North and John Locke, not to mention later ones, could only dilute him.
"If the wealth of a nation " he remarks, "could be decupled by a proclamation, it were strange that such
proclamations have not long since been made by our Governors." (1. c, p. 36.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (28 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

f 141 "Ou bien, il faut consentir a dire qu'une valeur d'un million en argent vaut plus qu'une valeur egale
en merchandises." (Le Troene, 1. c, p. 919), which amounts to saying "qu'une valeur vaut plus qu'une
valeur egale."

[151 Jerome had to wrestle hard, not only in his youth with the bodily flesh, as is shown by his fight in
the desert with the handsome women of his imagination, but also in his old age with the spiritual flesh. "I
thought," he says, "I was in the spirit before the Judge of the Universe." "Who art thou?" asked a voice.
"I am a Christian." "Thou liest," thundered back the great Judge, "thou art nought but a Ciceronian."

fl61 xxx — (F. Lassalle: vv Die Philosophic Herakleitos des Dunkeln." Berlin, 1858, Vol. I, p. 222.)
Lassalle in his note on this passage, p. 224, n. 3., erroneously makes gold a mere symbol of value.

f 171 Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in the Russian edition. — In his letter of November 28,
1878, to N. F. Danielson (Nikolai — on) Marx proposed that this sentence be corrected to read as
follows: "And, as a matter of fact, the value of each single yard is but the materialised form of a part of
the social labour expended on the whole number of yards." An analogous correction was made in a copy
of the second German edition of the first volume of "Capital" belonging to Marx; however, not in his
handwriting.

f 181 "Toute vente est achat." (Dr. Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les Travaux des Artisans."
Physiocrates ed. Daire I. Partie, Paris, 1846, p. 170), or as Quesnay in-his "Maximes generales" puts it,
"Vendre est acheter."

f 191 "Le prix d'une merchandise ne pouvant etre paye que par le prix d'une autre marchandise" (Mercier
de la Riviere: "L'Ordre naturel et essentiel de societes politiques." Physiocrates, ed. Daire II. Partie, p.
554.)

r201 "Pour avoir cet argent, il faut avoir vendu," 1. c, p. 543.

f211 As before remarked, the actual producer of gold or silver forms an exception. He exchanges his
product directly for another commodity, without having first sold it.

\22\ "Si l'argent represente, dans nos mains, les choses que nous pouvons desirer d'acheter, il y
represente aussi les choses que nous avons vendues pour cet argent." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1. c, p. 586.)

f231 "II y a done ... quatre termes et trots contractants, dont l'un intervient deux foist" (Le Trosne, 1. c, p.
909.)

\2A\ Self-evident as this may be, it is nevertheless for the most part unobserved by political economists,
and especially by the "Free-trader Vulgaris."

f251 See my observations on James Mill in "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 74-76. With regard to this subject, we
may notice two methods characteristic of apologetic economy. The first is the identification of the
circulation of commodities with the direct barter of products, by simple abstraction from their points of
difference; the second is, the attempt to explain away the contradictions of capitalist production, by
reducing the relations between the persons engaged in that mode of production, to the simple relations
arising out of the circulation of commodities. The production and circulation of commodities are
however, phenomena that occur to a greater or less extent in modes of production the most diverse. If we



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (29 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

are acquainted with nothing but the abstract categories of circulation, which are common to all these
modes of production, we cannot possibly know anything of the specific points of difference of those
modes, nor pronounce any judgment upon them. In no science is such a big fuss made with
commonplace truisms as in Political Economy. For instance, J. B. Say sets himself up as a judge of
crises, because, forsooth, he knows that a commodity is a product.

f261 Translator's note. — This word is here used in its original signification of the course or track
pursued by money as it changes from hand to hand, a course which essentially differs from circulation.

\21~\ Even when the commodity is sold over and over again, a phenomenon that at present has no
existence for us, it falls, when definitely sold for the last time, out of the sphere of circulation into that of
consumption, where it serves either as means of subsistence or means of production.

f281 "II (l'argent) n'a d'autre mouvement que celui qui lui est imprime par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1.
a, p. 885.)

f291 "Ce sont les productions qui le (l'argent) mettent en mouvement et le font circuler ... La celerite de
son mouvement (sc. de l'argent) supplee a sa quantite. Lorsqu'il en est besoin. il ne fait que glisser d'une
main dans l'autre sans s'arreter un instant." (Le Trosne, 1. c. pp. 915, 916.)

r301 "Money being ... the common measure of buying and selling, everybody who hath anything to sell,
and cannot procure chapmen for it, is presently apt to think, that want of money in the. kingdom, or
country, is the cause why his goods do not go off; and so, want of money is the common cry; which is a
great mistake... What do these people want, who cry out for money? ... The farmer complains ... he thinks
that were more money in the country; he should have a price for his goods. Then it seems money is not
his want, but a price for his corn and cattel, which he would sell, but cannot... Why cannot he get a price?
... (1) Either there is too much corn and cattel in the country, so that most who come to market have need
of selling, as he hash, and few of buying; or (2) There wants the usual vent abroad by transportation..., or
(3) The consumption fails, as when men, by reason of poverty, do not spend so much in their houses as
formerly they did; wherefore it is not the increase of specific money, which would at all advance the
farmer's goods, but the removal of any of these three causes, which do truly keep down the market... The
merchant and shopkeeper want money in the same manner, that is, they want a vent for the goods they
deal in, by reason that the markets fail"... [A nation] "never thrives better, than when riches are tost from
hand to hand." (Sir Dudley North: "Discourses upon Trade," Lond. 1691, pp. 11-15, passim.)
Herrenschwand's fanciful notions amount merely to this, that the antagonism, which has its origin in the
nature of commodities, and is reproduced in their circulation, can be removed by increasing the
circulating medium. But if, on the one hand, it is a popular delusion to ascribe stagnation in production
and circulation to insufficiency of the circulating medium, it by no means follows, on the other hand, that
an actual paucity of the medium in consequence, e.g., of bungling legislative interference with the
regulation of currency, may not give rise to such stagnation.

f3 11 "There is a certain measure and proportion of money requisite to drive the trade of a nation, more or
less than which would prejudice the same, lust as there is a certain proportion of farthings necessary in a
small retail trade, to change silver money, and to even such reckonings as cannot be adjusted with the
smallest silver pieces.... Now, as the proportion of the number of farthings requisite in commerce is to be
taken from the number of people, the frequency of their exchanges: as also, and principally, from the
value of the smallest silver pieces of money; so in like manner, the proportion of money [gold and silver



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (30 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

specie] requisite in our trade, is to be likewise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the
bigness of the payments." (William Petty, "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions." Lond. 1667, p. 17.)
The Theory of Hume was defended against the attacks of J. Steuart and others, by A. Young, in his
"Political Arithmetic," Lond; 1774, in which work there is a special chapter entitled "Prices depend on
quantity of money, at p. 112, sqq. I have stated in "Zur Kritik, &c," p. 149: "He (Adam Smith) passes
over without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in circulation, and treats money quite wrongly
as a mere commodity." This statement applies only in so far as Adam Smith, ex officio, treats of money.
Now and then, however, as in his criticism of the earlier systems of Political Economy, he takes the right
view. "The quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be
circulated by It.... The value of the goods annually bought and sold in any country requires a certain
quantity of money to circulate and distribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment
to no more. The channel of circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never
admits any more." ("Wealth of Nations." Bk. IV., ch. 1.) In like manner, ex officio, he opens his work
with an apotheosis on the division of labour. Afterwards, in the last book which treats of the sources of
public revenue, he occasionally repeats the denunciations of the division of labour made by his teacher,
A. Ferguson.

f321 "The prices of things will certainly rise in every nation, as the gold and silver increase amongst the
people, and consequently, where the gold and silver decrease in any nation, the prices of all things must
fall proportionately to such decrease of money." (Jacob Vanderlint: "Money Answers all Things." Lond.
1734, p. 5.) A careful comparison of thus book with Hume's "Essays," proves to my mind without doubt
that Hume was acquainted with and made use of Vanderlint's work, which is certainly an important one.
The opinion that prices are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, was also held by
Barbon and other much earlier writers. "No inconvenience," says Vanderlint, "can arise by an
unrestrained trade, but very great advantage; since, if the cash of the nation be decreased by it, which
prohibitions are designed to prevent, those nations that get the cash will certainly find everything
advance in price, as the cash increases amongst them. And ... our manufactures, and everything else, will
soon become so moderate as to turn the balance of trade in our favour, and thereby fetch the money back
again." (1. c. pp. 43, 44.)

f331 That the price of each single kind of commodity forms a pan of the sum of the prices of all the
commodities in circulation, is a self-evident proposition. But how use-values which are incommensurable
with regard to each other, are to be exchanged, en masse for the total sum of gold and silver in a country,
is quite incomprehensible. If we start from the notion that all commodities together form one single
commodity, of which each is but an aliquot part, we get the following beautiful result: The total
commodity = x cwt. of gold; commodity A = an aliquot part of the total commodity = the same liquot
part of x cwt. of gold. This is stated in all seriousness by Montesquieu: "Si Ton compare la masse de Tor
et de l'argent qui est dans le monde avec la somme des merchandises qui y vent il est cenain que chaque
denree ou merchandise, en paniculier, pourra etre comparee a une certaine portion de la masse entiere.
Supposons qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule denree ou marchandise dans le monde, ou qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule
qui s'achete, et qu'elle se divise comme l'argent: Cette panic de cette marchandise repondra a une partie
de la masee de l'argent; la moitie du total de l'une a la moitie du total de l'autre, &c... I'etablissement du
prix des choses depend tonjours fondamentalement de la raison du total des choses au total des signes."
(Montesquieu, 1. c. t. Ill, pp. 12, 13.) As to the further development of this theory by Ricardo and his
disciples, James Mill, Lord Overstone, and others, see "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 140-146, and p. 150, sqq.
John Stuart Mill, with his usual eclectic logic, understands how to hold at the same time the view of his



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (31 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

father, James Mill, and the opposite view. On a comparison of the text of his compendium, "Principles of
Poll Econ.," with his preface to the first edition, in which preface he announces himself as the Adam
Smith of his day — we do not know whether to admire more the simplicity of the man, or that of the
public, who took him, in good faith, for the Adam Smith he announced himself to be, although he bears
about as much resemblance to Adam Smith as say General Williams, of Kars, to the Duke of Wellington.
The original researches of Mr. J. S. Mill which are neither extensive nor profound, in the domain of
Political Economy, will be found mustered in rank and file in his little work, "Some Unsettled Questions
of Political Economy," which appeared in 1844. Locke asserts point blank the connexion between the
absence of value in gold and silver, and the determination of their values by quantity alone. "Mankind
having consented to put an imaginary value upon gold and silver ... the intrinsic value, regarded in these
metals, is nothing but the quantity." ("Some Considerations," &c, 1691, Works Ed. 1777, Vol. II., p. 15.)

f341 It lies of course, entirely beyond my purpose to take into consideration such details as the
seigniorage on minting. I will, however, cite for the benefit of the romantic sycophant, Adam Muller,
who admires the "generous liberality" with which the English Government coins gratuitously, the
following opinion of Sir Dudley North: "Silver and gold, like other commodities, have their ebbings and
flowings. Upon the arrival of quantities from Spain ... it is carried into the Tower, and coined. Not long
after there will come a demand for bullion to be exported again. If there is none, but all happens to be in
coin, what then? Melt it down again; there's no loss in it, for the coining costs the owner nothing. Thus
the nation has been abused, and made to pay for the twisting of straw for asses to eat. If the merchant
were made to pay the price of the coinage, he would not have sent his silver to the Tower without
consideration, and coined money would always keep a value above uncoined silver. " (North, 1. c, p. 18.)
North was himself one of the foremost merchants in the reign of Charles II.

f351 "If silver never exceed what is wanted for the smaller payments it cannot be collected in sufficient
quantities for the larger payments ... the use of gold in the main payments necessarily implies also Its use
in the retail trade: those who have gold coin offering them for small purchases, and receiving with the
commodity purchased a balance of silver in return; by which means the surplus of silver that would
otherwise encumber the retail dealer, is drawn off and dispersed into general circulation. But if there is as
much silver as will transact the small payments independent of gold, the retail trader must then receive
silver for small purchases ; and it must of necessity accumulate in his hands." (David Buchanan; "Inquiry
into the Taxation and Commercial Policy of Great Britain. " Edinburgh, 1844, pp. 248, 249.)

f361 The mandarin Wan-mao-in, the Chinese Chancellor of the Exchequer, took it into his head one day
to lay before the Son of Heaven a proposal that secretly aimed at converting the assignats of the empire
into convertible bank-notes. The assignats Committee, in its report of April, 1854, gives him a severe
snubbing. Whether he also received the traditional drubbing with bamboos is not stated. The concluding
part of the report is as follows: — "The Committee has carefully examined his proposal and finds that it
is entirely in favour of the merchants, and that no advantage will result to the crown." ("Arbeiten der
Kaiserlich Russischen Gesandtschaft zu Peking iiber China." Aus dem Russischen von Dr. K. Abel und
F. A. Mecklenburg. Erster Band. Berlin, 1858, p. 47 sq.) In his evidence before the Committee of the
House of Lords on the Bank Acts, a governor of the Bank of England says, with regard to the abrasion of
gold coins during currency: "Every year a fresh class of sovereigns becomes too light. The class which
one year passes with full weight, loses enough by wear and tear to draw the scales next year against it."
(House of Lords' Committee, 1848, n. 429.)

f371 The following passage from Fullarton shows the want of clearness on the pan of even the best

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (32 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

writers on money, in their comprehension of its various functions: "That, as far as concerns our domestic
exchanges, all the monetary functions which are usually performed by gold and silver coins, may be
performed as effectually by a circulation of inconvertible notes paying no value but that factitious and
conventional value they derive from the law is a fact which admits, I conceive, of no denial. Value of this
description may be made to answer all the purposes of intrinsic value, and supersede even the necessity
for a standard, provided only the quantity of issues be kept under due limitation." (Fullerton: "Regulation
of Currencies," London, 1845, p. 21.) Because the commodity that serves as money is capable of being
replaced in circulation by mere symbols of value, therefore its functions as a measure of value and a
standard of prices are declared to be superfluous !

\3S] From the fact that gold and silver, so far as they are coins, or exclusively serve as the medium of
circulation, become mere tokens of themselves, Nicholas Barbon deduces the right of Governments "to
raise money," that is, to give to the weight of silver that is called a shilling the name of a greater weight,
such as a crown; and so to pay creditors shillings, instead of crowns. "Money does wear and grow lighter
by often telling over... It is the denomination and currency of the money that men regard in bargaining,
and not the quantity of silver.. .'Tis the public authority upon the metal that makes it money." (N. Barbon,
1. c, pp. 29, 30, 25.)

f391 "Une richesse en argent n'est que ... richesse en productions, converties en argent." (Mercier de la
Riviere, 1. c.) "Une valeur en productions n'a fait que changer de forme." (Id., p. 486.)

KOI "Tis by this practice' they keep all their goods and manufactures at such low rates." (Vanderlint, 1.
c, pp. 95, 96.)

f411 "Money ... is a pledge." (John Bellers: "Essays about the Poor, Manufactures, Trade, Plantations,
and Immorality," Lond., 1699, p. 13.)

f421 A purchase, in a "categorical" sense, implies that gold and silver are already the converted form of
commodities, or the product of a sale.

f431 Henry III., most Christian king of France, robbed cloisters of their relics, and turned them into
money. It is well known what part the despoiling of the Delphic Temple, by the Phocians, played in the
history of Greece. Temples with the ancients served as the dwellings of the gods of commodities. They
were "sacred banks." With the Phoenicians, a trading people par excellence, money was the transmuted
shape of everything. It was, therefore, quite in order that the virgins, who, at the feast of the Goddess of
Love, gave themselves up to strangers, should offer to the goddess the piece of money they received.



[43al



"Gold, yellow, glittering, precious gold!

Thus much of this, will make black white, foul, fair;

Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant.

... What this, you gods? Why, this

Will lug your priests and servants from your sides;

Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads;

This yellow slave

Will knit and break religions; bless the accurs'd;

Make the hoar leprosy ador'd; place thieves,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (33 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

And give them title, knee and approbation;

With senators on the bench, this is it;

That makes the wappen'd widow wed again:

... Come damned earth,

Though common whore of mankind."

(Shakespeare: Timon of Athens.)

f43bl (Sophocles, Antigone.)

f441 "The desire of avarice to draw Pluto himself out of the bowels of the earth." (The Deipnosophistst,
VI, 23, Athenaeus)

f451 "Accrescere quanto piu si pud il numero de'venditori d'ogni merce, diminuere quanto piu si puo il
numero dei compratori, quest) sono i cardini sui quali si raggirano tutte le operazioni di economia
politica." (Verri, 1. c, p. 52.)

f461 "There is required for carrying on the trade of the nation a determinate sum of specifick money
which varies, and is sometimes more, sometimes less, as the circumstances we are in require.... This
ebbing and flowing of money supplies and accommodates itself, without any aid of Politicians.... The
buckets work alternately; when money is scarce, bullion is coined; when bullion is scarce, money is
melted." (Sir D. North, 1. c, Postscript, p. 3.) John Stuart Mill, who for a long time was an official of the
East India Company, confirms the fact that in India silver ornaments still continue to perform directly the
functions of a hoard. The silver ornaments are brought out and coined when there is a high rate of
interest, and go back again when the rate of interest falls. (1. S. Mill's Evidence "Reports on Bank Acts,"
1857, 2084.) According to a Parliamentary document of 1864 on the gold and silver import and export of
India, the import of gold and silver in 1863 exceeded the export by £19,367,764. During the 8 years
immediately preceding 1864, the excess of imports over exports of the precious metals amounted to
£109,652,917. During this century far more than £200,000,000 has been coined in India.

\41] The following shows the debtor and creditor relations existing between English traders at the

beginning of the 18th century. "Such a spirit of crudity reigns here in England among the men of trade,
that is not to be met with in any other society of men, nor in any other kingdom of the world." ("An
Essay on Credit and the Bankrupt Act," Lond.,

f481 It will be seen from the following quotation from my book which appeared in 1859, why I take no
notice in the text of an opposite form: "Contrariwise, in the process in M — C, the money can be
alienated as a real means of purchase, and in that way, the price of the commodity can be realised before
the use-value of the money is realised and the commodity actually delivered. This occurs constantly
under the e very-day form of prepayments. And it is under this form, that the English government
purchases opium from the ryots of India.... In these cases, however, the money always acts as a means of
purchase.... Of course capital also is advanced in the shape of money.... This point of view, however,
does not fall within the horizon of simple circulation." ("Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 119, 120.)

f491 The monetary crisis referred to in the text, being a phase of every crisis, must be clearly
distinguished from that particular form of crisis, which also is called a monetary crisis, but which may be
produced by itself as an independent phenomenon in such a way as to react only indirectly on industry
and commerce. The pivot of these crises is to be found in moneyed capital, and their sphere of direct

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (34 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

action is therefore the sphere of that capital, viz., banking, the stock exchange, and finance.

[501 "The sudden reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard cash heaps theoretical fright on
top of the practical panic; and the dealers by whose agency circulation is affected, shudder before the
impenetrable mystery in which their own economic relations are involved" (Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 126.)
"The poor stand still, because the rich have no money to employ them, though they have the same land
and hands to provide victuals and clothes, as ever they had; ...which is the true riches of a nation, and not
the money." John Bellers, Proposals for Raising a College of Industry, London, 1696, p3.

\5Y\ The following shows how such times are exploited by the "amis du commerce." "On one occasion
(1839) an old grasping banker (in the city) in his private room raised the lid of the desk he sat over, and
displayed to a friend rolls of bank-notes, saying with intense glee there were £600,000 of them, they were
held to make money tight, and would all be let out after three o'clock on the same day." ("The Theory of
Exchanges. The Bank Charter Act of 1844." Lond. 1864, p. 81). The Observer, a semi-official
government organ, contained the following paragraph on 24th April, 1864: "Some very curious rumours
are current of the means which have been resorted to in order to create a scarcity of banknotes....
Questionable as it would seem, to suppose that any trick of the kind would be adopted, the report has
been so universal that it really deserves mention."

f521 "The amount of purchases or contracts entered upon during the course of any given day, will not
affect the quantity of money afloat on that particular day, but, in the vast majority of cases, will resolve
themselves into multifarious drafts upon the quantity of money which may be afloat at subsequent dates
more or less distant.... The bills granted or credits opened, to-day, need have no resemblance whatever,
either in quantity, amount or duration, to those granted or entered upon to-morrow or next day, nay,
many of today's bills, and credits, when due, fall in with a mass of liabilities whose origins traverse a
range of antecedent dates altogether indefinite, bills at 12, 6, 3 months or 1 often aggregating together to
swell the common liabilities of one particular day...." ("The Currency Theory Reviewed; in a Letter to
the Scottish People." By a Banker in England. Edinburgh, 1845, pp. 29, 30 passim.)

f531 As an example of how little ready money is required in true commercial operations, I give below a
statement by one of the largest London houses of its yearly receipts and payments. Its transactions during
the year 1856, extending to many millions of pounds sterling, are here reduced to the scale of one
million.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (35 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

Receipts. Payments



Bankers' and Merchants'
Bills payable after Bills payable after



date,


L533, 596


date


L302, 674


Cheques on Bankers, &c,




Cheques on London




payable on demand


357, 715


Bankers


663, 672


Country Notes


9, 627






Bank of England Notes


68, 554


Bank of England Notes


22, 743


Gold


28, 089


Gold


9, 427


Silver and Copper


1, 486


Silver and Copper


1, 484


Post Office Orders


933







Total LI, 000, 000 Total LI, 000, 000



"Report from the Select Committee on the Bank Acts, July, 1858," p. lxxi.

f541 "The course of trade being thus turned, from exchanging of goods for goods, or delivering and
taking, to selling and paying, all the bargains ... are now stated upon the foot of a Price in money." ("An
Essay upon Publick Credit." 3rd Ed. Lond., 1710, p. 8.)

f551 "L'argent ... est devenu le bourreau de toutes choses." Finance is the "alambic, qui a fait evaporer
une quantite effroyable de biens et de denrees pour faire ce fatal precis." "L'argent declare la guerre a
tout le genre humain." (Boisguillebert: "Dissertation sur la nature des richesses, de l'argent et des
tribute." Edit. Daire. Economistes financiers. Paris, 1843, t. i., pp. 413, 419, 417.)

f561 "On Whitsuntide, 1824," says Mr. Craig before the Commons' Committee of 1826, "there was such
an immense demand for notes upon the banks of Edinburgh, that by 1 1 o'clock they had not a note left in
their custody. They sent round to all the different banks to borrow, but could not get them, and many of
the transactions were adjusted by slips of paper only; yet by three o'clock the whole of the notes were
returned into the banks from which they had issued! It was a mere transfer from hand to hand. "Although
the average effective circulation of bank-notes in Scotland is less than three millions sterling, yet on
certain pay days in the year, every single note in the possession of the bankers, amounting in the whole to
about £7,000,000, is called into activity. On these occasions the notes have a single and specific function
to perform, and so soon as they have performed it, they How back into the various banks from which
they issued. (See John Fullarton, "Regulation of Currencies." Lond. 1845, p. 86, note.) In explanation it
should be stated, that in Scotland, at the date of Fullarton's work, notes and not cheques were used to
withdraw deposits.

f571 Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in the Russian edition: Apparently a slip of the pen.
When writing /averse the author evidently meant direct.

f58J To the question, "If there were occasion to raise 40 millions p. a., whether the same 6 millions (gold)
... would suffice for such revolutions and circulations thereof, as trade requires," Petty replies in his usual
masterly manner, "I answer yes: for the expense being 40 millions, if the revolutions were in such short

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (36 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

circles, viz., weekly, as happens among poor artisans and labourers, who receive and pay every Saturday,
then 40/52 parts of 1 million of money would answer these ends, but if the circles be quarterly, according
to our custom of paying rent, and gathering taxes, then 10 millions were requisite. Wherefore, supposing
payments in general to be of a mixed circle between one week and 13, then add 10 millions to 40/52, the
half of which will be 5 1/2, so as if we have 5 1/2 millions we have enough." (William Petty: "Political
Anatomy of Ireland." 1672, Edit.: Lond. 1691, pp. 13, 14.)

f591 Hence the absurdity of every law prescribing that the banks of a country shall form reserves of that
precious metal alone which circulates at home. The "pleasant difficulties" thus self-created by the Bank
of England, are well known. On the subject of the great epochs in the history of the changes in the
relative value of gold and silver, see Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 136 sq. Sir Robert Peel, by his Bank Act of 1844,
sought to tide over the difficulty, by allowing the Bank of England to issue notes against silver bullion,
on condition that the reserve of silver should never exceed more than one-fourth of the reserve of gold.
The value of silver being for that purpose estimated at its price in the London market.

Added in the 4th German edition. — We find ourselves once more in a period of serious change in the
relative values of gold and silver. About 25 years ago the ratio expressing the relative value of gold and
silver was 15-1/2:1; now it is approximately 22:1, and silver is still constantly falling as against gold.
This is essentially the result of a revolution in the mode of production of both metals. Formerly gold was
obtained almost exclusively by washing it out from gold-bearing allovial deposits, products of the
weathering of auriferous rocks. Now this method has become inadequate and has been forced into the
background by the processing of the quartz lodes themselves, a way of extraction which formerly was
only of secondary importance, although well known to the ancients (Diodorus, 111, 12-14) (Diodor's v.
Sicilien "Historische Bibliothek," book III, 12-14. Stuttgart 1828, pp. 258-261). Moreover, not only were
new huge silver deposits discovered in North America, in the Western part of the Rocky Mountains, but
these and the Mexican silver mines were really opened up by the laying of railways, which made possible
the shipment of modern machinery and fuel and in consequence the mining of silver on a very large scale
at a low cost. However there is a great difference in the way the two metals occur in the quartz lodes. The
gold is mostly native, but disseminated throughout the quartz in minute quantities. The whole mass of the
vein must therefore be crushed and the gold either washed out or extracted by means of mercury. Often
1,000,000 grammes of quartz barely yield 1-3 and very seldom 30-60 grammes of gold. Silver is seldom
found native, however it occurs in special quartz that is separated from the lode with comparative ease
and contains mostly 40-90% silver; or it is contained, in smaller quantities, in copper, lead and other ores
which in themselves are worthwhile working. From this alone it is apparent that the labour expended on
the production of gold is rather in creasing while that expended on silver production has decidedly
decreased, which quite naturally explains the drop in the value of the latter. This fall in value would
express itself in a still greater fall in price if the price of silver were not pegged even to-day by artificial
means. But America's rich silver deposits have so far barely been tapped, and thus the prospects are that
the value of this metal will keep on dropping for rather a long time to come. A still greater contributing
factor here is the relative decrease in the requirement of silver for articles of general use and for luxuries,
that is its replacement by plated goods, aluminium, etc. One may thus gauge the utopianism of the
bimetallist idea that compulsory international quotation will raise silver again to the old value ratio of
1:15-1/2. It is more likely that silver will forfeit its money function more and more in the markets of the
world. — F E.]

r601 The opponents, themselves, of the mercantile system, a system which considered the settlement of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (37 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

surplus trade balances in gold and silver as the aim of international trade, entirely misconceived the
functions of money of the world. I have shown by the example of Ricardo in what way their false
conception of the laws that regulate the quantity of the circulating medium, is reflected in their equally
false conception of the international movement of the precious metals (1. c, pp. 150 sq.). His erroneous
dogma: "An unfavourable balance of trade never arises but from a redundant currency.... The exportation
of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance,"
already occurs in Barbon: "The Balance of Trade, if there be one, is not the cause of sending away the
money out of a nation; but that proceeds from the difference of the value of bullion in every country." (N.
Barbon; 1. c, pp. 59, 60.) MacCulloch in "The Literature of Political Economy, a classified catalogue,
Lond. 1845," praises Barbon for this anticipation, but prudently passes over the naive forms, in which
Barbon clothes the absurd supposition on which the "currency principle" is based. The absence of real
criticism and even of honesty, in that catalogue culminates in the sections devoted to the history of the
theory of money; the reason is that MacCulloch in this part of the work is flattering Lord Overstone
whom he calls "facile princeps argentanorum."

f611 For instance, in subsidies, money loans for carrying on wars or for enabling banks to resume cash
payments, &c, it is the money-form, and no other, of value that may be wanted.

f621 "I would desire, indeed, no more convincing evidence of the competency of the machinery of the
hoards in specie-paying countries to perform every necessary office of international adjustment, without
any sensible aid from the general circulation, than the facility with which France, when but just
recovering from the shock of a destructive foreign invasion, completed within the space of 27 months the
payment of her forced contribution of nearly 20 millions to the allied powers, and a considerable
proportion of the sum in specie, without any perceptible contraction or derangement of her domestic
currency, or even any alarming fluctuation of her exchanges." (Fullerton, 1. c, p. 141.) [Added in the 4th
German edition. — We have a still more striking example in the facility with which the same France was
able in 1871-73 to pay off within 30 months a forced contribution more than ten times as great, a
considerable part of it likewise in specie. — F.E.]

f631 "L'argent se partage entre les nations relativement au besoin qu'elles en ont ... etant toujours attire
par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 916.) "The mines which are continually giving gold and silver,
do give sufficient to supply such a needful balance to every nation." (J. Vanderlint, 1. c, p. 40.)

f641 "Exchanges rise and fall every week, and at some particular times in the year run high against a
nation, and at other times run as high on the contrary." (N. Barbon, 1. c, p. 39)

f651 These various functions are liable to come into dangerous conflict with one another whenever gold
and silver have also to serve as a fund for the conversion of bank-notes.

f661 "What money is more than of absolute necessity for a Home Trade, is dead stock ... and brings no
profit to that country it's kept in, but as it is transported in trade, as well as imported." (John Bellers,
"Essays", p. 13.) "What if we have too much coin? We may melt down the heaviest and turn it into the
splendour of plate, vessels or utensils of gold or silver, or send it out as a commodity, where the same is
wanted or desired; or let it out at interest, where interest is high." (W. Petty: "Quantulumcunque," p. 39.)
"Money is but the fat of the Body Politick, whereof too much cloth as often hinder its agility, as too little
makes it sick ... as fat lubricates the motion of the muscles, feeds in want of victuals, fills up the uneven
cavities, and beautifies the body; so cloth money in the state quicken its action, feeds from abroad in time



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (38 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

of dearth at home, evens accounts ... and beautifies the whole; altho more especially the particular
persons that have it in plenty." (W. Petty, "Political Anatomy of Ireland," p. 14.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Four: The General Formula for Capital
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (39 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part II:

The Transformation of Money and Capital



CHAPTER FOUR:

THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL



The circulation of commodities is the starting-point of capital. The production of commodities, their
circulation, and that more developed form of their circulation called commerce, these form the historical
ground-work from which it rises. The modern history of capital dates from the creation in the 16th
century of a world-embracing commerce and a world-embracing market.

If we abstract from the material substance of the circulation of commodities, that is, from the exchange
of the various use-values, and consider only the economic forms produced by this process of circulation,
we find its final result to be money: this final product of the circulation of commodities is the first form
in which capital appears.

As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, invariably takes the form at first of money;
it appears as moneyed wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer. £1} But we have no need
to refer to the origin of capital in order to discover that the first form of appearance of capital is money.
We can see it daily under our very eyes. All new capital, to commence with, comes on the stage, that is,
on the market, whether of commodities, labour, or money, even in our days, in the shape of money that
by a definite process has to be transformed into capital.

The first distinction we notice between money that is money only, and money that is capital, is nothing
more than a difference in their form of circulation.

The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C-M-C, the transformation of commodities into
money, and the change of the money back again into commodities; or selling in order to buy. But
alongside of this form we find another specifically different form: M-C-M, the transformation of money
into commodities, and the change of commodities back again into money; or buying in order to sell.
Money that circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into, becomes capital, and is already
potentially capital.

Now let us examine the circuit M-C-M a little closer. It consists, like the other, of two antithetical phases.
In the first phase, M-C, or the purchase, the money is changed into a commodity. In the second phase,
C-M, or the sale, the commodity is changed back again into money. The combination of these two phases



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

constitutes the single movement whereby money is exchanged for a commodity, and the same
commodity is again exchanged for money; whereby a commodity is bought in order to be sold, or,
neglecting the distinction in form between buying and selling, whereby a commodity is bought with
money, and then money is bought with a commodity. [2] The result, in which the phases of the process
vanish, is the exchange of money for money, M-M. If I purchase 2,000 lbs. of cotton for £100, and resell
the 2,000 lbs. of cotton for £1 10, 1 have, in fact, exchanged £100 for £1 10, money for money.

Now it is evident that the circuit M-C-M would be absurd and without meaning if the intention were to
exchange by this means two equal sums of money, £100 for £100. The miser's plan would be far simpler
and surer; he sticks to his £100 instead of exposing it to the dangers of circulation. And yet, whether the
merchant who has paid £100 for his cotton sells it for £1 10, or lets it go for £100, or even £50, his money
has, at all events, gone through a characteristic and original movement, quite different in kind from that
which it goes through in the hands of the peasant who sells corn, and with the money thus set free buys
clothes. We have therefore to examine first the distinguishing characteristics of the forms of the circuits
M-C-M and C-M-C, and in doing this the real difference that underlies the mere difference of form will
reveal itself.

Let us see, in the first place, what the two forms have in common.

Both circuits are resolvable into the same two antithetical phases, C-M, a sale, and M-C, a purchase. In
each of these phases the same material elements - a commodity, and money, and the same
economic dramatis personae, a buyer and a seller - confront one another. Each circuit is the unity of the
same two antithetical phases, and in each case this unity is brought about by the intervention of three
contracting parties, of whom one only sells, another only buys, while the third both buys and sells.

What, however, first and foremost distinguishes the circuit C-M-C from the circuit M-C-M, is the
inverted order of succession of the two phases. The simple circulation of commodities begins with a sale
and ends with a purchase, while the circulation of money as capital begins with a purchase and ends with
a sale. In the one case both the starting-point and the goal are commodities, in the other they are money.
In the first form the movement is brought about by the intervention of money, in the second by that of a
commodity.

In the circulation C-M-C, the money is in the end converted into a commodity, that serves as a use-value;
it is spent once for all. In the inverted form, M-C-M, on the contrary, the buyer lays out money in order
that, as a seller, he may recover money. By the purchase of his commodity he throws money into
circulation, in order to withdraw it again by the sale of the same commodity. He lets the money go, but
only with the sly intention of getting it back again. The money, therefore, is not spent, it is merely
advanced. [3]

In the circuit C-M-C, the same piece of money changes its place twice. The seller gets it from the buyer
and pays it away to another seller. The complete circulation, which begins with the receipt, concludes
with the payment, of money for commodities. It is the very contrary in the circuit M-C-M. Here it is not
the piece of money that changes its place twice, but the commodity. The buyer takes it from the hands of
the seller and passes it into the hands of another buyer. Just as in the simple circulation of commodities
the double change of place of the same piece of money effects its passage from one hand into another, so
here the double change of place of the same commodity brings about the reflux of the money to its point
of departure.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

Such reflux is not dependent on the commodity being sold for more than was paid for it. This
circumstance influences only the amount of the money that comes back. The reflux itself takes place, so
soon as the purchased commodity is resold, in other words, so soon as the circuit M-C-M is completed.
We have here, therefore, a palpable difference between the circulation of money as capital, and its
circulation as mere money.

The circuit C-M-C comes completely to an end, so soon as the money brought in by the sale of one
commodity is abstracted again by the purchase of another.

If, nevertheless, there follows a reflux of money to its starting-point, this can only happen through a
renewal or repetition of the operation. If I sell a quarter of corn for £3, and with this £3 buy clothes, the
money, so far as I am concerned, is spent and done with. It belongs to the clothes merchant. If I now sell
a second quarter of corn, money indeed flows back to me, not however as a sequel to the first transaction,
but in consequence of its repetition. The money again leaves me, so soon as I complete this second
transaction by a fresh purchase. Therefore, in the circuit C-M-C, the expenditure of money has nothing to
do with its reflux. On the other hand, in M-C-M, the reflux of the money is conditioned by the very mode
of its expenditure. Without this reflux, the operation fails, or the process is interrupted and incomplete,
owing to the absence of its complementary and final phase, the sale.

The circuit C-M-C starts with one commodity, and finishes with another, which falls out of circulation
and into consumption. Consumption, the satisfaction of wants, in one word, use-value, is its end and aim.
The circuit M-C-M, on the contrary, commences with money and ends with money. Its leading motive,
and the goal that attracts it, is therefore mere exchange-value.

In the simple circulation of commodities, the two extremes of the circuit have the same economic form.
They are both commodities, and commodities of equal value. But they are also use-values differing in
their qualities, as, for example, corn and clothes. The exchange of products, of the different materials in
which the labour of society is embodied, forms here the basis of the movement. It is otherwise in the
circulation M-C-M, which at first sight appears purposeless, because tautological. Both extremes have
the same economic form. They are both money, and therefore are not qualitatively different use- values;
for money is but the converted form of commodities, in which their particular use- values vanish. To
exchange £100 for cotton, and then this same cotton again for £100, is merely a roundabout way of
exchanging money for money, the same for the same, and appears to be an operation just as purposeless
as it is absurd. [4] One sum of money is distinguishable from another only by its amount. The character
and tendency of the process M-C-M, is therefore not due to any qualitative difference between its
extremes, both being money, but solely to their quantitative difference. More money is withdrawn from
circulation at the finish than was thrown into it at the start. The cotton that was bought for £100 is
perhaps resold for £100 + £10 or £100. The exact form of this process is therefore M-C-M', where M' =
M + delta M = the original sum advanced, plus an increment. This increment or excess over the original
value I call "surplus- value". The value originally advanced, therefore, not only remains intact while in
circulation, but adds to itself a surplus-value or expands itself. It is this movement that converts it into
capital.

Of course, it is also possible, that in C-M-C, the two extremes C-C, say corn and clothes, may represent
different quantities of value. The farmer may sell his corn above its value, or may buy the clothes at less
than their value. He may, on the other hand, "be done" by the clothes merchant. Yet, in the form of
circulation now under consideration, such differences in value are purely accidental. The fact that the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

corn and the clothes are equivalents, does not deprive the process of all meaning, as it does in M-C-M.
The equivalence of their values is rather a necessary condition to its normal course.

The repetition or renewal of the act of selling in order to buy, is kept within bounds by the very object it
aims at, namely, consumption or the satisfaction of definite wants, an aim that lies altogether outside the
sphere of circulation. But when we buy in order to sell, we, on the contrary, begin and end with the same
thing, money, exchange- value; and thereby the movement becomes interminable. No doubt, M becomes
M + delta M, £100 become £1 10. But when viewed in their qualitative aspect alone, £1 10 are the same as
£100, namely money; and considered quantitatively, £1 10 is, like £100, a sum of definite and limited
value. If now, the £1 10 be spent as money, they cease to play their part. They are no longer capital.
Withdrawn from circulation, they become petrified into a hoard, and though they remained in that state
till doomsday, not a single farthing would accrue to them. If, then, the expansion of value is once aimed
at, there is just the same inducement to augment the value of the £1 10 as that of the £100; for both are
but limited expressions for exchange-value, and therefore both have the same vocation to approach, by
quantitative increase, as near as possible to absolute wealth. Momentarily, indeed, the value originally
advanced, the £100 is distinguishable from the surplus- value of £10 that is annexed to it during
circulation; but the distinction vanishes immediately. At the end of the process, we do not receive with
one hand the original £100, and with the other, the surplus- value of £10. We simply get a value of £1 10,
which is in exactly the same condition and fitness for commencing the expanding process, as the original
£100 was. Money ends the movement only to begin it again. [51 Therefore, the final result of every
separate circuit, in which a purchase and consequent sale are completed, forms of itself the starting-point
of a new circuit. The simple circulation of commodities - selling in order to buy - is a means of carrying
out a purpose unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropriation of use-values, the satisfaction of
wants. The circulation of money as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the expansion of value
takes place only within this constantly renewed movement. The circulation of capital has therefore no
limits. [61

As the conscious representative of this movement, the possessor of money becomes a capitalist. His
person, or rather his pocket, is the point from which the money starts and to which it returns. The
expansion of value, which is the objective basis or main-spring of the circulation M-C-M, becomes his
subjective aim, and it is only in so far as the appropriation of ever more and more wealth in the abstract
becomes the sole motive of his operations, that he functions as a capitalist, that is, as capital personified
and endowed with consciousness and a will. Use- values must therefore never be looked upon as the real
aim of the capitalist; [71 neither must the profit on any single transaction. The restless never-ending
process of profit-making alone is what he aims at. [81 This boundless greed after riches, this passionate
chase after exchange-value [91, is common to the capitalist and the miser; but while the miser is merely a
capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a rational miser. The never-ending augmentation of exchange-value,
which the miser strives after, by seeking to save f 101 his money from circulation, is attained by the more
acute capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circulation, fill

The independent form, i.e., the money-form, which the value of commodities assumes in the case of
simple circulation, serves only one purpose, namely, their exchange, and vanishes in the final result of
the movement. On the other hand, in the circulation M-C-M, both the money and the commodity
represent only different modes of existence of value itself, the money its general mode, and the
commodity its particular, or, so to say, disguised mode. |121 It is constantly changing from one form to
the other without thereby becoming lost, and thus assumes an automatically active character. If now we

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

take in turn each of the two different forms which self-expanding value successively assumes in the
course of its life, we then arrive at these two propositions: Capital is money: Capital is commodities. |131
In truth, however, value is here the active factor in a process, in which, while constantly assuming the
form in turn of money and commodities, it at the same time changes in magnitude, differentiates itself by
throwing off surplus-value from itself; the original value, in other words, expands spontaneously. For the
movement, in the course of which it adds surplus-value, is its own movement, its expansion, therefore, is
automatic expansion. Because it is value, it has acquired the occult quality of being able to add value to
itself. It brings forth living offspring, or, at the least, lays golden eggs.

Value, therefore, being the active factor in such a process, and assuming at one time the form of money,
at another that of commodities, but through all these changes preserving itself and expanding, it requires
some independent form, by means of which its identity may at any time be established. And this form it
possesses only in the shape of money. It is under the form of money that value begins and ends, and
begins again, every act of its own spontaneous generation. It began by being £100, it is now £110, and so
on. But the money itself is only one of the two forms of value. Unless it takes the form of some
commodity, it does not become capital. There is here no antagonism, as in the case of hoarding, between
the money and commodities. The capitalist knows that all commodities, however scurvy they may look,
or however badly they may smell, are in faith and in truth money, inwardly circumcised Jews, and what
is more, a wonderful means whereby out of money to make more money.

In simple circulation, C-M-C, the value of commodities attained at the most a form independent of their
use-values, i.e., the form of money; but that same value now in the circulation M-C-M, or the circulation
of capital, suddenly presents itself as an independent substance, endowed with a motion of its own,
passing through a life-process of its own, in which money and commodities are mere forms which
it assumes and casts off in turn. Nay, more: instead of simply representing the relations of commodities,
it enters now, so to say, into private relations with itself. It differentiates itself as original value from
itself as surplus- value; as the father differentiates himself from himself qua the son, yet both are one and
of one age: for only by the surplus-value of £10 does the £100 originally advanced become capital, and
so soon as this takes place, so soon as the son, and by the son, the father, is begotten, so soon does their
difference vanish, and they again become one, £1 10.

Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in process, and, as such, capital. It comes out of
circulation, enters into it again, preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, comes back out of it with
expanded bulk, and begins the same round ever afresh. f!41 M-M', money which begets money, such is
the description of Capital from the mouths of its first interpreters, the Mercantilists.

Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order to sell dearer, M-C-M', appears certainly to
be a form peculiar to one kind of capital alone, namely, merchants' capital. But industrial capital too is
money, that is changed into commodities, and by the sale of these commodities, is re-converted into
more money. The events that take place outside the sphere of circulation, in the interval between the
buying and selling, do not affect the form of this movement. Lastly, in the case of interest-bearing
capital, the circulation M-C-M' appears abridged. We have its result without the intermediate stage, in the
form M-M', "en style lapidaire" so to say, money that is worth more money, value that is greater than
itself.

M-C-M' is therefore in reality the general formula of capital as it appears prima facie within the sphere of
circulation.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four



Footnotes

T 1 1 The contrast between the power, based on the personal relations of dominion and servitude, that is
conferred by landed property, and the impersonal power that is given by money, is well expressed by the
two French proverbs, "Nulle terre sans seigneur," and "L'argent n'a pas de maitre."

[21 "Avec de l'argent on achete des marchandises et avec des marchandises on achete de l'argent."
(Mercier de la Riviere: "L'ordre naturel et essentiel des societes politiques," p. 543.)

[3] "When a thing is bought in order to be sold again, the sum employed is called money advanced; when
it is bought not to be sold, it may be said to be expended." — (James Steuart: "Works," &c. Edited by
Gen. Sir James Steuart, his son. Lond., 1805, V. I., p. 274.)

\4] "On n'echange pas de l'argent contre de l'argent," says Mercier de la Riviere to the Mercantilists (1. c,
p. 486.) In a work, which, ex professo treats of "trade" and "speculation," occurs the following: "All trade
consists in the exchange of things of different kinds; and the advantage" (to the merchant?) "arises out of
this difference. To exchange a pound of bread against a pound of bread ... would be attended with no
advantage; ... Hence trade is advantageously contrasted with gambling, which consists in a mere
exchange of money for money." (Th. Corbet, "An Inquiry into the Causes and Modes of the Wealth of
Individuals; or the Principles of Trade and Speculation Explained." London, 1841, p. 5.) Although
Corbet does not see that M-M, the exchange or money for money, is the characteristic form of
circulation, not only of merchants' capital but of all capital, yet at least he acknowledges that this form is
common to gambling and to one species of trade, viz., speculation: but then comes MacCulloch and
makes out, that to buy in order to sell, is to speculate, and thus the difference between Speculation and
Trade vanishes. "Every transaction in which an individual buys produce in order to sell it again, is, in
fact, a speculation." (MacCulloch: "A Dictionary Practical, &c, of Commerce." Lond., 1847, p. 1009.)
With much more naivete, Pinto, the Pindar of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, remarks, "Le commerce
est un jeu: (taken from Locke) et ce n'est pas avec des gueux qu'on peut gagner. Si Ton gagnait longtemps
en tout avec tous, il faudrait rendre de bon accord les plus grandes parties du profit pour recommencer le
jeu." (Pinto: "Traite de la Circulation et du Credit." Amsterdam, 1771. p. 231,)

[51 "Capital is divisible ... into the original capital and the profit, the increment to the capital ... although
in practice this profit is immediately turned into capital, and set in motion with the original." (F. Engels,
"Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie, in: Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbiicher, herausgegeben
von Arnold Ruge und Karl Marx." Paris, 1844, p. 99.)

[61 Aristotle opposes Oeconomic to Chrematistic. He starts from the former. So far as it is the art of
gaining a livelihood, it is limited to procuring those articles that are necessary to existence, and useful
either to a household or the state. "True wealth ([greek:] o alethinos ploutos) consists of such values in
use; for the quantity of possessions of this kind, capable of making life pleasant, is not unlimited. There
is, however, a second mode of acquiring things, to which we may by preference and with correctness
give the name of Chrematistic, and in this case there appear to be no limits to riches and possessions.
Trade ([greek:] e kapelike) is literally retail trade, and Aristotle takes this kind because in it values in use
predominate) does not in its nature belong to Chrematistic, for here the exchange has reference only to



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

what is necessary to themselves (the buyer or seller)." Therefore, as he goes on to show, the original form
of trade was barter, but with the extension of the latter, there arose the necessity for money. On the
discovery of money, barter of necessity developed into [greek: kapelike], into trading in commodities,
and this again, in opposition to its original tendency, grew into Chrematistic, into the art of making
money. Now Chrematistic is distinguishable from Oeconomic in this way, that "in the case of
Chrematistic circulation is the source of riches ([greek:] poietike chrematon ... dia chrematon diaboles).
And it appears to revolve about money, for money is the beginning and end of this kind of exchange
([greek:] to nomisma stoicheion tes allages estin). Therefore also riches, such as Chrematistic strives for,
are unlimited. Just as every art that is not a means to an end, but an end in itself, has no limit to its aims,
because it seeks constantly to approach nearer and nearer to that end, while those arts that pursue means
to an end, are not boundless, since the goal itself imposes a limit upon them, so with Chrematistic, there
are no bounds to its aims, these aims being absolute wealth. Oeconomic not Chrematistic has a limit ...
the object of the former is something different from money, of the latter the augmentation of money....
By confounding these two forms, which overlap each other, some people have been led to look upon the
preservation and increase of money ad infinitum as the end and aim of Oeconomic." (Aristoteles, "De
Rep." edit. Bekker, lib. 1. c. 8, 9. passim.)

[7] "Commodities (here used in the sense of use- values) are not the terminating object of the trading
capitalist, money is his terminating object." (Th. Chalmers, "On Pol. Econ. &c," 2nd Ed., Glasgow,
1832, pp. 165, 166.)

[8] "II mercante non conta quasi per niente il lucro fatto, ma mira sempre al future" (A. Genovesi,
Lezioni di Economia Civile (1765), Custodi's edit, of Italian Economists. Parte Moderna t. viii, p. 139.)

[9] "The inextinguishable passion for gain, the auri sacra fames, will always lead capitalists."
(MacCulloch: "The Principles of Polit. Econ." London, 1830, p. 179.) This view, of course, does not
prevent the same MacCulloch and others of his kidney, when in theoretical difficulties, such, for
example, as the question of over-production, from transforming the same capitalist into a moral citizen,
whose sole concern is for use- values, and who even develops an insatiable hunger for boots, hats, eggs,
calico, and other extremely familiar sorts of use-values.

[10] [greek: Sozein] is a characteristic Greek expression for hoarding. So in English to save has the same
two meanings: sauver and epargner.

[Ill "Questo infinito che le cose non hanno in progresso, hanno in giro." (Galiani.)

[121 Ce n'est pas la matiere qui fait le capital, mais la valeur de ces matieres. " (J. B. Say: "Traite d'Econ.
Polit." 3eme ed. Paris, 1817, t. II., p. 429.)

[131 "Currency (!) employed in producing articles... is capital." (Macleod: "The Theory and Practice of
Banking." London, 1855, v. 1, ch. i, p. 55.) "Capital is commodities." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol.
Econ."Lond., 1821, p. 74.)

[141 Capital: "portion fructifiante de la richesse accumulee... valeur permanents, multipliante. "
(Sismondi: "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Polit.," t. L, p. 88, 89.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

Transcribed by Martha Giminez and Hinrich Kuhls
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Five: Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part II:

The Transformation of Money in Capital



CHAPTER FIVE:

CONTRADICTIONS IN THE GENERAL FORMULA OF CAPITAL



The form which circulation takes when money becomes capital, is opposed to all the laws we have
hitherto investigated bearing on the nature of commodities, value and money, and even of circulation
itself. What distinguishes this form from that of the simple circulation of commodities, is the inverted
order of succession of the two antithetical processes, sale and purchase. How can this purely formal
distinction between these processes change their character as it were by magic?

But that is not all. This inversion has no existence for two out of the three persons who transact business
together. As capitalist, I buy commodities from A and sell them again to B, but as a simple owner of
commodities, I sell them to B and then purchase fresh ones from A. A and B see no difference between
the two sets of transactions. They are merely buyers or sellers. And I on each occasion meet them as a
mere owner of either money or commodities, as a buyer or a seller, and, what is more, in both sets of
transactions, I am opposed to A only as a buyer and to B only as a seller, to the one only as money, to the
other only as commodities, and to neither of them as capital or a capitalist, or as representative of
anything that is more than money or commodities, or that can produce any effect beyond what money
and commodities can. For me the purchase from A and the sale to B are part of a series. But the
connexion between the two acts exists for me alone. A does not trouble himself about my transaction
with B, nor does B about my business with A. And if I offered to explain to them the meritorious nature
of my action in inverting the order of succession, they would probably point out to me that I was
mistaken as to that order of succession, and that the whole transaction, instead of beginning with a
purchase and ending with a sale, began, on the contrary, with a sale and was concluded with a purchase.
In truth, my first act, the purchase, was from the standpoint of A, a sale, and my second act, the sale, was
from the standpoint of B, a purchase. Not content with that, A and B would declare that the whole series
was superfluous and nothing but Hokus Pokus; that for the future A would buy direct from B, and B sell
direct to A. Thus the whole transaction would be reduced to a single act forming an isolated,
non-complemented phase in the ordinary circulation of commodities, a mere sale from A's point of view,
and from B's, a mere purchase. The inversion, therefore, of the order of succession, does not take us
outside the sphere of the simple circulation of commodities, and we must rather look, whether there is in
this simple circulation anything permitting an expansion of the value that enters into circulation, and,
consequently, a creation of surplus-value.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (1 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

Let us take the process of circulation in a form under which it presents itself as a simple and direct
exchange of commodities. This is always the case when two owners of commodities buy from each
other, and on the settling day the amounts mutually owing are equal and cancel each other. The money in
this case is money of account and serves to express the value of the commodities by their prices, but is
not, itself, in the shape of hard cash, confronted with them. So far as regards use-values, it is clear that
both parties may gain some advantage. Both part with goods that, as use-values, are of no service to
them, and receive others that they can make use of. And there may also be a further gain. A, who sells
wine and buys corn, possibly produces more wine, with given labour-time, than farmer B could, and B
on the other hand, more corn than wine-grower A could. A, therefore, may get, for the same
exchange- value, more corn, and B more wine, than each would respectively get without any exchange by
producing his own corn and wine. With reference, therefore, to use- value, there is good ground for
saying that "exchange is a transaction by which both sides gain." JJJ It is otherwise with exchange- value.
"A man who has plenty of wine and no corn treats with a man who has plenty of corn and no wine; an
exchange takes place between them of corn to the value of 50, for wine of the same value.This act
produces no increase of exchange-value either for the one or the other; for each of them already
possessed, before the exchange, a value equal to that which he acquired by means of that operation." \2]
The result is not altered by introducing money, as a medium of circulation, between the commodities,
and making the sale and the purchase two distinct acts. [31 The value of a commodity is expressed in its
price before it goes into circulation, and is therefore a precedent condition of circulation, not its result.
141

Abstractedly considered, that is, apart from circumstances not immediately flowing from the laws of the
simple circulation of commodities, there is in an exchange nothing (if we except the replacing of one
use-value by another) but a metamorphosis, a mere change in the form of the commodity. The same
exchange- value, i.e., the same quantity of incorporated social labour, remains throughout in the hands of
the owner of the commodity, first in the shape of his own commodity, then in the form of the money for
which he exchanged it, and lastly, in the shape of the commodity he buys with that money. This change
of form does not imply a change in the magnitude of the value. But the change, which the value of the
commodity undergoes in this process, is limited to a change in its money-form. This form exists first as
the price of the commodity offered for sale, then as an actual sum of money, which, however, was
already expressed in the price, and lastly, as the price of an equivalent commodity. This change of form
no more implies, taken alone, a change in the quantity of value, than does the change of a £5 note into
sovereigns, half sovereigns and shillings. So far therefore as the circulation of commodities effects a
change in the form alone of their values, and is free from disturbing influences, it must be the exchange
of equivalents. Little as Vulgar-Economy knows about the nature of value, yet whenever it wishes to
consider the phenomena of circulation in their purity, it assumes that supply and demand are equal,
which amounts to this, that their effect is nil. If therefore, as regards the use- values exchanged, both
buyer and seller may possibly gain something, this is not the case as regards the exchange-values. Here
we must rather say, "Where equality exists there can be no gain." [51 It is true, commodities may be sold
at prices deviating from their values, but these deviations are to be considered as infractions of the laws
of the exchange of commodities [6[, which in its normal state is an exchange of equivalents,
consequently, no method for increasing value. [7[

Hence, we see that behind all attempts to represent the circulation of commodities as a source of
surplus-value, there lurks a quid pro quo, a mixing up of use-value and exchange-value. For instance,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (2 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

Condillac says: "It is not true that on an exchange of commodities we give value for value. On the
contrary, each of the two contracting parties in every case, gives a less for a greater value. ... If we really
exchanged equal values, neither party could make a profit. And yet, they both gain, or ought to gain.
Why? The value of a thing consists solely in its relation to our wants. What is more to the one is less to
the other, and vice versa. ... It is not to be assumed that we offer for sale articles required for our own
consumption. ... We wish to part with a useless thing, in order to get one that we need; we want to give
less for more. ... It was natural to think that, in an exchange, value was given for value, whenever each of
the articles exchanged was of equal value with the same quantity of gold. ... But there is another point to
be considered in our calculation. The question is, whether we both exchange something superfluous for
something necessary." [8] We see in this passage, how Condillac not only confuses use-value with
exchange- value, but in a really childish manner assumes, that in a society, in which the production of
commodities is well developed, each producer produces his own means of subsistence, and throws into
circulation only the excess over his own requirements. [91 Still, Condillac's argument is frequently used
by modem economists, more especially when the point is to show, that the exchange of commodities in
its developed form, commerce, is productive of surplus-value. For instance, "Commerce ... adds value to
products, for the same products in the hands of consumers, are worth more than in the hands of
producers, and it may strictly be considered an act of production." flOl But commodities are not paid for
twice over, once on account of their use-value, and again on account of their value. And though the
use-value of a commodity is more serviceable to the buyer than to the seller, its money-form is more
serviceable to the seller. Would he otherwise sell it? We might therefore just as well say that the buyer
performs "strictly an act of production," by converting stockings, for example, into money.

If commodities, or commodities and money, of equal exchange- value, and consequently equivalents, are
exchanged, it is plain that no one abstracts more value from, than he throws into, circulation. There is no
creation of surplus-value. And, in its normal form, the circulation of commodities demands the exchange
of equivalents. But in actual practice, the process does not retain its normal form. Let us, therefore,
assume an exchange of non-equivalents.

In any case the market for commodities is only frequented by owners of commodities, and the power
which these persons exercise over each other, is no other than the power of their commodities. The
material variety of these commodities is the material incentive to the act of exchange, and makes buyers
and sellers mutually dependent, because none of them possesses the object of his own wants, and each
holds in his hand the object of another's wants. Besides these material differences of their use-values,
there is only one other difference between commodities, namely, that between their bodily form and the
form into which they are converted by sale, the difference between commodities and money. And
consequently the owners of commodities are distinguishable only as sellers, those who own
commodities, and buyers, those who own money.

Suppose then, that by some inexplicable privilege, the seller is enabled to sell his commodities above
their value, what is worth 100 for 1 10, in which case the price is nominally raised 10%. The seller
therefore pockets a surplus- value of 10. But after he has sold he becomes a buyer. A third owner of
commodities comes to him now as seller, who in this capacity also enjoys the privilege of selling his
commodities 10% too dear. Our friend gained 10 as a seller only to lose it again as a buyer, fill The net
result is, that all owners of commodities sell their goods to one another at 10% above their value, which
comes precisely to the same as if they sold them at their true value. Such a general and nominal rise of
prices has the same effect as if the values had been expressed in weight of silver instead of in weight of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (3 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

gold. The nominal prices of commodities would rise, but the real relation between their values would
remain unchanged.

Let us make the opposite assumption, that the buyer has the privilege of purchasing commodities under
their value. In this case it is no longer necessary to bear in mind that he in his turn will become a seller.
He was so before he became buyer; he had already lost 10% in selling before he gained 10% as buyer.
[121 Everything is just as it was.

The creation of surplus-value, and therefore the conversion of money into capital, can consequently be
explained neither on the assumption that commodities are sold above their value, nor that they are bought
below their value, f 1 31

The problem is in no way simplified by introducing irrelevant matters after the manner of Col. Torrens:
"Effectual demand consists in the power and inclination (!), on the part of consumers, to give for
commodities, either by immediate or circuitous barter, some greater portion of ... capital than their
production costs." f 141 In relation to circulation, producers and consumers meet only as buyers and
sellers. To assert that the surplus-value acquired by the producer has its origin in the fact that consumers
pay for commodities more than their value, is only to say in other words: The owner of commodities
possesses, as a seller, the privilege of selling too dear. The seller has himself produced the commodities
or represents their producer, but the buyer has to no less extent produced the commodities represented by
his money, or represents their producer. The distinction between them is, that one buys and the other
sells. The fact that the owner of the commodities, under the designation of producer, sells them over their
value, and under the designation of consumer, pays too much for them, does not carry us a single step
further. [15]

To be consistent therefore, the upholders of the delusion that surplus-value has its origin in a nominal rise
of prices or in the privilege which the seller has of selling too dear, must assume the existence of a class
that only buys and does not sell, i.e., only consumes and does not produce. The existence of such a class
is inexplicable from the standpoint we have so far reached, viz., that of simple circulation. But let us
anticipate. The money with which such a class is constantly making purchases, must constantly flow into
their pockets, without any exchange, gratis, by might or right, from the pockets of the commodity-owners
themselves. To sell commodities above their value to such a class, is only to crib back again a part of the
money previously given to it. [161 The towns of Asia Minor thus paid a yearly money tribute to ancient
Rome. With this money Rome purchased from them commodities, and purchased them too dear. The
provincials cheated the Romans, and thus got back from their conquerors, in the course of trade, a portion
of the tribute. Yet, for all that, the conquered were the really cheated. Their goods were still paid for with
their own money. That is not the way to get rich or to create surplus-value.

Let us therefore keep within the bounds of exchange where sellers are also buyers, and buyers, sellers.
Our difficulty may perhaps have arisen from treating the actors as personifications instead of as
individuals.

A may be clever enough to get the advantage of B or C without their being able to retaliate. A sells wine
worth £40 to B, and obtains from him in exchange corn to the value of £50. A has converted his £40 into
£50, has made more money out of less, and has converted his commodities into capital. Let us examine
this a little more closely. Before the exchange we had £40 worth of wine in the hands of A, and £50
worth of corn in those of B, a total value of £90. After the exchange we have still the same total value of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (4 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

£90. The value in circulation has not increased by one iota, it is only distributed differently between A
and B. What is a loss of value to B is surplus-value to A; what is "minus" to one is "plus" to the other.
The same change would have taken place, if A, without the formality of an exchange, had directly stolen
the £10 from B. The sum of the values in circulation can clearly not be augmented by any change in their
distribution, any more than the quantity of the precious metals in a country by a Jew selling a Queen
Anne's farthing for a guinea. The capitalist class, as a whole, in any country, cannot over-reach
themselves. |171

Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered. If equivalents are exchanged, no surplus-value
results, and if non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus-value. |181 Circulation, or the exchange of
commodities, begets no value. |191

The reason is now therefore plain why, in analysing the standard form of capital, the form under which it
determines the economic organisation of modern society, we entirely left out of consideration its most
popular, and, so to say, antediluvian forms, merchants' capital and money-lenders' capital.

The circuit M-C-M, buying in order to sell dearer, is seen most clearly in genuine merchants' capital. But
the movement takes place entirely within the sphere of circulation. Since, however, it is impossible, by
circulation alone, to account for the conversion of money into capital, for the formation of surplus-value,
it would appear, that merchants' capital is an impossibility, so long as equivalents are exchanged; [201
that, therefore, it can only have its origin in the two-fold advantage gained, over both the selling and the
buying producers, by the merchant who parasitically shoves himself in between them. It is in this sense
that Franklin says, "war is robbery, commerce is generally cheating." f211 If the transformation of

merchants' money into capital is to be explained otherwise than by the producers being simply cheated, a
long series of intermediate steps would be necessary, which, at present, when the simple circulation of
commodities forms our only assumption, are entirely wanting.

What we have said with reference to merchants' capital, applies still more to money-lenders' capital. In
merchants' capital, the two extremes, the money that is thrown upon the market, and the augmented
money that is withdrawn from the market, are at least connected by a purchase and a sale, in other words
by the movement of the circulation. In money-lenders' capital the form M-C-M is reduced to the two
extremes without a mean, M-M , money exchanged for more money, a form that is incompatible with the
nature of money, and therefore remains inexplicable from the standpoint of the circulation of
commodities. Hence Aristotle: "since chrematistic is a double science, one part belonging to commerce,
the other to economic, the latter being necessary and praiseworthy, the former based on circulation and
with justice disapproved (for it is not based on Nature, but on mutual cheating), therefore the usurer is
most rightly hated, because money itself is the source of his gain, and is not used for the purposes for
which it was invented. For it originated for the exchange of commodities, but interest makes out of
money, more money. Hence its name ([greek: tokos] interest and offspring). For the begotten are like
those who beget them. But interest is money of money, so that of all modes of making a living, this is the
most contrary to Nature." f22]

In the course of our investigation, we shall find that both merchants' capital and interest-bearing capital
are derivative forms, and at the same time it will become clear, why these two forms appear in the course
of history before the modern standard form of capital.

We have shown that surplus-value cannot be created by circulation, and, therefore, that in its formation,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (5 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

something must take place in the background, which is not apparent in the circulation itself. f231 But can
surplus-value possibly originate anywhere else than in circulation, which is the sum total of all the
mutual relations of commodity-owners, as far as they are determined by their commodities? Apart from
circulation, the commodity-owner is in relation only with his own commodity. So far as regards value,
that relation is limited to this, that the commodity contains a quantity of his own labour, that quantity
being measured by a definite social standard. This quantity is expressed by the value of the commodity,
and since the value is reckoned in money of account, this quantity is also expressed by the price, which
we will suppose to be £10. But his labour is not represented both by the value of the commodity, and by
a surplus over that value, not by a price of 10 that is also a price of 1 1, not by a value that is greater than
itself. The commodity owner can, by his labour, create value, but not self-expanding value. He can
increase the value of his commodity, by adding fresh labour, and therefore more value to the value in
hand, by making, for instance, leather into boots. The same material has now more value, because it
contains a greater quantity of labour. The boots have therefore more value than the leather, but the value
of the leather remains what it was; it has not expanded itself, has not, during the making of the boots,
annexed surplus-value. It is therefore impossible that outside the sphere of circulation, a producer of
commodities can, without coming into contact with other commodity-owners, expand value, and
consequently convert money or commodities into capital.

It is therefore impossible for capital to be produced by circulation, and it is equally impossible for it to
originate apart from circulation. It must have its origin both in circulation and yet not in circulation.

We have, therefore, got a double result.

The conversion of money into capital has to be explained on the basis of the laws that regulate the
exchange of commodities, in such a way that the starting-point is the exchange of equivalents. f24] Our
friend, Moneybags, who as yet is only an embryo capitalist, must buy his commodities at their value,
must sell them at their value, and yet at the end of the process must withdraw more value from
circulation than he threw into it at starting. His development into a full-grown capitalist must take place,
both within the sphere of circulation and without it. These are the conditions of the problem. Hie Rhodus,
hie salta!



Footnotes

T 1 1 "L'echange est une transaction admirable dans laquelle les deux contractants gagnent - toujours (!)"
(Destutt de Tracy: "Traite de la Volonte et de ses effets." Paris, 1826, p. 68.) This work appeared
afterwards as "Traite d'Econ. Polit."

[21 "Mercier de la Riviere," 1. c, p. 544.

[31 "Que l'une de ces deux valeurs soit argent, ou queues soient toutes deux marchandises usuelles, rien
de plus indifferent en soi." ("Mercier de la Riviere," 1. c, p. 543.)

[4J "Ce ne sont pas les contractants qui prononcent sur la valeur; elle est decidee avant la convention."
(Le Trosne, p. 906.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (6 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

\5] "Dove e egualita non e lucro." (Galiani, "Delia Moneta in Custodi, Parte Moderna," t. iv., p. 244.)

[6] "L'echange devient desavantageux pour l'une des parties, lorsque quelque chose etrangere vient
diminuer ou exagerer le prix; alors l'egalite est blessee, mais la lesion procede de cette cause et non de
l'echange." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 904.)

[71 "L'echange est de sa nature un contrat d'egalite qui se fait de valeur pour valeur egale. II n'est done
pas un moyen de s'enrichir, puisque Ton donne autant que Ton recoit." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 903.)

[81 Condillac: "Le Commerce et la Gouvernement" (1776). Edit. Daire et Molinari in the "Melanges
d'Econ. Polit." Paris, 1847, pp. 267, 291.

[9J Le Trosne, therefore, answers his friend Condillac with justice as follows: "Dans une ... societe
formee il n'y a pas de surabondant en aucun genre." At the same time, in a bantering way, he remarks: "If
both the persons who exchange receive more to an equal amount, and part with less to an equal amount,
they both get the same." It is because Condillac has not the remotest idea of the nature of exchange-value
that he has been chosen by Herr Professor Wilhelm Roscher as a proper person to answer for the
soundness of his own childish notions. See Roscher's "Die Grundlagen der Nationalokonomie, Dritte
Auflage," 1858.

[10] S. P. Newman: "Elements of Polit. Econ." Andover and New York, 1835, p. 175.

fill "By the augmentation of the nominal value of the produce... sellers not enriched... since what they
gain as sellers, they precisely expend in the quality of buyers." ("The Essential Principles of the Wealth
of Nations." &c, London, 1797, p. 66.)

fl21 "Si Ton est force de donner pour 18 livres une quantite de telle production qui en valait 24, lorsqu'on
employera ce meme argent a acheter, on aura egalement pour 18 1. ce que Ton payait 24." (Le Trosne, I.
c.,p. 897.)

f 131 "Chaque vendeur ne peut done parvenir a rencherir habituellement ses marchandises, qu'en se
soumettant aussi a payer habituellement plus cher les marchandises des autres vendeurs; et par la meme
raison, chaque consommateur ne peut payer habituellement moins cher ce qu 'il achete, qu'en se
soumettant aussi a une diminution semblance sur le prix des choses qu'il vend." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1.
c, p. 555.)

f 141 Torrens. "An Essay on the Production of Wealth." London, 1821, p. 349.

f 151 The idea of profits being paid by the consumers, is, assuredly, very absurd. Who are the
consumers?" (G. Ramsay: "An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth." Edinburgh, 1836, p. 183.)

f 161 "When a man is in want of a demand, does Mr. Malthus recommend him to pay some other person
to take off his goods?" is a question put by an angry disciple of Ricardo to Malthus, who, like his
disciple, Parson Chalmers, economically glorifies this class of simple buyers or consumers. (See "An
Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand and the Necessity of Consumption, lately
advocated by Mr. Malthus," &c. Lond., 1821, p. 55.)

f 171 Destutt de Tracy, although, or perhaps because, he was a member of the Institute, held the opposite



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (7 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

view. He says, industrial capitalists make profits because "they all sell for more than it has cost to
produce. And to whom do they sell? In the first instance to one another." (I. c, p. 239.)

f 181 "L'echange qui se fait de deux valeurs egales n'augmente ni ne diminue la masse des valeurs
subsistantes dans la societe. L'echange de deux valeurs inegales ... ne change rien non plus a la somme
des valeurs sociales, bien qu'il ajoute a la fortune de l'un ce qu'il ete de la fortune de I'autre." (J. B. Say, 1.
c, t. II, pp. 443, 444.) Say, not in the least troubled as to the consequences of this statement, borrows it,
almost word for word, from the Physiocrats. The following example will show how Monsieur Say turned
to account the writings of the Physiocrats, in his day quite forgotten, for the purpose of expanding the
"value" of his own. His most celebrated saying, "On n'achete des produits qu'avec des produits" (I. c, t.
II. p. 441.) runs as follows in the original physiocratic work: "Les productions ne se paient qu'avec des
productions." (Le Trosne, . c, p. 899.)

f 191 "Exchange confers no value at all upon products." (F. Wayland: "The Elements of Political
Economy." Boston, 1843, p. 169.)

f201 Under the rule of invariable equivalents commerce would be impossible. (G. Opdyke: "A Treatise
on Polit. Economy." New York, 1851, pp. 66-69.) "The difference between real value and
exchange- value is based upon this fact, namely, that the value of a thing is different from the so-called
equivalent given for it in trade, i.e., that this equivalent is no equivalent." (F. Engels, 1. c, p. 96).

f211 Benjamin Franklin: Works, Vol. II, edit. Sparks in "Positions to be examined concerning National
Wealth," p. 376.

[22J Aristotle, I. c, c. 10.

f231 "Profit, in the usual condition of the market, is not made by exchanging. Had it not existed before,
neither could it after that transaction." (Ramsay, 1. c, p. 184.)

f241 From the foregoing investigation, the reader will see that this statement only means that the
formation of capital must be possible even though the price and value of a commodity be the same; for
its formation cannot be attributed to any deviation of the one from the other. If prices actually differ from
values, we must, first of all, reduce the former to the latter, in other words, treat the difference as
accidental in order that the phenomena may be observed in their purity, and our observations not
interfered with by disturbing circumstances that have nothing to do with the process in question. We
know, moreover, that this reduction is no mere scientific process. The continual oscillations in prices,
their rising and falling, compensate each other, and reduce themselves to an average price, which is their
hidden regulator. It forms the guiding star of the merchant or the manufacturer in every undertaking that
requires time. He knows that when a long period of time is taken, commodities are sold neither over nor
under, but at their average price. If therefore he thought about the matter at all, he would formulate the
problem of the formation of capital as follows: How can we account for the origin of capital on the
supposition that prices are regulated by the average price, i. e., ultimately by the value of the
commodities? I say "ultimately," because average prices do not directly coincide with the values of
commodities, as Adam Smith, Ricardo, and others believe.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (8 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Six: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (9 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part II:

The Transformation of Money in Capital



CHAPTER SIX:

THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER



The change of value that occurs in the case of money intended to be converted into capital, cannot take
place in the money itself, since in its function of means of purchase and of payment, it does no more than
realise the price of the commodity it buys or pays for; and, as hard cash, it is value petrified, never
varying. JJJ Just as little can it originate in the second act of circulation, the re-sale of the commodity,
which does no more than transform the article from its bodily form back again into its money-form. The
change must, therefore, take place in the commodity bought by the first act, M-C, but not in its value, for
equivalents are exchanged, and the commodity is paid for at its full value. We are, therefore, forced to
the conclusion that the change originates in the use- value, as such, of the commodity, i.e., in its
consumption. In order to be able to extract value from the consumption of a commodity, our friend,
Moneybags, must be so lucky as to find, within the sphere of circulation, in the market, a commodity,
whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value, whose actual consumption,
therefore, is itself an embodiment of labour, and, consequently, a creation of value. The possessor of
money does find on the market such a special commodity in capacity for labour or labour-power.

By labour-power or capacity for labour is to be understood the aggregate of those mental and physical
capabilities existing in a human being, which he exercises whenever he produces a use-value of any
description.

But in order that our owner of money may be able to find labour-power offered for sale as a commodity,
various conditions must first be fulfilled. The exchange of commodities of itself implies no other
relations of dependence than those which, result from its own nature. On this assumption, labour-power
can appear upon the market as a commodity, only if, and so far as, its possessor, the individual whose
labour-power it is, offers it for sale, or sells it, as a commodity. In order that he may be able to do this, he
must have it at his disposal, must be the untrammelled owner of his capacity for labour, i.e., of his
person. [2\ He and the owner of money meet in the market, and deal with each other as on the basis of
equal rights, with this difference alone, that one is buyer, the other seller; both, therefore, equal in the
eyes of the law. The continuance of this relation demands that the owner of the labour-power should sell
it only for a definite period, for if he were to sell it rump and stump, once for all, he would be selling
himself, converting himself from a free man into a slave, from an owner of a commodity into a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

commodity. He must constantly look upon his labour-power as his own property, his own commodity,
and this he can only do by placing it at the disposal of the buyer temporarily, for a definite period of
time. By this means alone can he avoid renouncing his rights of ownership over it. \3]

The second essential condition to the owner of money finding labour-power in the market as a
commodity is this — that the labourer instead of being in the position to sell commodities in which his
labour is incorporated, must be obliged to offer for sale as a commodity that very labour-power, which
exists only in his living self.

In order that a man may be able to sell commodities other than labour-power, he must of course have the
means of production, as raw material, implements, &c. No boots can be made without leather. He
requires also the means of subsistence. Nobody — not even "a musician of the future" — can live upon
future products, or upon use-values in an unfinished state; and ever since the first moment of his
appearance on the world's stage, man always has been, and must still be a consumer, both before and
while he is producing. In a society where all products assume the form of commodities, these
commodities must be sold after they have been produced, it is only after their sale that they can serve in
satisfying the requirements of their producer. The time necessary for their sale is superadded to that
necessary for their production.

For the conversion of his money into capital, therefore, the owner of money must meet in the market with
the free labourer, free in the double sense, that as a free man he can dispose of his labour-power as his
own commodity, and that on the other hand he has no other commodity for sale, is short of everything
necessary for the realisation of his labour-power.

The question why this free labourer confronts him in the market, has no interest for the owner of money,
who regards the labour-market as a branch of the general market for commodities. And for the present it
interests us just as little. We cling to the fact theoretically, as he does practically. One thing, however, is
clear — Nature does not produce on the one side owners of money or commodities, and on the other men
possessing nothing but their own labour-power. This relation has no natural basis, neither is its social
basis one that is common to all historical periods. It is clearly the result of a past historical development,
the product of many economic revolutions, of the extinction of a whole series of older forms of social
production.

So, too, the economic categories, already discussed by us, bear the stamp of history. Definite historical
conditions are necessary that a product may become a commodity. It must not be produced as the
immediate means of subsistence of the producer himself. Had we gone further, and inquired under what
circumstances all, or even the majority of products take the form of commodities, we should have found
that this can only happen with production of a very specific kind, capitalist production. Such an inquiry,
however, would have been foreign to the analysis of commodities. Production and circulation of
commodities can take place, although the great mass of the objects produced are intended for the
immediate requirements of their producers, are not turned into commodities, and consequently social
production is not yet by a long way dominated in its length and breadth by exchange- value. The
appearance of products as commodities pre-supposes such a development of the social division of labour,
that the separation of use-value from exchange-value, a separation which first begins with barter, must
already have been completed. But such a degree of development is common to many forms of society,
which in other respects present the most varying historical features. On the other hand, if we consider
money, its existence implies a definite stage in the exchange of commodities. The particular functions of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

money which it performs, either as the mere equivalent of commodities, or as means of circulation, or
means of payment, as hoard or as universal money, point, according to the extent and relative
preponderance of the one function or the other, to very different stages in the process of social
production. Yet we know by experience that a circulation of commodities relatively primitive, suffices
for the production of all these forms. Otherwise with capital. The historical conditions of its existence are
by no means given with the mere circulation of money and commodities. It can spring into life, only
when the owner of the means of production and subsistence meets in the market with the free labourer
selling his labour-power. And this one historical condition comprises a world's history. Capital, therefore,
announces from its first appearance a new epoch in the process of social production. [41

We must now examine more closely this peculiar commodity, labour-power. Like all others it has a
value. [51 How is that value determined?

The value of labour-power is determined, as in the case of every other commodity, by the labour-time
necessary for the production, and consequently also the reproduction, of this special article. So far as it
has value, it represents no more than a definite quantity of the average labour of society incorporated in
it. Labour-power exists only as a capacity, or power of the living individual. Its production consequently
pre-supposes his existence. Given the individual, the production of labour-power consists in his
reproduction of himself or his maintenance. For his maintenance he requires a given quantity of the
means of subsistence. Therefore the labour-time requisite for the production of labour-power reduces
itself to that necessary for the production of those means of subsistence; in other words, the value of
labour-power is the value of the means of subsistence necessary for the maintenance of the labourer.
Labour-power, however, becomes a reality only by its exercise; it sets itself in action only by working.
But thereby a definite quantity of human muscle, nerve, brain, &c, is wasted, and these require to be
restored. This increased expenditure demands a larger income. [6[ If the owner of labour-power works
to-day, to-morrow he must again be able to repeat the same process in the same conditions as regards
health and strength. His means of subsistence must therefore be sufficient to maintain him in his normal
state as a labouring individual. His natural wants, such as food, clothing, fuel, and housing, vary
according to the climatic and other physical conditions of his country. On the other hand, the number and
extent of his so-called necessary wants, as also the modes of satisfying them, are themselves the product
of historical development, and depend therefore to a great extent on the degree of civilisation of a
country, more particularly on the conditions under which, and consequently on the habits and degree of
comfort in which, the class of free labourers has been formed. [71 In contradistinction therefore to the
case of other commodities, there enters into the determination of the value of labour-power a historical
and moral element. Nevertheless, in a given country, at a given period, the average quantity of the means
of subsistence necessary for the labourer is practically known.

The owner of labour-power is mortal. If then his appearance in the market is to be continuous, and the
continuous conversion of money into capital assumes this, the seller of labour-power must perpetuate
himself, "in the way that every living individual perpetuates himself, by procreation." [81 The
labour-power withdrawn from the market by wear and tear and death, must be continually replaced by, at
the very least, an equal amount of fresh labour-power. Hence the sum of the means of subsistence
necessary for the production of labour-power must include the means necessary for the labourer's
substitutes, i.e., his children, in order that this race of peculiar commodity-owners may perpetuate its
appearance in the market. \9]



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

In order to modify the human organism, so that it may acquire skill and handiness in a given branch of
industry, and become labour-power of a special kind, a special education or training is requisite, and this,
on its part, costs an equivalent in commodities of a greater or less amount. This amount varies according
to the more or less complicated character of the labour-power. The expenses of this education
(excessively small in the case of ordinary labour-power), enter pro tanto into the total value spent in its
production.

The value of labour-power resolves itself into the value of a definite quantity of the means of subsistence.
It therefore varies with the value of these means or with the quantity of labour requisite for their
production.

Some of the means of subsistence, such as food and fuel, are consumed daily, and a fresh supply must be
provided daily. Others such as clothes and furniture last for longer periods and require to be replaced
only at longer intervals. One article must be bought or paid for daily, another weekly, another quarterly,
and so on. But in whatever way the sum total of these outlays may be spread over the year, they must be
covered by the average income, taking one day with another. If the total of the commodities required
daily for the production of labour-power = A, and those required weekly = B, and those required
quarterly = C, and so on, the daily average of these commodities = 365 A + 52B + 4C + &c / 365.
Suppose that in this mass of commodities requisite for the average day there are embodied 6 hours of
social labour, then there is incorporated daily in labour-power half a day's average social labour, in other
words, half a day's labour is requisite for the daily production of labour-power. This quantity of labour
forms the value of a day's labour-power or the value of the labour-power daily reproduced. If half a day's
average social labour is incorporated in three shillings, then three shillings is the price corresponding to
the value of a day's labour-power. If its owner therefore offers it for sale at three shillings a day, its
selling price is equal to its value, and according to our supposition, our friend Moneybags, who is intent
upon converting his three shillings into capital, pays this value.

The minimum limit of the value of labour-power is determined by the value of the commodities, without
the daily supply of which the labourer cannot renew his vital energy, consequently by the value of those
means of subsistence that are physically indispensable. If the price of labour-power fall to this minimum,
it falls below its value, since under such circumstances it can be maintained and developed only in a
crippled state. But the value of every commodity is determined by the labour-time requisite to turn it out
so as to be of normal quality.

It is a very cheap sort of sentimentality which declares this method of determining the value of
labour-power, a method prescribed by the very nature of the case, to be a brutal method, and which wails
with Rossi that, "To comprehend capacity for labour (puissance de travail) at the same time that we make
abstraction from the means of subsistence of the labourers during the process of production, is to
comprehend a phantom (etre de raison). When we speak of labour, or capacity for labour, we speak at the
same time of the labourer and his means of subsistence, of labourer and wages." flQl When we speak of
capacity for labour, we do not speak of labour, any more than when we speak of capacity for digestion,
we speak of digestion. The latter process requires something more than a good stomach. When we speak
of capacity for labour, we do not abstract from the necessary means of subsistence. On the contrary, their
value is expressed in its value. If his capacity for labour remains unsold, the labourer derives no benefit
from it, but rather he will feel it to be a cruel nature-imposed necessity that this capacity has cost for its
production a definite amount of the means of subsistence and that it will continue to do so for its
reproduction. He will then agree with Sismondi: "that capacity for labour ... is nothing unless it is sold."

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

Oil

One consequence of the peculiar nature of labour-power as a commodity is, that its use-value does not,
on the conclusion of the contract between the buyer and seller, immediately pass into the hands of the
former. Its value, like that of every other commodity, is already fixed before it goes into circulation,
since a definite quantity of social labour has been spent upon it; but its use-value consists in the
subsequent exercise of its force. The alienation of labour-power and its actual appropriation by the buyer,
its employment as a use-value, are separated by an interval of time. But in those cases in which the
formal alienation by sale of the use-value of a commodity, is not simultaneous with its actual delivery to
the buyer, the money of the latter usually functions as means of payment. f!21 In every country in which
the capitalist mode of production reigns, it is the custom not to pay for labour-power before it has been
exercised for the period fixed by the contract, as for example, the end of each week. In all cases,
therefore, the use- value of the labour-power is advanced to the capitalist: the labourer allows the buyer to
consume it before he receives payment of the price; he everywhere gives credit to the capitalist. That this
credit is no mere fiction, is shown not only by the occasional loss of wages on the bankruptcy of the
capitalist, fl 31 but also by a series of more enduring consequences. |141 Nevertheless, whether money
serves as a means of purchase or as a means of payment, this makes no alteration in the nature of the
exchange of commodities. The price of the labour-power is fixed by the contract, although it is not
realised till later, like the rent of a house. The labour-power is sold, although it is only paid for at a later
period. It will, therefore, be useful, for a clear comprehension of the relation of the parties, to assume
provisionally, that the possessor of labour-power, on the occasion of each sale, immediately receives the
price stipulated to be paid for it.

We now know how the value paid by the purchaser to the possessor of this peculiar commodity,
labour-power, is determined. The use-value which the former gets in exchange, manifests itself only in
the actual usufruct, in the consumption of the labour-power. The money-owner buys everything
necessary for this purpose, such as raw material, in the market, and pays for it at its full value. The
consumption of labour-power is at one and the same time the production of commodities and of
surplus-value. The consumption of labour-power is completed, as in the case of every other commodity,
outside the limits of the market or of the sphere of circulation. Accompanied by Mr. Moneybags and by
the possessor of labour-power, we therefore take leave for a time of this noisy sphere, where everything
takes place on the surface and in view of all men, and follow them both into the hidden abode of
production, on whose threshold there stares us in the face "No admittance except on business." Here we
shall see, not only how capital produces, but how capital is produced. We shall at last force the secret of
profit making.

This sphere that we are deserting, within whose boundaries the sale and purchase of labour-power goes
on, is in fact a very Eden of the innate rights of man. There alone rule Freedom, Equality, Property and
Bentham. Freedom, because both buyer and seller of a commodity, say of labour-power, are constrained
only by their own free will. They contract as free agents, and the agreement they come to, is but the form
in which they give legal expression to their common will. Equality, because each enters into relation with
the other, as with a simple owner of commodities, and they exchange equivalent for equivalent. Property,
because each disposes only of what is his own. And Bentham, because each looks only to himself. The
only force that brings them together and puts them in relation with each other, is the selfishness, the gain
and the private interests of each. Each looks to himself only, and no one troubles himself about the rest,
and just because they do so, do they all, in accordance with the pre-established harmony of things, or



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

under the auspices of an all-shrewd providence, work together to their mutual advantage, for the common
weal and in the interest of all.

On leaving this sphere of simple circulation or of exchange of commodities, which furnishes the
"Free-trader Vulgaris" with his views and ideas, and with the standard by which he judges a society
based on capital and wages, we think we can perceive a change in the physiognomy of our dramatis
personae. He, who before was the money-owner, now strides in front as capitalist; the possessor of
labour-power follows as his labourer. The one with an air of importance, smirking, intent on business;
the other, timid and holding back, like one who is bringing his own hide to market and has nothing to
expect but — a hiding.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "In the form of money ... capital is productive of no profit." (Ricardo: '"Princ. of Pol. Econ.," p. 267.)

\2] In encyclopaedias of classical antiquities we find such nonsense as this — that in the ancient world
capital was fully developed, "except that the free labourer and a system of credit was wanting."
Mommsen also, in his "History of Rome," commits, in this respect, one blunder after another.

[3] Hence legislation in various countries fixes a maximum for labour-contracts. Wherever free labour is
the rule, the laws regulate the mode of terminating this contract. In some States, particularly in Mexico
(before the American Civil War, also in the territories taken from Mexico, and also, as a matter of fact, in
the Danubian provinces till the revolution effected by Kusa), slavery is hidden under the form of
peonage. By means of advances, repayable in labour, which are handed down from generation to
generation, not only the individual labourer, but his family, become, de facto, the property of other
persons and their families. Juarez abolished peonage. The so-called Emperor Maximilian re-established it
by a decree, which, in the House of Representatives at Washington, was aptly denounced as a decree for
the re-introduction of slavery into Mexico. "I may make over to another the use, for a limited time, of my
particular bodily and mental aptitudes and capabilities; because in consequence of this restriction, they
are impressed with a character of alienation with regard to me as a whole. But by the alienation of all my
labour-time and the whole of my work, I should be converting the substance itself, in other words, my
general activity and reality, my person, into the property of another." (Hegel, "Philosophic des Rechts."
Berlin, 1840, p. 104, § 67.)

[4J The capitalist epoch is therefore characterised by this, that labour-power takes in the eyes of the
labourer himself the form of a commodity which is his property; his labour consequently becomes
wage-labour. On the other hand, it is only from this moment that the produce of labour universally
becomes a commodity.

[5] "The value or worth of a man, is as of all other things his price — that is to say, so much as would be
given for the use of his power." (Th. Hobbes: "Leviathan" in Works, Ed. Molesworth. Lond. 1839-44, v.
iii. p. 76.)

\6\ Hence the Roman Villicus, as overlooker of the agricultural slaves, received "more meagre fare than
working slaves, because his work was lighter." (Th. Mommsen, Rom. Geschichte, 1856, p. 810.)

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

JT[ Compare W. Th. Thornton: "Over-population and its Remedy," Lond., 1846.

[81 Petty.

[91 "Its (labour's) natural price ... consists in such a quantity of necessaries and comforts of life, as, from
the nature of the climate, and the habits of the country, are necessary to support the labourer, and to
enable him to rear such a family as may preserve, in the market, an undiminished supply of labour." (R.
Torrens: "An Essay on the External Corn Trade." Lond. 1815, p. 62.) The word labour is here wrongly
used for labour-power.

[101 Rossi: "Cours d'Econ. Polit.," Bruxelles, 1842, p. 370.

rill Sismondi: "Nouv. Princ. etc.," 1. 1, p. 112.

fl21 "All labour is paid after it has ceased." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of
Demand," &c, p. 104.) Le credit commercial a du commencer au moment ou l'ouvrier, premier artisan
de la production, a pu, au moyen de ses economies, attendre le salaire de son travail jusqu'a la fin de la
semaine, de la quinzaine, du mois, du trimestre, &c." (Ch. Ganilh: "Des Systemes d'Econ. Polit." 2eme
edit. Paris, 1821, t. II, p. 150.)

f 131 "L'ouvrier prete son industrie," but adds Storch slyly: he "risks nothing" except "de perdre son
salaire ... l'ouvrier ne transmet rien de materiel." (Storch: "Cours d'Econ. Polit." Petersbourg, 1815, t. II. ,
p. 37.)

f 141 One example. In London there are two sorts of bakers, the "full priced," who sell bread at its full
value, and the "undersellers," who sell it under its value. The latter class comprises more than
three-fourths of the total number of bakers, (p. xxxii in the Report of H. S. Tremenheere, commissioner
to examine into "the grievances complained of by the journeymen bakers", &c, Lond. 1862.) The
undersellers, almost without exception, sell bread adulterated with alum, soap, pearl ashes, chalk,
Derbyshire stone-dust, and such like agreeable nourishing and wholesome ingredients. (See the above
cited Blue book, as also the report of "the committee of 1855 on the adulteration of bread," and Dr.
Hassall's "Adulterations Detected," 2nd Ed. Lond. 1861.) Sir John Gordon stated before the committee of
1855, that "in consequence of these adulterations, the poor man, who lives on two pounds of bread a day,
does not now get one fourth part of nourishing matter, let alone the deleterious effects on his health. "
Tremenheere states (1. c, p. xlviii), as the reason, why a very large part of the working-class, although
well aware of this adulteration, nevertheless accept the alum, stone-dust, &c, as part of their purchase:
that it is for them "a matter of necessity to take from their baker or from the chandler's shop, such bread
as they choose to supply." As they are not paid their wages before the end of the week, they in their turn
are unable "to pay for the bread consumed by their families, during the week, before the end of the
week", and Tremenheere adds on the evidence of witnesses, "it is notorious that bread composed of those
mixtures, is made expressly for sale in this manner." In many English and still more Scotch agricultural
districts, wages are paid fortnightly and even monthly; with such long intervals between the payments,
the agricultural labourer is obliged to buy on credit.... He must pay higher prices, and is in fact tied to the
shop which gives him credit. Thus at Horningham in Wilts, for example, where the wages are monthly,
the same flour that he could buy elsewhere at Is lOd per stone, costs him 2s 4d per stone. ("Sixth Report"
on "Public Health" by "The Medical Officer of the Privy Council, &c, 1864," p.264.) "The block printers
of Paisley and Kilmarnock enforced, by a strike, fortnightly, instead of monthly payment of wages."

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

("Reports of the Inspectors of Factories for 31st Oct., 1853," p. 34.) As a further pretty result of the credit
given by the workmen to the capitalist, we may refer to the method current in many English coal mines,
where the labourer is not paid till the end of the month, and in the meantime, receives sums on account
from the capitalist, often in goods for which the miner is obliged to pay more than the market price
(Truck-system). "It is a common practice with the coal masters to pay once a month, and advance cash to
their workmen at the end of each intermediate week. The cash is given in the shop" (i.e., the Tommy
shop which belongs to the master); "the men take it on one side and lay it out on the other." ("Children's
Employment Commission, III. Report," Lond. 1864, p. 38, n. 192.)



Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Seven: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus- Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute

Surplus-Value



CHAPTER SEVEN:

THE LABOUR-PROCESS AND THE PROCESS OF PRODUCING

SURPLUS-VALUE



Contents

Section 1 - The Labour-Process or the Production of Use-Values
Section 2 - The Production of Surplus-Value

SECTION 1.

THE LABOUR-PROCESS OR THE PRODUCTION OF USE-VALUES



The capitalist buys labour-power in order to use it; and labour-power in use is labour itself. The
purchaser of labour-power consumes it by setting the seller of it to work. By working, the latter becomes
actually, what before he only was potentially, labour-power in action, a labourer. In order that his labour
may re-appear in a commodity, he must, before all things, expend it on something useful, on something
capable of satisfying a want of some sort. Hence, what the capitalist sets the labourer to produce, is a
particular use-value, a specified article. The fact that the production of use-values, or goods, is carried on
under the control of a capitalist and on his behalf, does not alter the general character of that production.
We shall, therefore, in the first place, have to consider the labour-process independently of the particular
form it assumes under given social conditions.

Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man and Nature participate, and in which man of his
own accord starts, regulates, and controls the material re-actions between himself and Nature. He
opposes himself to Nature as one of her own forces, setting in motion arms and legs, head and hands, the
natural forces of his body, in order to appropriate Nature's productions in a form adapted to his own
wants. By thus acting on the external world and changing it, he at the same time changes his own nature.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (1 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

He develops his slumbering powers and compels them to act in obedience to his sway. We are not now
dealing with those primitive instinctive forms of labour that remind us of the mere animal. An
immeasurable interval of time separates the state of things in which a man brings his labour-power to
market for sale as a commodity, from that state in which human labour was still in its first instinctive
stage. We pre-suppose labour in a form that stamps it as exclusively human. A spider conducts
operations that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an architect in the construction
of her cells. But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is this, that the architect
raises his structure in imagination before he erects it in reality. At the end of every labour-process, we get
a result that already existed in the imagination of the labourer at its commencement. He not only effects a
change of form in the material on which he works, but he also realises a purpose of his own that gives the
law to his modus operandi, and to which he must subordinate his will. And this subordination is no mere
momentary act. Besides the exertion of the bodily organs, the process demands that, during the whole
operation, the workman's will be steadily in consonance with his purpose. This means close attention.
The less he is attracted by the nature of the work, and the mode in which it is carried on, and the less,
therefore, he enjoys it as something which gives play to his bodily and mental powers, the more close his
attention is forced to be.

The elementary factors of the labour-process are 1, the personal activity of man, i.e., work itself, 2, the
subject of that work, and 3, its instruments.

The soil (and this, economically speaking, includes water) in the virgin state in which it supplies £JJ man
with necessaries or the means of subsistence ready to hand, exists independently of him, and is the
universal subject of human labour. All those things which labour merely separates from immediate
connexion with their environment, are subjects of labour spontaneously provided by Nature. Such are
fish which we catch and take from their element, water, timber which we fell in the virgin forest, and
ores which we extract from their veins. If, on the other hand, the subject of labour has, so to say, been
filtered through previous labour, we call it raw material; such is ore already extracted and ready for
washing. All raw material is the subject of labour, but not every subject of labour is raw material: it can
only become so, after it has undergone some alteration by means of labour.

An instrument of labour is a thing, or a complex of things, which the labourer interposes between himself
and the subject of his labour, and which serves as the conductor of his activity. He makes use of
the mechanical, physical, and chemical properties of some substances in order to make other substances
subservient to his aims. [2J Leaving out of consideration such ready-made means of subsistence as fruits,
in gathering which a man's own limbs serve as the instruments of his labour, the first thing of which the
labourer possesses himself is not the subject of labour but its instrument. Thus Nature becomes one of the
organs of his activity, one that he annexes to his own bodily organs, adding stature to himself in spite of
the Bible. As the earth is his original larder, so too it is his original tool house. It supplies him, for
instance, with stones for throwing, grinding, pressing, cutting, &c. The earth itself is an instrument of
labour, but when used as such in agriculture implies a whole series of other instruments and a
comparatively high development of labour. £3J No sooner does labour undergo the least development,
than it requires specially prepared instruments. Thus in the oldest caves we find stone implements and
weapons. In the earliest period of human history domesticated animals, i.e., animals which have been
bred for the purpose, and have undergone modifications by means of labour, play the chief part as
instruments of labour along with specially prepared stones, wood, bones, and shells. [41 The use and
fabrication of instruments of labour, although existing in the germ among certain species of animals, is



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (2 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

specifically characteristic of the human labour-process, and Franklin therefore defines man as a
tool-making animal. Relics of bygone instruments of labour possess the same importance for the
investigation of extinct economic forms of society, as do fossil bones for the determination of extinct
species of animals. It is not the articles made, but how they are made, and by what instruments, that
enables us to distinguish different economic epochs. [5\ Instruments of labour not only supply a standard
of the degree of development to which human labour has attained, but they are also indicators of the
social conditions under which that labour is carried on. Among the instruments of labour, those of a
mechanical nature, which, taken as a whole, we may call the bone and muscles of production, offer much
more decided characteristics of a given epoch of production, than those which, like pipes, tubs, baskets,
jars, &c, serve only to hold the materials for labour, which latter class, we may in a general way, call the
vascular system of production. The latter first begins to play an important part in the chemical industries.

In a wider sense we may include among the instruments of labour, in addition to those things that are
used for directly transferring labour to its subject, and which therefore, in one way or another, serve as
conductors of activity, all such objects as are necessary for carrying on the labour-process. These do not
enter directly into the process, but without them it is either impossible for it to take place at all, or
possible only to a partial extent. Once more we find the earth to be a universal instrument of this sort, for
it furnishes a locus standi to the labourer and a field of employment for his activity. Among instruments
that are the result of previous labour and also belong to this class, we find workshops, canals, roads, and
so forth.

In the labour-process, therefore, man's activity, with the help of the instruments of labour, effects an
alteration, designed from the commencement, in the material worked upon. The process disappears in the
product, the latter is a use-value, Nature's material adapted by a change of form to the wants of man.
Labour has incorporated itself with its subject: the former is materialised, the latter transformed. That
which in the labourer appeared as movement, now appears in the product as a fixed quality without
motion. The blacksmith forges and the product is a forging.

If we examine the whole process from the point of view of its result, the product, it is plain that both the
instruments and the subject of labour, are means of production, [6] and that the labour itself is productive
labour. [7]

Though a use- value, in the form of a product, issues from the labour-process, yet other use-values,
products of previous labour, enter into it as means of production. The same-use-value is both the product
of a previous process, and a means of production in a later process. Products are therefore not only
results, but also essential conditions of labour.

With the exception of the extractive industries, in which the material for labour is provided immediately
by Nature, such as mining, hunting, fishing, and agriculture (so far as the latter is confined to breaking up
virgin soil), all branches of industry manipulate raw material, objects already filtered through labour,
already products of labour. Such is seed in agriculture. Animals and plants, which we are accustomed to
consider as products of Nature, are in their present form, not only products of, say last year's labour, but
the result of a gradual transformation, continued through many generations, under man's
superintendence, and by means of his labour. But in the great majority of cases, instruments of labour
show even to the most superficial observer, traces of the labour of past ages.

Raw material may either form the principal substance of a product, or it may enter into its formation only



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (3 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

as an accessory. An accessory may be consumed by the instruments of labour, as coal under a boiler, oil
by a wheel, hay by draft-horses, or it may be mixed with the raw material in order to produce some
modification thereof, as chlorine into unbleached linen, coal with iron, dye-stuff with wool, or again, it
may help to carry on the work itself, as in the case of the materials used for heating and lighting
workshops. The distinction between principal substance and accessory vanishes in the true chemical
industries, because there none of the raw material re-appears, in its original composition, in the substance
of the product. [8]

Every object possesses various properties, and is thus capable of being applied to different uses. One and
the same product may therefore serve as raw material in very different processes. Corn, for example, is a
raw material for millers, starch-manufacturers, distillers, and cattlebreeders. It also enters as raw material
into its own production in the shape of seed; coal, too, is at the same time the product of, and a means of
production in, coal-mining.

Again, a particular product may be used in one and the same process, both as an instrument of labour and
as raw material. Take, for instance, the fattening of cattle, where the animal is the raw material, and at the
same time an instrument for the production of manure.

A product, though ready for immediate consumption, may yet serve as raw material for a further product,
as grapes when they become the raw material for wine. On the other hand, labour may give us its product
in such a form, that we can use it only a's raw material, as is the case with cotton, thread, and yarn. Such
a raw material, though itself a product, may have to go through a whole series of different processes: in
each of these in turn, it serves, with constantly varying form, as raw material, until the last process of the
series leaves it a perfect product, ready for individual consumption, or for use as an instrument of labour.

Hence we see, that whether a use-value is to be regarded as raw material, as instrument of labour, or as
product, this is determined entirely by its function in the labour-process, by the position it there occupies:
as this varies, so does its character.

Whenever therefore a product enters as a means of production into a new labour-process, it thereby loses
its character of product, and becomes a mere factor in the process. A spinner treats spindles only as
implements for spinning, and flax only as the material that he spins. Of course it is impossible to spin
without material and spindles; and therefore the existence of these things as products, at the
commencement of the spinning operation, must be presumed: but in the process itself, the fact that they
are products of previous labour, is a matter of utter indifference; just as in the digestive process, it is of
no importance whatever, that bread is the produce of the previous labour of the farmer, the miller, and
the baker. On the contrary, it is generally by their imperfections as products, that the means of production
in any process assert themselves in their character of products. A blunt knife or weak thread forcibly
remind us of Mr. A., the cutler, or Mr. B., the spinner. In the finished product the labour by means of
which it has acquired its useful qualities is not palpable, has apparently vanished.

A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is useless. In addition, it falls a prey to the
destructive influence of natural forces. Iron rusts and wood rots. Yarn with which we neither weave nor
knit, is cotton wasted. Living labour must seize upon these things and rouse them from their death-sleep,
change them from mere possible use-values into real and effective ones. Bathed in the fire of labour,
appropriated as part and parcel of labour's organism, and, as it were, made alive for the performance of
their functions in the process, they are in truth consumed, but consumed with a purpose, as elementary
constituents of new use- values, of new products, ever ready as means of subsistence for individual

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (4 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

consumption, or as means of production for some new labour-process.

If then, on the one hand, finished products are not only results, but also necessary conditions, of the
labour-process, on the other hand, their assumption into that process, their contact with living labour, is
the sole means by which they can be made to retain their character of use-values, and be utilised.

Labour uses up its material factors, its subject and its instruments, consumes them, and is therefore a
process of consumption. Such productive consumption is distinguished from individual consumption by
this, that the latter uses up products, as means of subsistence for the living individual; the former, as
means whereby alone, labour, the labour-power of the living individual, is enabled to act. The product,
therefore, of individual consumption, is the consumer himself; the result of productive consumption, is a
product distinct from the consumer.

In so far then, as its instruments and subjects are themselves products, labour consumes products in order
to create products, or in other words, consumes one set of products by turning them into means of
production for another set. But, just as in the beginning, the only participators in the labour-process were
man and the earth, which latter exists independently of man, so even now we still employ in the process
many means of production, provided directly by Nature, that do not represent any combination of natural
substances with human labour.

The labour-process, resolved as above into its simple elementary factors, is human action with a view to
the production of use-values, appropriation of natural substances to human requirements; it is the
necessary condition for effecting exchange of matter between man and Nature; it is the everlasting
Nature-imposed condition of human existence, and therefore is independent of every social phase of that
existence, or rather, is common to every such phase. It was, therefore, not necessary to represent our
labourer in connexion with other labourers; man and his labour on one side, Nature and its materials on
the other, sufficed. As the taste of the porridge does not tell you who grew the oats, no more does this
simple process tell you of itself what are the social conditions under which it is taking place, whether
under the slave-owner's brutal lash, or the anxious eye of the capitalist, whether Cincinnatus carries it on
in tilling his modest farm or a savage in killing wild animals with stones. [9J

Let us now return to our would-be capitalist. We left him just after he had purchased, in the open market,
all the necessary factors of the labour-process- its objective factors, the means of production, as well as
its subjective factor, labour-power. With the keen eye of an expert, he has selected the means of
production and the kind of labour-power best adapted to his particular trade, be it spinning, bootmaking,
or any other kind. He then proceeds to consume the commodity, the labour-power that he has just bought,
by causing the labourer, the impersonation of that labour-power, to consume the means of production by
his labour. The general character of the labour-process is evidently not changed by the fact, that the
labourer works for the capitalist instead of for himself; moreover, the particular methods and operations
employed in bootmaking or spinning are not immediately changed by the intervention of the capitalist.
He must begin by taking the labour-power as he finds it in the market, and consequently be satisfied with
labour of such a kind as would be found in the period immediately preceding the rise of capitalists.
Changes in the methods of production by the subordination of labour to capital, can take place only at a
later period, and therefore will have to be treated of in a later chapter.

The labour-process, turned into the process by which the capitalist consumes labour-power, exhibits two
characteristic phenomena. First, the labourer works under the control of the capitalist to whom his labour
belongs; the capitalist taking good care that the work is done in a proper manner, and that the means of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (5 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

production are used with intelligence, so that there is no unnecessary waste of raw material, and no wear
and tear of the implements beyond what is necessarily caused by the work.

Secondly, the product is the property of the capitalist and not that of the labourer, its immediate producer.
Suppose that a capitalist pays for a day's labour-power at its value; then the right to use that power for a
day belongs to him, just as much as the right to use any other commodity, such as a horse that he has
hired for the day. To the purchaser of a commodity belongs its use, and the seller of labour-power, by
giving his labour, does no more, in reality, than part with the use-value that he has sold. From the instant
he steps into the workshop, the use-value of his labour-power, and therefore also its use, which is labour,
belongs to the capitalist. By the purchase of labour-power, the capitalist incorporates labour, as a living
ferment, with the lifeless constituents of the product. From his point of view, the labour-process is
nothing more than the consumption of the commodity purchased, i. e., of labour-power; but this
consumption cannot be effected except by supplying the labour-power with the means of production. The
labour-process is a process between things that the capitalist has purchased, things that have become his
property. The product of this process belongs, therefore, to him, just as much as does the wine which is
the product of a process of fermentation completed in his cellar. flOl



SECTION 2.

THE PRODUCTION OF SURPLUS-VALUE



The product appropriated by the capitalist is a use-value, as yarn, for example, or boots. But, although
boots are, in one sense, the basis of all social progress, and our capitalist is a decided "progressist," yet he
does not manufacture boots for their own sake. Use-value is, by no means, the thing "qu'on aime pour
lui-meme" in the production of commodities. Use-values are only produced by capitalists, because, and
in so far as, they are the material substratum, the depositories of exchange- value. Our capitalist has two
objects in view: in the first place, he wants to produce a use-value that has a value in exchange, that is to
say, an article destined to be sold, a commodity; and secondly, he desires to produce a commodity whose
value shall be greater than the sum of the values of the commodities used in its production, that is, of the
means of production and the labour-power, that he purchased with his good money in the open market.
His aim is to produce not only a use- value, but a commodity also; not only use- value, but value; not only
value, but at the same time surplus-value.

It must be borne in mind, that we are now dealing with the production of commodities, and that, up to
this point, we have only considered one aspect of the process. Just as commodities are, at the same time,
use-values and values, so the process of producing them must be a labour-process, and at the same time,
a process of creating value. \\X\

Let us now examine production as a creation of value.

We know that the value of each commodity is determined by the quantity of labour expended on and
materialised in it, by the working-time necessary, under given social conditions, for its production. This

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (6 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

rule also holds good in the case of the product that accrued to our capitalist, as the result of the
labour-process carried on for him. Assuming thisproduct to be 10 lbs. of yarn, our first step is to calculate
the quantity of labour realised in it.

For spinning the yarn, raw material is required; suppose in this case 10 lbs. of cotton. We have no need at
present to investigate the value of this cotton, for our capitalist has, we will assume, bought it at its full
value, say of ten shillings. In this price the labour required for the production of the cotton is already
expressed in terms of the average labour of society. We will further assume that the wear and tear of the
spindle, which, for our present purpose, may represent all other instruments of labour employed, amounts
to the value of 2s. If, then, twenty-four hours' labour, or two working-days, are required to produce the
quantity of gold represented by twelve shillings, we have here, to begin with, two days' labour already
incorporated in the yarn.

We must not let ourselves be misled by the circumstance that the cotton has taken a new shape while the
substance of the spindle has to a certain extent been used up. By the general law of value, if the value of
40 lbs. of yarn = the value of 40 lbs. of cotton + the value of a whole spindle, i. e., if the same
working-time is required to produce the commodities on either side of this equation, then 10 lbs. of yarn
are an equivalent for 10 lbs. of cotton, together with one-fourth of a spindle. In the case we are
considering the same working-time is materialised in the 10 lbs. of yarn on the one hand, and in the 10
lbs. of cotton and the fraction of a spindle on the other. Therefore, whether value appears in cotton, in a
spindle, or in yarn, makes no difference in the amount of that value. The spindle and cotton, instead of
resting quietly side by side, join together in the process, their forms are altered, and they are turned into
yarn; but their value is no more affected by this fact than it would be if they had been simply exchanged
for their equivalent in yarn.

The labour required for the production of the cotton, the raw material of the yarn, is part of the labour
necessary to produce the yarn, and is therefore contained in the yarn. The same applies to the labour
embodied in the spindle, without whose wear and tear the cotton could not be spun.

Hence, in determining the value of the yarn, or the labour-time required for its production, all the special
processes carried on at various times and in different places, which were necessary, first to produce the
cotton and the wasted portion of the spindle, and then with the cotton and spindle to spin the yarn, may
together be looked on as different and successive phases of one and the same process. The whole of the
labour in the yarn is past labour; and it is a matter of no importance that the operations necessary for the
production of its constituent elements were carried on at times which, referred to the present, are more
remote than the final operation of spinning. If a definite quantity of labour, say thirty days, is requisite to
build a house, the total amount of labour incorporated in it is not altered by the fact that the work of the
last day is done twenty-nine days later than that of the first. Therefore the labour contained in the raw
material and the instruments of labour can be treated just as if it were labour expended in an earlier stage
of the spinning process, before the labour of actual spinning commenced.

The values of the means of production, i. e., the cotton and the spindle, which values are expressed in the
price of twelve shillings, are therefore constituent parts of the value of the yarn, or, in other words, of the
value of the product.

Two conditions must nevertheless be fulfilled. First, the cotton and spindle must concur in the production
of a use-value; they must in the present case become yarn. Value is independent of the particular
use-value by which it is borne, but it must be embodied in a use-value of some kind. Secondly, the time

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (7 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

occupied in the labour of production must not exceed the time really necessary under the given social
conditions of the case. Therefore, if no more than I lb. of cotton be requisite to spin 1 1 lbs. of yarn, care
must be taken that no more than this weight of cotton is consumed in the production of 1 1 lbs. of yarn;
and similarly with regard to the spindle. Though the capitalist have a hobby, and use a gold instead of a
steel spindle, yet the only labour that counts for anything in the value of the yarn is that which would be
required to produce a steel spindle, because no more is necessary under the given social conditions.

We now know what portion of the value of the yarn is owing to the cotton and the spindle. It amounts to
twelve shillings or the value of two days' work. The next point for our consideration is, what portion of
the value of the yarn is added to the cotton by the labour of the spinner.

We have now to consider this labour under a very different aspect from that which it had during the
labour-process; there, we viewed it solely as that particular kind of human activity which changes cotton
into yarn; there, the more the labour was suited to the work, the better the yarn, other circumstances
remaining the same. The labour of the spinner was then viewed as specifically different from other kinds
of productive labour, different on the one hand in its special aim, viz., spinning, different, on the other
hand, in the special character of its operations, in the special nature of its means of production and in the
special use-value of its product. For the operation of spinning, cotton and spindles are a necessity, but for
making rifled cannon they would be of no use whatever. Here, on the contrary, where we consider the
labour of the spinner only so far as it is value-creating, i.e., a source of value, his labour differs in no
respect from the labour of the man who bores cannon, or (what here more nearly concerns us), from the
labour of the cotton-planter and spindle-maker incorporated in the means of production. It is solely by
reason of this identity, that cotton planting, spindle making and spinning, are capable of forming the
component parts differing only quantitatively from each other, of one whole, namely, the value of the
yarn. Here, we have nothing more to do with the quality, the nature and the specific character of the
labour, but merely with its quantity. And this simply requires to be calculated. We proceed upon the
assumption that spinning is simple, unskilled labour, the average labour of a given state of society.
Hereafter we shall see that the contrary assumption would make no difference.

While the labourer is at work, his labour constantly undergoes a transformation: from being motion, it
becomes an object without motion; from being the labourer working, it becomes the thing produced. At
the end of one hour's spinning, that act is represented by a definite quantity of yarn; in other words, a
definite quantity of labour, namely that of one hour, has become embodied in the cotton. We say labour,
i.e., the expenditure of his vital force by the spinner, and not spinning labour, because the special work of
spinning counts here, only so far as it is the expenditure of labour-power in general, and not in so far as it
is the specific work of the spinner.

In the process we are now considering it is of extreme importance, that no more time be consumed in the
work of transforming the cotton into yarn than is necessary under the given social conditions. If under
normal, i.e., average social conditions of production, a pounds of cotton ought to be made into b pounds
of yarn by one hour's labour, then a day's labour does not count as 12 hours' labour unless 12 a pounds of
cotton have been made into 12 b pounds of yarn; for in the creation of value, the time that is socially
necessary alone counts.

Not only the labour, but also the raw material and the product now appear in quite a new light, very
different from that in which we viewed them in the labour-process pure and simple. The raw material
serves now merely as an absorbent of a definite quantity of labour. By this absorption it is in fact



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (8 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

changed into yarn, because it is spun, because labour-power in the form of spinning is added to it; but the
product, the yarn, is now nothing more than a measure of the labour absorbed by the cotton. If in one
hour 1 2/3 lbs. of cotton can be spun into 1 2/3 lbs. of yarn, then 10 lbs. of yarn indicate the absorption of
6 hours' labour. Definite quantities of product, these quantities being determined by experience, now
represent nothing but definite quantities of labour, definite masses of crystallised labour-time. They are
nothing more than the materialisation of so many hours or so many days of social labour.

We are here no more concerned about the facts, that the labour is the specific work of spinning, that its
subject is cotton and its product yarn, than we are about the fact that the subject itself is already a product
and therefore raw material. If the spinner, instead of spinning, were working in a coal mine, the subject
of his labour, the coal, would be supplied by Nature; nevertheless, a definite quantity of extracted coal, a
hundredweight for example, would represent a definite quantity of absorbed labour.

We assumed, on the occasion of its sale, that the value of a day's labour-power is three shillings, and that
six hours' labour is incorporated in that sum; and consequently that this amount of labour is requisite to
produce the necessaries of life daily required on an average by the labourer. If now our spinner by
working for one hour, can convert 1 2/3 lbs. of cotton into 1 2/3 lbs. of yarn, f!21 it follows that in six
hours he will convert 10 lbs. of cotton into 10 lbs. of yarn. Hence, during the spinning process, the cotton
absorbs six hours' labour. The same quantity of labour is also embodied in a piece of gold of the value of
three shillings. Consequently by the mere labour of spinning, a value of three shillings is added to the
cotton.

Let us now consider the total value of the product, the 10 lbs. of yarn. Two and a half days' labour has
been embodied in it, of which two days were contained in the cotton and in the substance of the spindle
worn away, and half a day was absorbed during the process of spinning. This two and a half days' labour
is also represented by a piece of gold of the value of fifteen shillings. Hence, fifteen shillings is an
adequate price for the 10 lbs. of yarn, or the price of one pound is eighteenpence.

Our capitalist stares in astonishment. The value of the product is exactly equal to the value of the capital
advanced. The value so advanced has not expanded, no surplus-value has been created, and consequently
money has not been converted into capital. The price of the yarn is fifteen shillings, and fifteen shillings
were spent in the open market upon the constituent elements of the product, or, what amounts to the same
thing, upon the factors of the labour-process; ten shillings were paid for the cotton, two shillings for the
substance of the spindle worn away, and three shillings for the labour-power. The swollen value of the
yarn is of no avail, for it is merely the sum of the values formerly existing in the cotton, the spindle, and
the labour-power: out of such a simple addition of existing values, no surplus-value can possibly arise.
f 131 These separate values are now all concentrated in one thing; but so they were also in the sum of
fifteen shillings, before it was split up into three parts, by the purchase of the commodities.

There is in reality nothing very strange in this result. The value of one pound of yarn being
eighteenpence, if our capitalist buys 10 lbs. of yarn in the market, he must pay fifteen shillings for them.
It is clear that, whether a man buys his house ready built, or gets it built for him, in neither case will the
mode of acquisition increase the amount of money laid out on the house.

Our capitalist, who is at home in his vulgar economy, exclaims: "Oh! but I advanced my money for the
express purpose of making more money. " The way to Hell is paved with good intentions, and he might
just as easily have intended to make money, without producing at all. f 141 He threatens all sorts of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (9 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

things. He won't be caught napping again. In future he will buy the commodities in the market, instead of
manufacturing them himself. But if all his brother capitalists were to do the same, where would he find
his commodities in the market? And his money he cannot eat. He tries persuasion. "Consider my
abstinence; I might have played ducks and drakes with the 15 shillings; but instead of that I consumed it
productively, and made yarn with it. " Very well, and by way of reward he is now in possession of good
yarn instead of a bad conscience; and as for playing the part of a miser, it would never do for him to
relapse into such bad ways as that; we have seen before to what results such asceticism leads. Besides,
where nothing is, the king has lost his rights; whatever may be the merit of his abstinence, there is
nothing wherewith specially to remunerate it, because the value of the product is merely the sum of the
values of the commodities that were thrown into the process of production. Let him therefore console'
himself with the reflection that virtue is its own reward, But no, he becomes importunate. He says: "The
yarn is of no use to me: I produced it for sale. " In that case let him sell it, or, still better, let him for the
future produce only things for satisfying his personal wants, a remedy that his physician MacCulloch has
already prescribed as infallible against an epidemic of over-production. He now gets obstinate. "Can the
labourer, " he asks, "merely with his arms and legs, produce commodities out of nothing? Did I not
supply him with the materials, by means of which, and in which alone, his labour could be embodied?
And as the greater part of society consists of such ne'er-do-wells, have I not rendered society
incalculable service by my instruments of production, my cotton and my spindle, and not only society, but
the labourer also, whom in addition I have provided with the necessaries of life? And am I to be allowed
nothing in return for all this service?" Well, but has not the labourer rendered him the equivalent service
of changing his cotton and spindle into yarn? Moreover, there is here no question of service. fl51 A
service is nothing more than the useful effect of a use-value, be it of a commodity, or be it of labour. f!61
But here we are dealing with exchange- value. The capitalist paid to the labourer a value of 3 shillings,
and the labourer gave him back an exact equivalent in the value of 3 shillings, added by him to the
cotton: he gave him value for value. Our friend, up to this time so purse-proud, suddenly assumes the
modest demeanour of his own workman, and exclaims: "Have I myself not worked? Have I not
performed the labour of superintendence and of overlooking the spinner? And does not this labour, too,
create value?" His overlooker and his manager try to hide their smiles. Meanwhile, after a hearty laugh,
he re-assumes his usual mien. Though he chanted to us the whole creed of the economists, in reality, he
says, he would not give a brass farthing for it. He leaves this and all such like subterfuges and juggling
tricks to the professors of Political Economy, who are paid for it. He himself is a practical man; and
though he does not always consider what he says outside his business, yet in his business he knows what
he is about.

Let us examine the matter more closely. The value of a day's labour-power amounts to 3 shillings,
because on our assumption half a day's labour is embodied in that quantity of labour-power, i.e., because
the means of subsistence that are daily required for the production of labour-power, cost half a day's
labour. But the past labour that is embodied in the labour-power, and the living labour that it can call into
action; the daily cost of maintaining it, and its daily expenditure in work, are two totally different things.
The former determines the exchange- value of the labour-power, the latter is its use- value. The fact that
half a day's labour is necessary to keep the labourer alive during 24 hours, does not in any way prevent
him from working a whole day. Therefore, the value of labour-power, and the value which that
labour-power creates in the labour-process, are two entirely different magnitudes; and this difference of
the two values was what the capitalist had in view, when he was purchasing the labour-power. The useful
qualities that labour-power possesses, and by virtue of which it makes yarn or boots, were to him nothing
more than a conditio sine qua non; for in order to create value, labour must be expended in a useful

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (10 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

manner. What really influenced him was the specific use-value which this commodity possesses of being
a source not only of value, but of more value than it has itself This is the special service that the
capitalist expects from labour-power, and in this transaction he acts in accordance with the "eternal laws"
of the exchange of commodities. The seller of labour-power, like the seller of any other commodity,
realises its exchange-value, and parts with its use-value. He cannot take the one without giving the other.
The use-value of labour-power, or in other words, labour, belongs just as little to its seller, as the
use-value of oil after it has been sold belongs to the dealer who has sold it. The owner of the money has
paid the value of a day's labour-power; his, therefore, is the use of it for a day; a day's labour belongs to
him. The circumstance, that on the one hand the daily sustenance of labour-power costs only half a day's
labour, while on the other hand the very same labour-power can work during a whole day, that
consequently the value which its use during one day creates, is double what he pays for that use, this
circumstance is, without doubt, a piece of good luck for the buyer, but by no means an injury to the
seller.

Our capitalist foresaw this state of things, and that was the cause of his laughter. The labourer therefore
finds, in the workshop, the means of production necessary for working, not only during six, but during
twelve hours. Just as during the six hours' process our 10 lbs. of cotton absorbed six hours' labour, and
became 10 lbs. of yarn, so now, 20 lbs. of cotton will absorb 12 hours' labour and be changed into 20 lbs.
of yarn. Let us now examine the product of this prolonged process. There is now materialised in this 20
lbs. of yarn the labour of five days, of which four days are due to the cotton and the lost steel of the
spindle, the remaining day having been absorbed by the cotton during the spinning process. Expressed in
gold, the labour of five days is thirty shillings. This is therefore the price of the 20 lbs. of yarn, giving, as
before, eighteenpence as the price of a pound. But the sum of the values of the commodities that entered
into the process amounts to 27 shillings. The value of the yarn is 30 shillings. Therefore the value of the
product is 1/9 greater than the value advanced for its production; 27 shillings have been transformed into
30 shillings; a surplus-value of 3 shillings has been created. The trick has at last succeeded; money has
been converted into capital.

Every condition of the problem is satisfied, while the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities,
have been in no way violated. Equivalent has been exchanged for equivalent. For the capitalist as buyer
paid for each commodity, for the cotton, the spindle and the labour-power, its full value. He then did
what is done by every purchaser of commodities; he consumed their use- value. The consumption of the
labour-power, which was also the process of producing commodities, resulted in 20 lbs. of yarn, having a
value of 30 shillings. The capitalist, formerly a buyer, now returns to market as a seller, of commodities.
He sells his yarn at eighteenpence a pound, which is its exact value. Yet for all that he withdraws 3
shillings more from circulation than he originally threw into it. This metamorphosis, this conversion of
money into capital, takes place both within the sphere of circulation and also outside it; within the
circulation, because conditioned by the purchase of the labour-power in the market; outside the
circulation, because what is done within it is only a stepping-stone to the production of surplus-value, a
process which is entirely confined to the sphere of production. Thus "tout est pour le mieux dans le
meflleur des mondes possibles."

By turning his money into commodities that serve as the material elements of a new product, and as
factors in the labour-process, by incorporating living labour with their dead substance, the capitalist at
the same time converts value, i.e., past, materialised, and dead labour into capital, into value big with
value, a live monster that is fruitful and multiplies.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (11 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

If we now compare the two processes of producing value and of creating surplus-value, we see that the
latter is nothing but the continuation of the former beyond a definite point. If on the one hand the process
be not carried beyond the point, where the value paid by the capitalist for the labour-power is replaced by
an exact equivalent, it is simply a process of producing value; if, on the other hand, it be continued
beyond that point, it becomes a process of creating surplus-value.

If we proceed further, and compare the process of producing value with the labour-process, pure and
simple, we find that the latter consists of the useful labour, the work, that produces use- values. Here we
contemplate the labour as producing a particular article; we view it under its qualitative aspect alone,
with regard to its end and aim. But viewed as a value-creating process, the same labour-process presents
itself under its quantitative aspect alone. Here it is a question merely of the time occupied by the labourer
in doing the work; of the period during which the labour-power is usefully expended. Here, the
commodities that take part in the process, do not count any longer as necessary adjuncts of labour-power
in the production of a definite, useful object. They count merely as depositories of so much absorbed or
materialised labour; that labour, whether previously embodied in the means of production, or
incorporated in them for the first time during the process by the action of labour-power, counts in either
case only according to its duration; it amounts to so many hours or days as the case may be.

Moreover, only so much of the time spent in the production of any article is counted, as, under the given
social conditions, is necessary. The consequences of this are various. In the first place, it becomes
necessary that the labour should be carried on under normal conditions. If a self-acting mule is the
implement in general use for spinning, it would be absurd to supply the spinner with a distaff and
spinning wheel. The cotton too must not be such rubbish as to cause extra waste in being worked, but
must be of suitable quality. Otherwise the spinner would be found to spend more time in producing a
pound of yarn than is socially necessary, in which case the excess of time would create neither value nor
money. But whether the material factors of the process are of normal quality or not, depends not upon the
labourer, but entirely upon the capitalist. Then again, the labour-power itself must be of average efficacy.
In the trade in which it is being employed, it must possess the average skill, handiness and quickness
prevalent in that trade, and our capitalist took good care to buy labour-power of such normal goodness.
This power must be applied with the average amount of exertion and with the usual degree of intensity;
and the capitalist is as careful to see that this is done, as that his workmen are not idle for a single
moment. He has bought, the use of the labour-power for a definite period, and he insists upon his rights.
He has no intention of being robbed. Lastly, and for this purpose our friend has a penal code of his own,
all wasteful consumption of raw material or instruments of labour is strictly forbidden, because what is
so wasted, represents labour superfluously expended, labour that does not count in the product or enter
into its value. |171

We now see, that the difference between labour, considered on the one hand as producing utilities, and
on the other hand, as creating value, a difference which we discovered by our analysis of a commodity,
resolves itself into a distinction between two aspects of the process of production.

The process of production, considered on the one hand as the unity of the labour-process and the process
of creating value, is production of commodities; considered on the other hand as the unity of the
labour-process and the process of producing surplus-value, it is the capitalist process of production, or
capitalist production of commodities.

We stated, on a previous page, that in the creation of surplus-value it does not in the least matter, whether



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (12 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

the labour appropriated by the capitalist be simple unskilled labour of average quality or more
complicated skilled labour. All labour of a higher or more complicated character than average labour is
expenditure of labour-power of a more costly kind, labour-power whose production has cost more time
and labour, and which therefore has a higher value, than unskilled or simple labour-power. This power
being higher- value, its consumption is labour of a higher class, labour that creates in equal times
proportionally higher values than unskilled labour does. Whatever difference in skill there may be
between the labour of a spinner and that of a jeweller, the portion of his labour by which the jeweller
merely replaces the value of his own labour-power, does not in any way differ in quality from the
additional portion by which he creates surplus-value. In the making of jewellery, just as in spinning, the
surplus-value results only from a quantitative excess of labour, from a lengthening-out of one and the
same labour-process, in the one case, of the process of making jewels, in the other of the process of
making yarn. fl81

But on the other hand, in every process of creating value, the reduction of skilled labour to average social
labour, e.g., one day of skilled to six days of unskilled labour, is unavoidable. |191 We therefore save
ourselves a superfluous operation, and simplify our analysis, by the assumption, that the labour of the
workman employed by the capitalist is unskilled average labour.



Footnotes

£11 "The earth's spontaneous productions being in small quantity, and quite independent of man, appear,
as it were, to be furnished by Nature, in the same way as a small sum is given to a young man, in order to
put him in a way of industry, and of making his fortune." (James Stueart: "Principles of Polit. Econ."
edit. Dublin, 1770, v. I, p. 1 16.)

\2] "Reason is just as cunning as she is powerful. Her cunning consists principally in her mediating
activity, which, by causing objects to act and re-act on each other in accordance with their own nature, in
this way, without any direct interference in the process, carries out reason's intentions." (Hegel:
"Enzyklopadie, Erster Theil, Die Logik," Berlin, 1840, p. 382.)

[31 In his otherwise miserable work ("Theorie de I'Econ. Polit." Paris, 1815), Ganilh enumerates in a
striking manner in opposition to the "Physiocrats" the long series of previous processes necessary before
agriculture properly so called can commence.

[41 Turgot in his "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses" (1766) brings well into
prominence the importance of domesticated animals to early civilisation.

[51 The least important commodities of all for the technological comparison of different epochs of
production are articles of luxury, in the strict meaning of the term. However little our written histories up
to this time notice the development of material production, which is the basis of all social life, and
therefore of all real history, yet prehistoric times have been classified in accordance with the results, not
of so-called historical, but of materialistic investigations. These periods have been divided, to correspond
with the materials from which their implements and weapons were made, viz., into the stone, the bronze,
and the iron ages.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (13 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

\6] It appears paradoxical to assert, that uncaught fish, for instance, are a means of production in the
fishing industry. But hitherto no one has discovered the art of catching fish in waters that contain none.

[71 This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour-process alone, what is productive
labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist process of production.

[81 Storch calls true raw materials "matieres," and accessory material "materiaux." Cherbuliez describes
accessories as "matieres instrumentales."

[91 By a wonderful feat of logical acumen, Colonel Torrens has discovered, in this stone of the savage
the origin of capital. "In the first stone which he [the savage] flings at the wild animal he pursues, in the
first stick that he seizes to strike down the fruit which hangs above his reach, we see the appropriation of
one article for the purpose of aiding in the acquisition of another, and thus discover the origin of capital."
(R. Torrens: "An Essay on the Production of Wealth," &c, pp. 70-71.)

f 101 "Products are appropriated before they are converted into capital; this conversion does not secure
them from such appropriation." (Cheibuliez: "Richesse on Pauvrete," edit. Paris, 1841, p. 54.) "The
Proletarian, by selling his labour for a definite quantity of the necessaries of life, renounces all claim to a
share in the product. The mode of appropriation of the products remains the same as before; it is in no
way altered by the bargain we have mentioned. The product belongs exclusively to the capitalist, who
supplied the raw material and the necessaries of life; and this is a rigorous consequence of the law of
appropriation, a law whose fundamental principle was the very opposite, namely, that every labourer has
an exclusive right to the ownership of what he produces." (1. c, p. 58.) "When the labourers receive
wages for their labour ... the capitalist is then the owner not of the capital only" (he means the means of
production) "but of the labour also. If what is paid as wages is included, as it commonly is, in the term
capital, it is absurd to talk of labour separately from capital. The word capital as thus employed includes
labour and capital both." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol. Econ.," &c, Ed. 1821, pp. 70, 71.)

fill As has been stated in a previous note, the English language has two different expressions for these
two different aspects of labour: in the Simple Labour-process, the process of producing Use-Values, it is
Work; in the process of creation of Value, it is Labour, taking the term in its strictly economic sense. —
F. E.

fl21 These figures are quite arbitrary.

f 131 This is the fundamental proposition on which is based the doctrine of the Physiocrats as to the
unproductiveness of all labour that is not agriculture: it is irrefutable for the orthodox economist. "Cette
facon d'imputer a une seule chose la valeur de plusieurs autres" (par exemple au lin la consommation du
tisserand), "d'appliquer, pour ainsi dire, couche sur couche, plusieurs valcurs sur une seule, fait que
celle-ci grossit d'autant.... Le terme d'addition peint tres-bien la maniere dont se forme le prix des
ouvrages de maind'oeuvre; ce prix n'est qu'un total de plusieurs valeurs consommees et additionnees
ensemble; or, additionner n'est pas multiplier." ("Mercier de la Riviere," 1. c, p. 599.)

f 141 Thus from 1844-47 he withdrew part of his capital from productive employment, in order to throw it
away in railway speculations; and so also, during the American Civil War, he closed his factory, and
turned his work-people into the streets, in order to gamble on the Liverpool cotton exchange.

f 151 "Extol thyself, put on finery and adorn thyself ... but whoever takes more or better than he gives,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (14 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:01]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

that is usury, and is not service, but wrong done to his neighbour, as when one steals and robs. All is not
service and benefit to a neighbour that is called service and benefit. For an adulteress and adulterer do
one another great service and pleasure. A horseman does an incendiary a great service, by helping him to
rob on the highway, and pillage land and houses. The papists do ours a great service, in that they don't
drown, burn, murder all of them, or let them all rot in prison; but let some live, and only drive them out,
or take from them what they have. The devil himself does his servants inestimable service.... To sum up,
the world is full of great, excellent, and daily service and benefit." (Martin Luther: "An die Pfarrherrn
wider den Wucher zu predigen," Wittenberg, 1540.)

fl61 In "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oek.," p. 14, 1 make the following remark on this point — "It is not difficult
to understand what 'service' the category 'service' must render to a class of economists like J. B. Say and
F. Bastiat."

f 171 This is one of the circumstances that makes production by slave labour such a costly process. The
labourer here is, to use a striking expression of the ancients, distinguishable only as instrumentum vocale,
from an animal as instrumentum semi- vocale, and from an implement as instrumentum mutum. But he
himself takes care to let both beast and implement feel that he is none of them,'but is a man. He
convinces himself with immense satisfaction, that he is a different being, by treating the one
unmercifully and damaging the other con amore. Hence the principle, univerially applied in this method
of production, only to employ the rudest and heaviest implements and such as are difficult to damage
owing to their sheer clumsiness. In the slave-states bordering on the Gulf of Mexico, down to the date of
the civil war, ploughs constructed on old Chinese models, which turned up the soil like a hog or a mole,
instead of making furrows, were alone to be found. Conf. J. E. Cairnes. "The Slave Power," London,
1862, p. 46 sqq. In his "Sea Board Slave States," Olmsted tells us: "I am here shown tools that no man in
his senses, with us, would allow a labourer, for whom he was paying wages, to be encumbered with; and
the excessive weight and clumsiness of which, I would judge, would make work at least ten per cent
greater than with those ordinarily used with us. And I am assured that, in the careless and clumsy way
they must be used by the slaves, anything lighter or less rude could not be furnished them with good
economy, and that such tools as we constantly give our labourers and find our profit in giving them,
would not last out a day in a Virginia comficid-much lighter and more free from stones though it be than
ours. So, too, when I ask why mules are so universally substituted for horses on the farm, the first reason
given, and confessedly the most conclusive one, is that horses cannot bear the treatment that they always
must get from negroes; horses are always soon foundered or crippled by them, while mules will bear
cudgelling, or lose a meal or two now and then, and not be materially injured, and they do not take cold
or get sick, if neglected or overworked. But I do not need to go further than to the window of the room in
which I am writing, to see at almost any time, treatment of cattle that would ensure the immediate
discharge of the driver by almost any farmer owning them in the North."

f 181 The distinction between skilled and unskilled labour rests in part on pure illusion, or, to say the
least, on distinctions that have long since ceased to be real, and that survive only by virtue of a traditional
convention; in part on the helpless condition of some groups of the working-class, a condition that
prevents themfrom exacting equally with the rest the value of their labour-power. Accidental
circumstances here play so great a part, that these two forms of labour sometimes change places. Where,
for instance, the physique of the working-class has deteriorated, and is, relatively speaking, exhausted,
which in the case in all countries with a well developed capitalist production, the lower forms of labour,
which demand great expenditure of muscle, are in general considered as skilled, compared with much



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (15 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:01]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

more delicate forms of labour; the latter sink down to the level of unskilled labour. Take as an example
the labour of a bricklayer, which in England occupies a much higher level than that of a damask-weaver.
Again, although the labour of a fustian cutter demands great bodily exertion, and is at the same time
unhealthy, yet it counts only as unskilled labour. And then, we must not forget, that the so-called skilled
labour does not occupy a large space in the field of national labour. Laing estimates that in England (and
Wales) the livelihood of 1 1,300,000 people depends on unskilled labour. If from the total population of
18,000,000 living at the time when he wrote, we deduct 1,000,000 for the "genteel population," and
1,500,000 for paupers, vagrants, criminals, prostitutes, &c, and 4,650,000 who compose the
middle-class, there remain the above mentioned 11,000,000. But in his middle-class he includes people
that live on the interest of small investments, officials, men of letters, artists, schoolmasters and the like,
and in order to swell the number he also includes in these 4,650,000 the better paid portioti of the factory
operatives! The bricklayers, too, figure amongst them. (S. Laing: "National Distress," &c, London,
1844). "The great class who have nothing to give for food but ordinary labour, are the great bulk of the
people." (James Mill, in art.: "Colony," Supplement to the Encyclop. Brit., 1831.)

f 191 "Where reference is made to labour as a measure of value, it necessarily implies labour of one
particular kind ... the proportion which the other kinds bear to it being easily ascertained." ("Outlines of
Pol. Econ.," Lond., 1832, pp. 22 and 23.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Eight: Constant Capital and Variable Capital
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (16 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:01]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute

Surplus-Value



CHAPTER EIGHT:

CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL



The various factors of the labour-process play different parts in forming the value of the product.

The labourer adds fresh value to the subject of fiis labour by expending upon it a given amount of
additional labour, no matter what the specific character and utility of that labour may be. On the other
hand, the values of the means of production used up in the process are preserved, and present themselves
afresh as constituent parts of the value of the product; the values of the cotton and the spindle, for
instance, re-appear again in the value of the yarn. The value of the means of production is therefore
preserved, by being transferred to the product. This transfer takes place during the conversion of those
means into a product, or in other words, during the labour-process. It is brought about by labour; but
how?

The labourer does not perform two operations at once, one in order to add value to the cotton, the other in
order to preserve the value of the means of production, or, what amounts to the same thing, to transfer to
the yarn, to the product, the value of the cotton on which he works, and part of the value of the spindle
with which he works. But, by the very act of adding new value, he preserves their former values. Since,
however, the addition of new value to the subject of his labour, and the preservation of its former value,
are two entirely distinct results, produced simultaneously by the labourer, during one operation, it is plain
that this two-fold nature of the result can be explained only by the two-fold nature of his labour; at one
and the same time, it must in one character create value, and in another character preserve or transfer
value.

Now, in what manner does every labourer add new labour and consequently new value? Evidently, only
by labouring productively in a particular way; the spinner by spinning, the weaver by weaving, the smith
by forging. But, while thus incorporating labour generally, that is value, it is by the particular form alone
of the labour, by the spinning, the weaving and the forging respectively, that the means of production, the
cotton and spindle, the yarn and loom, and. the iron and anvil become constituent elements of the
product, of a new use-value. £1} Each use-value disappears, but only to re-appear under a new form in a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (1 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

new use-value. Now, we saw, when we were considering the process of creating value, that, if a
use-value be effectively consumed in the production of a new use- value, the quantity of labour expended
in the production of the consumed article, forms a portion of the quantity of labour necessary to produce
the new use- value; this portion is therefore labour transferred from the means of production to the new
product. Hence, the labourer preserves the values of the consumed means of production, or transfers
them as portions of its value to the product, not by virtue of his additional labour, abstractedly
considered, but by virtue of the particular useful character of that labour, by virtue of its special
productive form. In so far then as labour is such specific productive activity, in so far as it is spinning,
weaving, or forging, it raises, by mere contact, the means, of production from the dead, makes them
living factors of the labour-process, and combines with them to form the new products.

If the special productive labour of the workman were not spinning, he could not convert the cotton into
yarn, and therefore could not transfer the values of the cotton and spindle to the yarn. Suppose the same
workman were to change his occupation to that of a joiner, he would still by a day's labour add value to
the material he works upon. Consequently, we see, first, that the addition of new value takes place not by
virtue of his labour being spinning in particular, or joinering in particular, but because it is labour in the
abstract, a portion of the total labour of society; and we see next, that the value added is of a given
definite amount, not because his labour has a special utility, but because it is exerted for a definite time.
On the one hand, then, it is by virtue of its general character, as being expenditure of human
labour-power in the abstract, that spinning adds new value to the values of the cotton and the spindle; and
on the other hand, it is by virtue of its special character, as being a concrete, useful process, that the same
labour of spinning both transfers the values of the means of production to the product, and preserves
them in the product. Hence at one and the same time there is produced a two-fold result.

By the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour, new value is added, and by the quality of this
added labour, the original values of the means of production are preserved in the product. This two-fold
effect, resulting from the two-fold character of labour, may be traced in various phenomena.

Let us assume, that some invention enables the spinner to spin as much cotton in 6 hours as he was able
to spin before in 36 hours. His labour is now six times as effective as it was, for the purposes of useful
production. The product of 6 hours' work has increased six-fold, from 6 lbs. to 36 lbs. But now the 36
lbs. of cotton absorb only the same amount of labour as formerly did the 6 lbs. One-sixth as much new
labour is absorbed by each pound of cotton, and consequently, the value added by the labour to each
pound is only one-sixth of what it formerly was. On the other hand, in the product, in the 36 lbs. of yarn,
the value transferred from the cotton is six times as great as before. By the 6 hours' spinning, the value of
the raw material preserved and transferred to the product is six times as great as before, although the new
value added by the labour of the spinner to each pound of the very same raw material is one-sixth what it
was formerly. This shows that the two properties of labour, by virtue of which it is enabled in one case to
preserve value, and in the other to create value, are essentially different. On the one hand, the longer the
time necessary to spin a given weight of cotton into yarn, the greater is the new value added to the
material; on the other hand, the greater the weight of the cotton spun in a given time, the greater is the
value preserved, by being transferred from it to the product.

Let us now assume, that the productiveness of the spinner's labour, instead of varying, remains constant,
that he therefore requires the same time as he formerly did, to convert one pound of cotton into yarn, but
that the exchange-value of the cotton varies, either by rising to six times its former value or falling to
one-sixth of that value. In both these cases, the spinner puts the same quantity of labour into a pound of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (2 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

cotton, and therefore adds as much value, as he did before the change in the value: he also produces a
given weight of yarn in the same time as he did before. Nevertheless, the value that he transfers from the
cotton to the yarn is either one-sixth of what it was before the variation, or, as the case may be, six times
as much as before. The same result occurs when the value of the instruments of labour rises or falls,
while their useful efficacy in the process remains unaltered.

Again, if the technical conditions of the spinning process remain unchanged, and no change of value
takes place in the means of production, the spinner continues to consume in equal working-times equal
quantities of raw material, and equal quantities of machinery of unvarying value. The value that he
preserves in the product is directly proportional to the new value that he adds to the product. In two
weeks he incorporates twice as much labour, and therefore twice as much value, as in one week, and
during the same time he consumes twice as much material, and wears out twice as much machinery, of
double the value in each case: he therefore preserves, in the product of two weeks, twice as much value
as in the product of one week. So long as the conditions of production remain the same, the more value
the labourer adds by fresh labour, the more value he transfers and preserves; but he does so merely
because this addition of new value takes place under conditions that have not varied and are independent
of his own labour. Of course, it may be said in one sense, that the labourer preserves old value always in
proportion to the quantity of new value that he adds. Whether the value of cotton rise from one shilling to
two shillings, or fall to sixpence, the workman invariably preserves in the product of one hour only one
half as much value as he preserves in two hours. In like manner, if the productiveness of his own labour
varies by rising or falling, he will in one hour spin either more or less cotton, as the case may be, than he
did before, and will consequently preserve in the product of one hour, more or less value of cotton; but,
all the same, he will preserve by two hours' labour twice as much value as he will by one.

Value exists only in articles of utility, in objects: we leave out of consideration its purely symbolical
representation by tokens. (Man himself, viewed as the impersonation of labour-power, is a natural object,
a thing, although a living conscious thing, and labour is the manifestation of this power residing in him.)
If therefore an article loses its utility, it also loses its value. The reason why means of production do not
lose their value, at the same time that they lose their use-value, is this: they lose in the labour-process the
original form of their use-value, only to assume in the product the form of a new use-value. But, however
important it may be to value, that it should have some object of utility to embody itself in, yet it is a
matter of complete indifference what particular object serves this purpose; this we saw when treating of
the metamorphosis of commodities. Hence it follows that in the labour-process the means of production
transfer their value to the product only so far as along with their use-value they lose also their
exchange- value. They give up to the product that value alone which they themselves lose as means of
production. But in this respect the material factors of the labour-process do not all behave alike.

The coal burnt under the boiler vanishes without leaving a trace; so, too, the tallow with which the axles
of wheels are greased. Dye stuffs and other auxiliary substances also vanish but re-appear as properties
of the product. Raw material forms the substance of the product, but only after it has changed its form.
Hence raw material and auxiliary substances lose the characteristic form with which they are clothed on
entering the labour-process. It is otherwise with the instruments of labour. Tools, machines, workshops,
and vessels, are of use in the labour-process, only so long as they retain their original shape, and are
ready each morning to renew the process with their shape unchanged. And just as during their lifetime,
that is to say, during the continued labour-process in which they serve, they retain their shape
independent of the product, so, too, they do after their death. The corpses of machines, tools, workshops,
&c, are always separate and distinct from the product they helped to turn out. If we now consider the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (3 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

case of any instrument of labour during the whole period of its service, from the day of its entry into the
workshop, till the day of its banishment into the lumber room, we find that during this period its
use-value has been completely consumed, and therefore its exchange-value completely transferred to the
product. For instance, if a spinning machine lasts for 10 years, it is plain that during that working period
its total value is gradually transferred to the product of the 10 years. The lifetime of an instrument of
labour, therefore, is spent in the repetition of a greater or less number of similar operations. Its life may
be compared with that of a human being. Every day brings a man 24 hours nearer to his grave: but how
many days he has still to travel on that road, no man can tell accurately by merely looking at him. This
difficulty, however, does not prevent life insurance offices from drawing, by means of the theory of
averages, very accurate, and at the same time very profitable conclusions. So it is with the instruments of
labour. It is known by experience how long on the average a machine of a particular kind will last.
Suppose its use-value in the labour-process to last only six days. Then, on the average, it loses each day
one-sixth of its use-value, and therefore parts with one-sixth of its value to the daily product. The wear
and tear of all instruments, their daily loss of use-value, and the corresponding quantity of value they part
with to the product, are accordingly calculated upon this basis.

It is thus strikingly clear, that means of production never transfer more value to the product than they
themselves lose during the labour-process by the destruction of their own use-value. If such an
instrument has no value to lose, if, in other words, it is not the product of human labour, it transfers no
value to the product. It helps to create use-value without contributing to the formation of exchange-value.
In this class are included all means of production supplied by Nature without human assistance, such as
land, wind, water, metals in situ, and timber in virgin forests.

Yet another interesting phenomenon here presents itself. Suppose a machine to be worth £1,000, and to
wear out in 1,000 days. Then one thousandth part of the value of the machine is daily transferred to
the day's product. At the same time, though with diminishing vitality, the machine as a whole continues
to take part in the labour-process. Thus it appears, that one factor of the labour-process, a means of
production, continually enters as a whole into that process, while it enters into the process of the
formation of value by fractions only. The difference between the two processes is here reflected in their
material factors, by the same instrument of production taking part as a whole in the labour-process, while
at the same time as an element in the formation of value, it enters only by fractions. [2]

On the other hand, a means of production may take part as a whole in the formation of value, while into
the labour-process it enters only bit by bit. Suppose that in spinning cotton, the waste for every 1 15 lbs.
used amounts to 15 lbs., which is converted, not into yarn, but into "devil's dust." Now, although this 15
lbs. of cotton never becomes a constituent element of the yarn, yet assuming this amount of waste to be
normal and inevitable under average conditions of spinning, its value is just as surely transferred to the
value of the yarn, as is the value of the 100 lbs. that form the substance of the yarn. The use-value of 15
lbs. of cotton must vanish into dust, before 100 lbs. of yarn can be made. The destruction of this cotton is
therefore a necessary condition in the production of the yarn. And because it is a necessary condition,
and for no other reason, the value of that cotton is transferred to the product. The same holds good for
every kind of refuse resulting from a labour-process, so tar at least as such refuse cannot be further
employed as a means in the production of new and independent use-values. Such an employment of
refuse may be seen in the large machine works at Manchester, where mountains of iron turnings are
carted away to the foundry in the evening, in order the next morning to re-appear in the workshops as
solid masses of iron.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (4 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

We have seen that the means of production transfer value to the new product, so far only as during the
labour-process they lose value in the shape of their old use-value. The maximum loss of value that they
can suffer in the process, is plainly limited by the amount of the original value with which they came into
the process, or in other words, by the labour-time necessary for their production. Therefore, the means of
production can never add more value to the product than they themselves possess independently of the
process in which they assist. However useful a given kind of raw material, or a machine, or other means
of production may be, though it may cost £150, or, say, 500 days' labour, yet it cannot, under any
circumstances, add to the value of the product more than £150. Its value is determined not by the
labour-process into which it enters as a means of production, but by that out of which it has issued as a
product. In the labour-process it only serves as a mere use-value, a thing with useful properties, and
could not, therefore, transfer any value to the product, unless it possessed such value previously. \3]

While productive labour is changing the means of production into constituent elements of a new product,
their value undergoes a metempsychosis. It deserts the consumed body, to occupy the newly created one.
But this transmigration takes place, as it were, behind the back of the labourer. He is unable to add new
labour, to create new value, without at the same time preserving old values, and this, because the labour
he adds must be of a specific useful kind; and he cannot do work of a useful kind, without employing
products as the means of production of a new product, and thereby transferring their value to the new
product. The property therefore which labour-power in action, living labour, possesses of preserving
value, at the same time that it adds it, is a gift of Nature which costs the labourer nothing, but which is
very advantageous to the capitalist inasmuch as it preserves the existing value of his capital. [4] So long
as trade is good, the capitalist is too much absorbed in money-grubbing to take notice of this gratuitous
gift of labour. A violent interruption of the labour-process by a crisis, makes him sensitively aware of it.
[51

As regards the means of production, what is really consumed is their use-value, and the consumption of
this use-value by labour results in the product. There is no consumption of their value, [61 and it would
therefore be inaccurate to say that it is reproduced. It is rather preserved; not by reason of any operation it
undergoes itself in the process; but because the article in which it originally exists, vanishes, it is true, but
vanishes into some other article. Hence, in the value of the product, there is a reappearance of the value
of the means of production, but there is, strictly speaking, no reproduction of that value. That which is
produced is a new use- value in which the old exchange- value reappears. [7]

It is otherwise with the subjective factor of the labour-process, with labour-power in action. While the
labourer, by virtue of his labour being of a specialised kind that has a special object, preserves and
transfers to the product the value of the means of production, he at the same time, by the mere act of
working, creates each instant an additional or new value. Suppose the process of production to be
stopped just when the workman has produced an equivalent for the value of his own, labour-power,
when, for example, by six hours' labour, he has added a value of three shillings. This value is the surplus,
of the total value of the product, over the portion of its value that is due to the means of production. It is
the only original bit of value formed during this process, the only portion of the value of the product
created by this process. Of course, we do not forget that this new value only replaces the money
advanced by the capitalist in the purchase of the labour-power, and spent by the labourer on the
necessaries of life. With regard to the money spent, the new value is merely a reproduction; but,
nevertheless, it is an actual, and not, as in the case of the value of the means of production, only an
apparent, reproduction. The substitution of one value for another, is here effected by the creation of new



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (5 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

value.

We know, however, from what has gone before, that the labour-process may continue beyond the time
necessary to reproduce and incorporate in the product a mere equivalent for the value of the
labour-power. Instead of the six hours that are sufficient for the latter purpose, the process may continue
for twelve hours. The action of labour-power, therefore, not only reproduces its own value, but produces
value over and above it. This surplus-value is the difference between the value of the product and the
value of the elements consumed in the formation of that product, in other words, of the means of
production and the labour-power.

By our explanation of the different parts played by the various factors of the labour-process in the
formation of the product's value, we have, in fact, disclosed the characters of the different functions
allotted to the different elements of capital in the process of expanding its own value. The surplus of the
total value of the product, over the sum of the values of its constituent factors, is the surplus of the
expanded capital over the capital originally advanced. The means of production on the one hand,
labour-power on the other, are merely the different modes of existence which the value of the original
capital assumed when from being money it was transformed into the various factors of the
labour-process. That part of capital then, which is represented by the means of production, by the raw
material, auxiliary material and the instruments of labour does not, in the process of production, undergo
any quantitative alteration of value. I therefore call it the constant part of capital, or, more shortly,
constant capital.

On the other hand, that part of capital, represented by labour-power, does, in the process of production,
undergo an alteration of value. It both reproduces the equivalent of its own value, and also produces an
excess, a surplus-value, which may itself vary, may be more or less according to circumstances. This part
of capital is continually being transformed from a constant into a variable magnitude. I therefore call it
the variable part of capital, or, shortly, variable capital. The same elements of capital which, from the
point of view of the labour-process, present themselves respectively as the objective and subjective
factors, as means of production and labour-power, present themselves, from the point of view of the
process of creating surplus-value, as constant and variable capital.

The definition of constant capital given above by no means excludes the possibility of a change of value
in its elements. Suppose the price of cotton to be one day sixpence a pound, and the next day, in
consequence of a failure of the cotton crop, a shilling a pound. Each pound of the cotton bought at
sixpence, and worked up after the rise in value, transfers to the product a value of one shilling; and the
cotton already spun before the rise, and perhaps circulating in the market as yarn, likewise transfers to
the product twice its, original value. It is plain, however, that these changes of value are independent of
the increment or surplus-value added to the value of the cotton by the spinning itself. If the old cotton
had never been spun, it could, after the rise, be resold at a shilling a pound instead of at sixpence.
Further, the fewer the processes the cotton has gone through, the more certain is this result. We therefore
find that speculators make it a rule when such sudden changes in value occur, to speculate in that
material on which the least possible quantity of labour has been spent: to speculate, therefore, in yarn
rather than in cloth, in cotton itself, rather than in yarn. The change of value in the case we have been
considering, originates, not in the process in which the cotton plays the part of a means of production,
and in which it therefore functions as constant capital, but in the process in which the cotton itself is
produced. The value of a commodity, it. is true, is determined by the quantity of labour contained in it,
but this quantity is itself limited by social conditions. If the time socially necessary for the production of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (6 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

any commodity alters — and a given weight of cotton represents, after a bad harvest, more labour than
after a good one — all previously existing commodities of the same class are affected, because they are,
as it were, only individuals of the species, £81 and their value at any given time is measured by the labour
socially necessary, i.e., by the labour necessary for their production under the then existing social
conditions.

As the value of the raw material may change, so, too, may that of the instruments of labour, of the
machinery, &c, employed in the process; and consequently that portion of the value of the product
transferred to it from them, may also change. If in consequence of a new invention, machinery of a
particular kind can be produced by a diminished expenditure of labour, the old machinery becomes
depreciated more or less, and consequently transfers so much less value to the product. But here again,
the change in value originates outside the process in which the machine is acting as a means of
production. Once engaged in this process, the machine cannot transfer more value than it possesses apart
from the process.

Just as a change in the value of the means of production, even after they have commenced to take a part
in the labour-process, does not alter their character as constant capital, so, too, a change in the proportion
of constant to variable capital does not affect the respective functions of these two kinds of capital. The
technical conditions of the labour-process may be revolutionised to such an extent, that where formerly
ten men using ten implements of small value worked up a relatively small quantity of raw material, one
man may now, with the aid of one expensive machine, work up one hundred times as much raw material.
In the latter case we have an enormous increase in the constant capital, that is represented by the total
value of the means of production used, and at the same time a great reduction in the variable capital,
invested in labour-power. Such a revolution, however, alters only the quantitative relation between the
constant and the variable capital, or the proportions in which the total capital is split up into its constant
and variable constituents; it has not in the least degree affected the essential difference between the two.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "Labour gives a new creation for one extinguished." ("An Essay on the Polit. Econ. of Nations,"
London, 1821, p. 13.)

[2} The subject of repairs of the implements of labour does not concern us here. A machine that is
undergoing repair, no longer plays the part of an instrument, but that of a subject of labour. Work is no
longer done with it, but upon it. It is quite permissible for our purpose to assume, that the labour
expended on the repairs of instruments is included in the labour necessary for their original production.
But in the text we deal with that wear and tear, which no doctor can cure, and which little by little brings
about death, with "that kind of wear which cannot be repaired from time to time, and which, in the case
of a knife, would ultimately reduce it to a state in which the cutler would say of it, it is not worth a new
blade." We have shewn in the text, that a machine takes part in every labour-process as an integral
machine, but that into the simultaneous process of creating value it enters only bit by. bit. How great then
is the confusion of ideas exhibited in the following extract! "Mr. Ricardo says a portion of the labour of
the engineer in making [stocking] machines" is contained for example in the value of a pair of stockings.
"Yet the total labour, that produced each single pair of stockings ... includes the whole labour of the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (7 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

engineer, not a portion; for one machine makes many pairs, and none of those pairs could have been done
without any part of the machine." ("Obs. on Certain Verbal Disputes in Pol. Econ., Particularly Relating
to Value," p. 54.1 The author, an uncommonly self-satisfied wiseacre, is right in his confusion and
therefore in his contention, to this extent only, that neither Ricardo nor any other economist, before or
since him, has accurately distinguished the two aspects of labour, and still less, therefore, the part played
by it under each of these aspects in the formation of value.

[31 From this we may judge of the absurdity of J. B. Say, who pretends to account for surplus-value
(Interest, Profit, Rent), by the "services productifs" which the means of production, soil, instruments, and
raw material, render in the labour-process by means of their use-values. Mr. Wm. Roscher who seldom
loses an occasion of registering, in black and white, ingenious apologetic fancies, records the following
specimen: - "J. B. Say (Traite, t. 1, ch. 4) very truly remarks: the value produced by an oil mill, after
deduction of all costs, is something new, something quite different from the labour by which the oil mill
itself was erected." (1. c, p. 82, note.) Very true, Mr. Professor! the oil produced by the oil mill is indeed
something very different from the labour expended in constructing the mill! By value, Mr. Roscher
understands such stuff as "oil," because oil has value, notwithstanding that "Nature" produces petroleum,
though relatively "in small quantities," a fact to which he seems to refer in his further observation: "It
(Nature) produces scarcely any exchange- value." Mr. Roscher's "Nature" and the exchange-value it
produces are rather like the foolish virgin who admitted indeed that she had had a child, but "it was such
a little one." This "savant serieux" in continuation remarks: "Ricardo's school is in the habit of including
capital as accumulated labour under the head of labour. This is unskilful work, because, indeed, the
owner of capital, after all, does something more than the merely creating and preserving of the same:
namely, the abstention from the enjoyment of it, for which he demands, e.g., interest." (1. c.) How very
"skilful" is this "anatomico-physiological method" of Political Economy, which, "indeed," converts a
mere desire "after air' into a source of value.

[4J "Of all the instruments of the farmers' trade, the labour of man ... is that on which he is most to rely
for the repayment of his capital. The other two ... the working stock of the cattle and the ... carts, ploughs,
spades, and so forth, without a given portion of the first, are nothing at all." (Edmund Burke: "Thoughts
and Details on Scarcity, originally presented to the Right Hon. W. Pitt, in the month of November 1795,"
Edit. London, 1800, p. 10.)

[51 In The Times of 26th November, 1862, a manufacturer, whose mill employed 800 hands, and
consumed, on the average, 150 bales of East Indian, or 130 bales of American cotton, complains, in
doleful manner, of the standing expenses of his factory when not working. He estimates them at £6,000 a
year. Among them are a number of items that do not concern us here, such as rent, rates, and taxes,
insurance, salaries of the manager, book-keeper, engineer, and others. Then he reckons £150 for coal
used to heat the mill occasionally, and run the engine now and then. Besides this, he includes the wages
of the people employed at odd times to keep the machinery in working order. Lastly, he puts down
£1,200 for depreciation of machinery, because "the weather and the natural principle of decay do not
suspend their operations because the steam-engine ceases to revolve." He says, emphatically, he does not
estimate his depreciation at more than the small sum of £1,200, because his machinery is already nearly
worn out.

[61 "Productive consumption ... where the consumption of a commodity is a part of the process of
production. ... In these instances there is no consumption of value." (S. P. Newman, 1. c, p. 296.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (8 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

[71 In an American compendium that has gone through, perhaps, 20 editions, this passage occurs: "It
matters not in what form capital re-appears;" then after a lengthy enumeration of all the possible
ingredients of production whose value re-appears in the product, the passage concludes thus: "The
various kinds of food, clothing, and shelter, necessary for the existence and comfort of the human being,
are also changed. They are consumed from time to time, and their value re-appears in that new vigour
imparted to his body and mind, forming fresh capital, to be employed again in the work of production."
(F. Wayland, 1. c, pp. 31, 32.) Without noticing any other oddities, it suffices to observe, that what
re-appears in the fresh vigour, is not the bread's price, but its bloodforming substances. What, on the
other hand, re-appears in the value of that vigour, is not the means of subsistence, but their value. The
same necessaries of life, at half the price, would form just as much muscle and bone, just as much vigour,
but not vigour of the same value. This confusion of "value" and "vigour" coupled with our author's
Pharisaical indefiniteness, mark an attempt, futile for all that, to thrash out an explanation of
surplus-value from a mere re-appearance of pre-existing values.

[81 "Toutes les productions d'un meme — genre ne forment proprement qu'une masse, dont le prix se
determine en general et sans egard aux circonstances particulieres." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 893.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Nine: The Rate of Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (9 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute

Surplus-Value



CHAPTER NINE:

THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE



Contents

Section 1 - The Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power

Section 2 - The Representation of the Components of the Value of the Product by Corresponding

Proportional Parts of the Product itself

Section 3 - Senior's "Last Hour"

Section 4 - Surplus-Produce



SECTION 1.

THE DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER



The surplus-value generated in the process of production by C, the capital advanced, or in other words,
the self-expansion of the value of the capital C, presents itself for our consideration, in the first place, as
a surplus, as the amount by which the value of the product exceeds the value of its constituent elements.

The capital C is made up of two components, one, the sum of money c laid out upon the means of
production, and the other, the sum of money v expended upon the labour-power; c represents the portion
that has become constant capital, and v the portion that has become variable capital. At first then, C = c +
v: for example, if £500 is the capital advanced, its components may be such that the £500 = £410 const. +
£90 var. When the process of production is finished, we get a commodity whose value = (c + v) + s,
where s is the surplus- value; or taking our former figures, the value of this commodity may be (£410
const. + £90 var.) + £90 surpl. The original capital has now changed from C to C, from £500 to £590.
The difference is s or a surplusvalue of £90, Since the value of the constituent elements of the product is
equal to the value of the advanced capital, it is mere tautology to say, that the excess of the value of the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (1 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

product over the value of its constituent elements, is equal to the expansion of the capital advanced or to
the surplus-value produced.

Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little more closely. The two things compared are, the
value of the product and the value of its constituents consumed in the process of production. Now we
have seen how that portion of the constant capital which consists of the instruments of labour, transfers to
the production only a fraction of its value, while the remainder of that value continues, to reside in those
instruments. Since this remainder plays no part in the formation of value, we may at present leave it on
one side. To introduce it into the calculation would make no difference. For instance, taking our former
example, c = £410: suppose this sum to consist of £312 value of raw material, £44 value of auxiliary
material, and £54 value of the machinery worn away in the process; and suppose that the total value of
the machinery employed is £1,054. Out of this latter sum, then, we reckon as advanced for the purpose of
turning out the product, the sum of £54 alone, which the machinery loses by wear and tear in the process;
for this is all it parts with to the product. Now if we also reckon the remaining £1,000, which still
continues in the machinery, as transferred to the product, we ought also to reckon it as part of the value
advanced, and thus make it appear on both sides of our calculation. [1] We should, in this way, get
£1,500 on one side and £1,590 on the other. The difference of these two sums, or the surplus-value,
would still be £90. Throughout this Book therefore, by constant capital advanced for the production of
value, we always mean, unless the context is repugnant thereto, the value of the means of production
actually consumed in the process, and that value alone.

This being so, let us return to the formula C = c + v, which we saw was transformed into C = (c + v) + s,
C becoming C. We know that the value of the constant capital is transferred to, and merely re-appears in
the product. The new value actually created in the process, the value produced, or value-product, is
therefore not the same as the value of the product; it is not, as it would at first sight appear (c + v) + s or
£410 const. + £90 var. + £90 surpl.; but v + s or £90 var. + £90 surpl., not £590 but £180. If c = 0, or in
other words, if there were branches of industry in which the capitalist could dispense with all means of
production made by previous labour, whether they be raw material, auxiliary material, or instruments of
labour, employing only labour-power and materials supplied by Nature, in that case, there would be no
constant capital to transfer to the product. This component of the value of the product, i.e., the £410 in
our example, would be eliminated, but the sum of £180, the amount of new value created, or the value
produced, which contains £90 of surplus-value, would remain just as great as if c represented the highest
value imaginable. We should have C = (0 + v) = v or C the expanded capital = v + s and therefore C - C
= s as before. On the other hand, if s = 0, or in other words, if the labour-power, whose value is advanced
in the form of variable capital, were to produce only its equivalent, we should have C = c + v or C the
value of the product — (c + v) + or C = C. The capital advanced would, in this case, not have
expanded its value.

From what has gone before, we know that surplus-value is purely the result of a variation in the value of
v, of that portion of the capital which is transformed into labour-power; consequently, v + s = v + v, orv
plus an increment of v. But the fact that it is v alone that varies, and the conditions of that variation, are
obscured by the circumstance that in consequence of the increase in the variable component of the
capital, there is also an increase in. the sum total of the advanced capital. It was originally £500 and
becomes £590. Therefore in order that our investigation may lead to accurate results, we must make
abstraction from that portion of the value of the product, in which constant capital alone appears, and
consequently must equate the constant capital to zero or make c = 0. This is merely an application of a
mathematical rule, employed whenever we operate with constant and variable magnitudes, related to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (2 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

each other by the symbols of addition and subtraction only.

A further difficulty is caused by the original form of the variable capital. In our example, C = £410
const. + £90 var. + £90 surpl.; but £90 is a given and therefore a constant quantity; hence it appears
absurd to treat it as variable. But in fact, the term £90 var. is here merely a symbol to show that this value
undergoes a process. The portion of the capital invested in the purchase of labour-power is a definite
quantity of materialised labour, a constant value like the value of the labour-power purchased. But in the
process of production the place of the £90 is taken by the labour-power in action, dead labour is replaced
by living labour, something stagnant by something flowing, a constant by a variable. The result is the
reproduction of v plus an increment of v. From the point of view then of capitalist production, the whole
process appears as the spontaneous variation of the originally constant value, which is transformed into
labour-power. Both the process and its result, appear to be owing to this value. If, therefore, such
expressions as "£90 variable capital," or "so much self-expanding value", appear contradictory, this is
only because they bring to the surface a contradiction immanent in capitalist production.

At first sight it appears a strange proceeding, to equate the constant capital to zero. Yet it is what we do
every day. If, for example, we wish to calculate the amount of England's profits from the cotton industry,
we first of all deduct the sums paid for cotton to the United States, India, Egypt and other countries; in
other words, the value of the capital that merely re-appears in the value of the product, is put = 0.

Of course the ratio of surplus-value not only to that portion of the capital from which it immediately
springs, and whose change of value it represents, but also -to the sum total of the capital advanced is
economically of very great importance. We shall, therefore, in the third book, treat of this ratio
exhaustively. In order to enable one portion of a capital to expand its value by being converted into
labour-power, it is necessary that another portion be converted into means of production. In order that
variable capital may perform its function, constant capital must be advanced in proper proportion, a
proportion given by the special technical conditions of each labour-process. The circumstance, however,
that retorts and other vessels, are necessary to a chemical process, does not compel the chemist to notice
them in the result of his analysis. If we look at the means of production, in their relation to the creation of
value, and to the variation in the quantity of value, apart from anything else, they appear simply as the
material in which labour-power, the value-creator, incorporates itself. Neither the nature, nor the value of
this material is of any importance. The only requisite is that there be a sufficient supply to absorb the
labour expended in the process of production. That supply once given, the material may rise or fall in
value, or even be, as land and the sea, without any value in itself; but this will have no influence on the
creation of value or on the variation in the quantity of value. [2]

In the first place then we equate the constant capital to zero. The capital advanced is consequently
reduced from c + v to v, and instead of the value of the product (c + v) + s we have now the value
produced (v + s). Given the new value produced = £180, which sum consequently represents the whole
labour expended during the process, then subtracting from it £90 the value of the variable capital, we
have remaining £90, the amount of the surplus-value. This sum of £90 or s expresses the absolute
quantity of surplus-value produced. The relative quantity produced, or the increase per cent of the
variable capital, is determined, it is plain, by the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable capital, or is
expressed by s/v. In our example this ratio is 90/90, which gives an increase of 100%. This relative
increase in the value of the variable capital, or the relative magnitude of the surplus-value, I call, "The
rate of surplus-value." \3]



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (3 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

We have seen that the labourer, during one portion of the labour-process, produces only the value of his
labour-power, that is, the value of his means of subsistence. Now since his work forms part of a system,
based on the social division of labour, he does not directly produce the actual necessaries which he
himself consumes; he produces instead a particular commodity, yarn for example, whose value is equal
to the value of those necessaries or of the money with which they can be bought. The portion of his day's
labour devoted to this purpose, will be greater or less, in proportion to the value of the necessaries that he
daily requires on an average, or, what amounts to the same thing, in proportion to the labour-time
required on an average to produce them. If the value of those necessaries represent on an average the
expenditure of six hours' labour, the workman must on an average work for six hours to produce that
value. If instead of working for the capitalist, he worked independently on his own account, he would,
other things being equal, still be obliged to labour for the same number of hours, in order to produce the
value of his labour-power, and thereby to gain the means of subsistence necessary for his conservation or
continued reproduction. But as we have seen, during that portion of his day's labour in which he produces
the value of his labour-power, say three shillings, he produces only an equivalent for the value of his
labour-power already advanced [41 by the capitalist; the new value created only replaces the variable
capital advanced. It is owing to this fact, that the production of the new value of three shillings takes the
semblance of a mere reproduction. That portion of the working-day, then, during which this reproduction
takes place, I call "necessary" labour-time, and the labour expended during that time I call "necessary"
labour £52 Necessary, as regards the labourer, because independent of the particular . 2 social form of his
labour; necessary, as regards capital, and the world of capitalists, because on the continued existence of
the labourer depends their existence also.

During the second period of the labour-process, that in which his labour is no longer necessary labour,
the workman, it is true, labours, expends labour-power; but his labour, being no longer necessary labour,
he creates no value for himself. He creates surplus-value which, for the capitalist, has all the charms of a
creation out of nothing. This portion of the working-day, I name surplus labour-time, and to the labour
expended during that time, I give the name of surplus-labour. It is every bit as important, for a correct
understanding of surplus-value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of surplus labour-time, as nothing
but materialised surplus-labour, as it is, for a proper comprehension of value, to conceive it as a mere
congelation of so many hours of labour, as nothing but materialised labour. The essential difference
between the various economic forms of society, between, for instance, a society based on slave-labour,
and one based on wage-labour, lies only in the mode in which this surplus-labour is in each case
extracted from the actual producer, the labourer. [6]

Since, on the one hand, the values of the variable capital and of the labour-power purchased by that
capital are equal, and the value of this labour-power determines the necessary portion of the
working-day; and since, on the other hand, the surplus- value is determined by the surplus portion of the
working-day, it follows that surplus-value bears the same ratio to variable capital, that surplus-labour
does to necessary labour, or in other words, the rate of surplus-value

s surplus-labour



v necessary labour

Both ratios, s/v and surplus-labour/necessary-labour, express the same thing in different ways; in the one
case by reference to materialised, incorporated labour, in the other by reference to living, fluent labour.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (4 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

The rate of surplus-value is therefore an exact expression for the degree of exploitation of labour-power
by capital, or of the labourer by the capitalist. £7]

We assumed in our example, that the value of the product £410 const. + £90 var. + £90 surpl., and that
the capital advanced = £500. Since the surplus-value = £90, and the advanced capital = £500, we should,
according to the usual way of reckoning, get as the rate of surplus-value (generally confounded with rate
of profits) 18%, a rate so low as possibly to cause a pleasant surprise to Mr. Carey and other harmonisers.
But in truth, the rate of surplus-value is not equal to s/C or s/C+v: thus it is not 90/500 but 90/500 or
100%, which is more than five times the apparent degree of exploitation. Although, in the case we have
supposed, we are ignorant of the actual length of the working-day, and of the duration in days or weeks
of the labour-process, as also of the number of labourers employed, yet the rate of surplus-value s/v
accurately discloses to us, by means of its equivalent expression, surplus-labour/necessary labour the
relation between the two parts of the working-day. This relation is here one of equality, the rate being
100%. Hence, it is plain, the labourer, in our example, works one half of the day for himself, the other
half for the capitalist.

The method of calculating the rate of surplus-value is therefore, shortly, as follows. We take the total
value of the product and put the constant capital which merely re-appears in it, equal to zero. What
remains, is the only value that has, in the process of producing the commodity, been actually created. If
the amount of surplus-value be given, we have only to deduct it from this remainder, to find the variable
capital. And vice versa, if the latter be given, and we require to find the surplus-value. If both be given,
we have only to perform the concluding operation, viz., to calculate s/v, the ratio of the surplus- value to
the v variable capital.

Though the method is so simple, yet it may not be amiss, by means of a few examples, to exercise the
reader in the application of the novel principles underlying it.

First we will take the case of a spinning mill containing 10,000 mule spindles, spinning No. 32 yarn from
American cotton, and producing 1 lb. of yarn weekly per spindle. We assume the waste to be 6%: under
these circumstances 10,600 lbs. of cotton are consumed weekly, of which 600 lbs. go to waste. The price
of the cotton in April, 1871, was 7 3/4d. per lb.; the raw material therefore costs in round numbers
£342. The 10,000 spindles, including preparation-machinery, and motive power, cost, we will assume, £1
per spindle, amounting to a total of £10,000. The wear and tear we put at 10%, or £1,000 yearly = £20
weekly. The rent of the building we suppose to be £300 a year, or £6 a week. Coal consumed (for 100
horse-power indicated, at 4 lbs. of coal per horse-power per hour during 60 hours, and inclusive of that
consumed in heating the mill), 1 1 tons a week at 8s. 6 d. a ton, amounts to about £4 1/2 a week: gas, £1 a
week, oil, &c, £4 1/2 a week. Total cost of the above auxiliary materials, £10 weekly. Therefore the
constant portion of the value of the week's product is £378. Wages amount to £52 a week. The price of
the yarn is 12 l/4d. per. lb. which gives for the value of 10,000 lbs. the sum of £510. The surplus-value is
therefore in this case £510 - £430 = £80. We put the constant part of the value of the product = 0, as it
plays no part in the creation of value. There remains £132 as the weekly value created, which = £52 var.
+ £80 surpl. The rate of surplus-value is therefore 80/52 = 153 1 1/13%. In a working-day of 10 hours
with average labour the result is: necessary labour = 3 31/33 hours, and surplus-labour = 6 2/33. £81

One more example. Jacob gives the following calculation for the year 1815. Owing to the previous
adjustment of several items it is very imperfect; nevertheless for our purpose it is sufficient. In it he
assumes the price of wheat to be 8s. a quarter, and the average yield per acre to be 22 bushels.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (5 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine



VALUE PRODUCED PER ACRE


Seed


£1 9s. Od.


Tithes, Rates,
and taxes,


£1 Is. Od.


Manure


£2 10s. Od.


Rent


£1 8s. Od.


Wages


£3 10s. Od.


Farmer's Profit
and Interest


£1 2s. Od.


TOTAL


£7 9s. Od.


TOTAL


£3 llsOd.



Assuming that the price of the product is the same as its value, we here find the surplus-value distributed
under the various heads of profit, interest, rent, &c. We have, nothing to do with these in detail; we
simply add them together, and the sum is a surplus-value of £3 lis. Od. The sum of £3 19s. Od., paid for
seed and manure, is constant capital, and we put it equal to zero. There is left the sum of £3 10s. Od.,
which is the variable capital advanced: and we see that a new value of £3 10s. Od + £3 lis. Od. has been
produced in its place. Therefore ' s/v = £3 lis. Od. / £3 10s. 0d., giving a rate of surplus-value of more
than 100%. The labourer employs more than one half of his working-day in producing the surplus-value,
which different persons, under different pretexts, share amongst themselves. [9J



SECTION 2.

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE COMPONENTS OF THE VALUE OF THE PRODUCT BY
CORRESPONDING PROPORTIONAL PARTS OF THE PRODUCT ITSELF



Let us now return to the example by which we were shown how the capitalist converts money into
capital.

The product of a working-day of 12 hours is 20 lbs. of yarn, having a value of 30s. No less than 8/10ths
of this value, or 24s., is due to mere re-appearance in it, of the value of the means of production (20 lbs.
of cotton, value 20s., and spindle worn away, 4s.): it is therefore constant capital. The remaining 2/10ths
or 6s. is the new value created during the spinning process: of this one half replaces the value of the day's
labour-power, or the variable capital, the remaining half constitutes a surplus- value of 3s. The total value
then of the 20 lbs. of yarn is made up as follows:

30s. value of yarn = 24s. const. + 3s. var. + 3s. surpl.

Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lbs. of yarn produced, it follows that the various
component parts of this value, can be represented as being contained respectively in corresponding parts
of the product.

If the value of 30s. is contained in 20 lbs. of yarn, then 8/10ths of this value, or the 24s. that form its
constant part, is contained in 8/10ths of the product or in 16 lbs. of yarn. Of the latter 13 1/3 lbs.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (6 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

represent the value of the raw material, the 20s. worth of cotton spun, and 2 2/3 lbs. represent the 4s.
worth of spindle, &c, worn away in the process.

Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 lbs. of yarn, is represented by 13 1/3 lbs. of
yarn. This latter weight of yarn contains, it is true, by weight, no more than 13 1/3 lbs. of cotton, worth
13 1/3 shillings; but the 6 2/3 shillings additional value contained in it, are the equivalent for the cotton
consumed in spinning the remaining 6 2/3 lbs. of yarn. The effect is the same as if these 6 2/3 lbs. of yarn
contained no cotton at all, and the whole 20 lbs. of cotton were concentrated in the 13 1/3 lbs. of yarn.
The latter weight, on the other hand, does not contain an atom either of the value of the auxiliary
materials and implements, or of the value newly created in the process.

In the same way, the 2 2/3 lbs. of yarn, in which the 4s., the remainder of the constant capital, is
embodied, represents nothing but the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of labour
consumed in producing the 20 lbs. of yarn.

We have, therefore, arrived at this result: although eight-tenths of the product, or 16 lbs. of yarn, is, in its
character of an article of utility, just as much the fabric of the spinner's labour, as the remainder of the
same product, yet when viewed in this connexion, it does not contain, and has not absorbed any labour
expended during the process of spinning. It is just as if the cotton had converted itself into yarn, without
help; as if the shape it had assumed was mere trickery and deceit: for so soon as our capitalist sells it for
24s., and with the money replaces his means of production, it becomes evident that this 16 lbs. of yarn is
nothing more than so much cotton and spindle-waste in disguise.

On the other hand, the remaining 2/10 ths of the product, or 4 lbs. of yarn, represent nothing but the new
value of 6s., created during the 12 hours' spinning process. All the value transferred to those 4 lbs., from
the raw material and instruments of labour consumed, was, so to say, intercepted in order to be
incorporated in the 16 lbs. first spun. In this case, it is as if the spinner had spun 4 lbs. of yarn out of air,
or, as if he had spun them with the aid of cotton and spindles, that, being the spontaneous gift of Nature,
transferred no value to the product.

Of this 4 lbs. of yarn, in which the whole of the value newly created during the process, is condensed,
one half represents the equivalent for the value of the labour consumed, or the 3s. variable capital, the
other half represents the 3s. surplus- value.

Since 12 working-hours of the spinner are embodied in 6s., it follows that in yarn of the value of 30s.,
there must be embodied 60 working-hours. And this quantity of labour- time does in fact exist in the 20
lbs. of yarn; for in 8/10ths or 16 lbs. there are materialised the 48 hours of 10 labour expended, before the
commencement of the spinning process, on the means of production; and in the remaining 2 ths or 4 lbs.
there 10 are materialised the 12 hours' work done during the process itself.

On a former page we saw that the value of the yarn is equal to the sum of the new value created during
the production of that yarn plus the value previously existing in the means of production.

It has now been shown how the various component parts of the value of the product, parts that differ
functionally from each other, may be represented by corresponding proportional parts of the product
itself.

To split up in this manner the product into different parts, of which one represents only the labour
previously spent on the means of production, or the constant capital, another, only the necessary labour

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (7 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

spent during the process of production, or the variable capital, and another and last part, only the
surplus-labour expended during the same process, or the surplus-value; to do this, is, as will be seen later
on from its application to complicated and hitherto unsolved problems, no less important than it is
simple.

In the preceding investigation we have treated the total product as the final result, ready for use, of a
working-day of 12 hours. We can however follow this total product through all the stages of its
production; and in this way we shall arrive at the same result as before, if we represent the partial
products, given off at the different stages, as functionally different parts of the final or total product.

The spinner produces in 12 hours 20 lbs. of yarn, or in I hour 1 2/3 lbs; consequently he produces in 8
hours 13 2/3 lbs., or a partial product equal in value to all the cotton that is spun in a whole day. In like
manner the partial product of the next period of 1 hour and 36 minutes, is 2 2/3 lbs. of yarn: this
represents the value of the instruments of labour that are consumed in 12 hours. In the following hour
and 12 minutes, the spinner produces 2 lbs. of yarn worth 3 shillings, a value equal to the whole value he
creates in his 6 hours' necessary labour. Finally, in the last hour and 12 minutes he produces another 2
lbs. of yarn, whose value is equal to the surplus-value, created by his surplus-labour during half a day.
This method of calculation serves the English manufacturer for every-day use; it shows, he will say, that
in the first 8 hours, or 2/3 of the working-day, he gets back the value of his cotton; and so on for the
remaining hours. It is also a perfectly correct method: being in fact the first method given above with this
difference, that instead of being applied to space, in which the different parts of the completed product lie
side by side, it deals with time, in which those parts are successively produced. But it can also be
accompanied by very barbarian notions, more especially in the heads of those who are as much
interested, practically, in the process of making value beget value, as they are in misunderstanding that
process theoretically. Such people may get the notion into their heads, that our spinner, for example,
produces or replaces in the first 8 hours of his working-day the value of the cotton; in the following hour
and 36 minutes the value of the instruments of labour worn away; in the next hour and 12 minutes the
value of the wages; and that he devotes to the production of surplus-value for the manufacturer, only that
well known "last hour." In this way the poor spinner is made to perform the two-fold miracle not only of
producing cotton, spindles, steam-engine, coal, oil, &c, at the same time that he spins with them, but
also of turning one working-day into five; for, in the example we are considering, the production of the
raw material and instruments of labour demands four working-days of twelve hours each, and their
conversion into yarn requires another such day. That the love of lucre induces an easy belief in such
miracles, and that sycophant doctrinaires are never wanting to prove them, is vouched for by the
following incident of historical celebrity.



SECTION 3.

SENIOR'S "LAST HOUR"

One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W. Senior, who may be called the bel-esprit of English

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (8 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

economists, well known, alike for his economic "science," and for his beautiful style, was summoned
from Oxford to Manchester, to learn in the latter place, the Political Economy that he taught in the
former. The manufacturers elected him as their champion, not only against the newly passed Factory Act,
but against the still more menacing Ten-hours' agitation. With their usual practical acuteness, they had
found out- that the learned Professor "wanted a good deal of finishing;" it was this discovery that caused
them to write for him. On his side the Professor has embodied the lecture he received from the
Manchester manufacturers, in a pamphlet, entitled: "Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the cotton
manufacture." London, 1837. Here we find, amongst others, the following edifying passage: "Under the
present law, no mill in which persons under 18 years of age are employed, ... can be worked more than
1 1 1/2 hours a day, that is 12 hours for 5 days in the week, and nine on Saturday.

"Now the following analysis (!) will show that in a mill so worked, the whole net profit is derived/rom
the last hour. I will suppose a manufacturer to invest £100,000: — £80,000 in his mill and machinery,
and £20,000 in raw material and wages. The annual return of that mill, supposing the capital to be turned
once a year, and gross profits to be 15 per cent., ought to be goods worth £15,000.... Of this £1 15,000,
each of the twenty-three half-hours of work produces 5-1 15ths or one twenty-third. Of these 23-23rds
(constituting the whole £1 15,000) twenty, that is to say £100,000 out of the £1 15,000, simply replace the
capital; — one twenty-third (or £5,000 out of the £1 15,000) makes up for the deterioration of the mill
and machinery. The remaining 2-23rds, that is, the last two of the twenty-three half-hours of every day,
produce the net profit of 10 per cent. If, therefore (prices remaining the same), the factory could be kept
at work thirteen hours instead of eleven and a half, with an addition of about £2,600 to the circulating
capital, the net profit would be more than doubled. On the other hand, if the hours of working were
reduced by one hour per day (prices remaining the same), the net profit would be destroyed — if they
were reduced by one hour and a half, even the gross profit would be destroyed. "£101

And the Professor calls this an "analysis!" If, giving credence to the out-cries of the manufacturers, he
believed that the workmen spend the best part of the day in the production, i.e., the reproduction or
replacement of the value of the buildings, machinery, cotton, coal, &c, then his analysis was
superfluous. His answer would simply have been: — Gentlemen! if you work your mills for 10 hours
instead of 1 1 1/2, then, other things being equal, the daily consumption of cotton, machinery, &c, will
decrease in proportion. You gain just as much as you lose. Your work-people will in future spend one
hour and a half less time in reproducing or replacing the capital that has been advanced. — If, on the
other hand, he did not believe them without further inquiry, but, as being an expert in such matters,
deemed an analysis necessary, then he ought, in a question that is concerned exclusively with the
relations of net profit to the length of the working-day, before all things to have asked the manufacturers,
to be careful not to lump together machinery, workshops, raw material, and labour, but to be good
enough to place the constant capital, invested in buildings, machinery, raw material, &c, on one side of
the account, and the capital advanced in wages on the other side. If the Professor then found, that in
accordance with the calculation of the manufacturers, the workman reproduced or replaced his wages in
2 half-hours, in that case, he should have continued his analysis thus:

According to your figures, the workman in the last hour but one produces his wages, and in the last hour
your surplus-value or net profit. Now, since in equal periods he produces equal values, the produce of the
last hour but one, must have the same value as that of the last hour. Further, it is only while he labours
that he produces any value at all, and the amount of his labour is measured by his labour-time. This you
say, amounts to 1 1 1/2 hours a day. He employs one portion of these 1 1 1/2 hours, in producing or
replacing his wages, and the remaining portion in producing your net profit. Beyond this he does

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (9 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

absolutely nothing. But since, on your assumption, his wages, and the surplus-value he yields, are of
equal value, it is clear that he produces his wages in 5 3/4 hours, and your net profit in the other 5 3/4
hours. Again, since the value of the yarn produced in 2 hours, is equal to the sum of the values of his
wages and of your net profit, the measure of the value of this yarn must be 1 1 1/2 working-hours, of
which 5 3/4 hours measure the value of the yarn produced in the last hour but one, and 5 3/4, the value of
the yarn produced in the last hour. We now come to a ticklish point; therefore, attention! The last
working-hour but one is, like the first, an ordinary working-hour, neither more nor less. How then can the
spinner produce in one hour, in the shape of yarn, a value that embodies 5 3/4 hours' labour? The truth is
that he performs no such miracle. The use-value produced by him in one hour, is a definite quantity of
yarn. The value of this yarn is measured by 5 3/4 working-hours, of which 4 3/4 were, without
any assistance from him, previously embodied in the means of production, in the cotton, the machinery,
and so on; the remaining one hour alone is added by him. Therefore since his wages are produced in 5
3/4 hours, and the yarn produced in one hour also contains 5 3/4 hours' work, there is no witchcraft in the
result, that the value created by his 5 3/4 hours' spinning, is equal to the value of the product spun in one
hour. You are altogether on the wrong track, if you think that he loses a single moment of his
working-day, in reproducing or replacing the values of the cotton, the machinery, and so on. On the
contrary, it is because his labour converts the cotton and spindles into yarn, because he spins, that the
values of the cotton and spindles go over to the yarn of their own accord. This result is owing to the
quality of his labour, not to its quantity. It is true, he will in one hour transfer to the yarn more value, in
the shape of cotton, than he will in half an hour; but that is only because in one hour he spins up more
cotton than in half an hour. You see then, your assertion, that the workman produces, in the last hour but
one, the value of his wages, and in the last hour your net profit, amounts to no more than this, that in the
yarn produced by him in 2 working-hours, whether they are the 2 first or the 2 last hours of the
working-day, in that yarn, there are incorporated 11 1/2 working-hours, or just a whole day's work, i.e.,
two hours of his own work and 9 1/2 hours of other people's. And my assertion that, in the first 5 3/4
hours, he produces his wages, and in the last 5 3/4 hours your net profit, amounts only to this, that you
pay him for the former, but not for the latter. In speaking of payment of labour, instead of payment of
labour-power, I only talk your own slang. Now, gentlemen, if you compare the working-time you pay
for, with that which you do not pay for, you will find that they are to one another, as half a day is to half
a day; this gives a rate of 100%, and a very pretty percentage it is. Further, there is not the least doubt,
that if you make you "hands" toil for 13 hours, instead of 1 1 1/2, and, as may be expected from you, treat
the work done in that extra one hour and a half, as pure surplus-labour, then the latter will be increased
from 5 3/4 hours' labour to 7 1/4 hours' labour, and the rate of surplus-value from 100% to 126 2/23%.
So that you are altogether too sanguine, in expecting that by such an addition of 1 1/2 hours to the
working-day, the rate will rise from 100% to 200% and more, in other words that it will be "more than
doubled." On the other hand-man's heart is a wonderful thing, especially when carried in the purse —
you take too pessimist a view, when you fear, that with a reduction of the hours of labour from 1 1 1/2 to
10, the whole of your net profit will go to the dogs. Not at all. All other conditions remaining the same,
the surplus-labour will fall from 5 3/4 hours to 4 3/4 hours, a period that still gives a very profitable rate
of surplus-value, namely 82 14/23%. But this dreadful "last hour," about which you have invented more
stories than have the millenarians about the day of judgment, is "all bosh." If it goes, it will cost neither
you, your net profit, nor the boys and girls whom you employ, their "purity of mind." fill Whenever
your "last hour" strikes in earnest, think of the Oxford Professor. And now, gentlemen, "farewell, and
may we meet again in yonder better world, but not before."

Senior invented the battle cry of the "last hour" in 1836. f!21 In the London Economist of the 15th April,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (10 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

1848, the same cry was again raised by James Wilson, an economic mandarin of high standing: this time
in opposition to the 10 hours' bill.



SECTION 4.

SURPLUS-PRODUCE



The portion of the product that represents the surplus-value, (one tenth of the 20 lbs., or 2 lbs. of yarn, in
the example given in Sec. 2) we call "surplus-produce." Just as the rate of surplus-value is determined by
its relation, not to the sum total of the capital, but to its variable part; in like manner, the relative quantity
of surplus-produce is determined by the ratio that this produce bears, not to the remaining part of the total
product, but to that part of it in which is incorporated the necessary labour. Since the production of
surplus-value is the chief end and aim of capitalist production, it is clear, that the greatness of a man's or
a nation's wealth should be measured, not by the absolute quantity produced, but by the relative
magnitude of the surplus-produce, f 131

The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus-labour, i.e., of the periods of time during which the
workman replaces the value of his labour-power, and produces the surplus-value, this sum constitutes the
actual time during which he works, i.e., the working-day.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "If we reckon the value of the fixed capital employed as a part of the advances, we must reckon the
remaining value of such capital at the end of the year as a part of the annual returns." (Malthus, "Princ. of
Pol. Econ." 2nd. ed., Lond., 1836, p. 269.)

\2] What Lucretius says is self-evident; "nil posse creari de nihilo," out of nothing, nothing can be
created. Creation of value is transformation of labour-power into labour. Labourpower itself is energy
transferred to a human organism by means of nourishing matter.

\3] In the same way that the English use the terms "rate of profit," "rate of interest." We shall see, in
Book III, that the rate of profit is no mystery, so soon as we know the laws of surplus-value. If we
reverse the process, we cannot comprehend either the one or the other.

[4J Note added in the 3rd German edition. — The author resorts here to the economic language in
current use. It will be remembered that on p. 182 (present edition, p. 174) it was shown that in reality the
labourer "advances" to the capitalist and not the capitalist to the labourer. — F. E.

[52 In this work, we have, up to now, employed the term "necessary labour-time," to designate the time



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (11 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

necessary under given social conditions for the production of any commodity. Henceforward we use it to
designate also the time necessary for the production of the particular commodity labour-power. The use
of one and the same technical term in different senses is inconvenient, but in no science can it be
altogether avoided. Compare, for instance, the higher with the lower branches of mathematics.

[61 Herr Wilhelm Thucydides Roscher has found a mare's nest. He has made the important discovery that
if, on the one hand, the formation of surplus-value, or surplus-produce, and the consequent accumulation
of capital, is now-a-days due to the thrift of the capitalist, on the other hand, in the lowest stages of
civilisation it is the strong who compel the weak to economise. (1. c, p. 78.) To economise what?
Labour? Or superfluous wealth that does not exist? What is it that makes such men as Roscher account
for the origin of surplus-value, by a mere rechauffe of the more of less plausible excuses by the capitalist,
for his appropriation of surplus-value? It is, besides their real ignorance, their apologetic dread of a
scientific analysis of value and surplus-value, and of obtaining a result, possibly not altogether palatable
to the powers that be.

[71 Although the rate of surplus-value is an exact expression for the degree of exploitation of
labour-power, it is, in no sense, an expression for the absolute amount of exploitation. For example, if the
necessary labour 5 hours and the surplus-labour = 5 hours, the degree of exploitation is 100%. The
amount of exploitation is here measured by 5 hours. If, on the other hand, the necessary labour = 6 hours
and the surplus-labour = 6 hours, the degree of exploitation remains, as before, 100%, while the actual
amount of exploitation has increased 20%, namely from five hours to six.

[81 The above data, which may be relied upon, were given me by a Manchester spinner. In England the
horse-power of an engine was formerly calculated from the diameter of its cylinder, now the actual
horse-power shown by the indicator is taken.

[91 The calculations given in the text are intended merely as illustrations. We have in fact, assumed that
prices = values. We shall, however, see, in Book 111., that even in the case of average prices the
assumption cannot be made in this very simple manner.

f 101 Senior, 1. c, pp. 12, 13. We let pass such extraordinary notions as are of no importance for our
purpose; for instance, the assertion, that manufacturers reckon as part of their profit, gross or net, the
amount required to make good wear and tear of machinery, or in other words, to replace a part of the
capital. So, too, we pass over any question as to the accuracy of his figures. Leonard Homer has shown in
"A Letter to Mr. Senior," &c, London, 1837, that they are worth no more than so-called "Analysis."
Leonard Horner was one of the Factory Inquiry Commissioners in 1833, and Inspector, or rather Censor
of Factories till 1859. He rendered undying service to the English working-class. He carried on a
life-long contest, not only with the embittered manufacturers, but also with the Cabinet, to whom the
number of votes given by the masters in the Lower House, was a matter of far greater importance than
the number of hours worked by the "hands" in the mills.

Apart from efforts in principle, Senior's statement is confused. What he really intended to say was this:
The manufacturer employs the workman for 1 1 1/2 hours or for 23 half-hours daily. As the working-day,
so, too, the working year, may be conceived to consist of 1 1 1/2 hours or 23 half-hours, but each
multiplied by the number of working-days in the year. On this supposition, the 23 half-hours yield an
annual product of £1 15,000; one half-hour yields 1/23 x £1 15,000; 20 half-hours yield 20/23 x £1 15,000
= £100,000, i.e., they replace no more than the capital advanced. There remain 3 half-hours, which yield



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (12 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

3/23 x £1 15,000 = £5,000 or the gross profit. Of these 3 half-hours, one yields 1/23 x £1 15,000 = £5,000;
i.e., it makes up for the wear and tear of the machinery; the remaining 2 half-hours, i.e., the last hour,
yield 2/23 x £1 15,000 = £10,000 or the net profit. In the text Senior converts the last 2/23 of the product
into portions of the working-day itself.

fill If, on the one hand, Senior proved that the net profit of the manufacturer, the existence of the
English cotton industry, and England's command of the markets of the world, depend on "the last
working-hour," on the other hand, Dr. Andrew Ure showed, that if children and young persons under 18
years of age, instead of being kept the full 12 hours in the warm and pure moral atmosphere of the
factory, are turned out an hour sooner into the heartless and frivolous outer world, they will be deprived,
by idleness and vice, of all hope of salvation for their souls. Since 1848, the factory inspectors have
never tired of twitting the masters with this "last," this "fatal hour." Thus Mr. Ho veil in his report of the
21st May, 1855: "Had the following ingenious calculation (he quotes Senior) been correct, every cotton
factory in the United Kingdom would have been working at a loss since the year 1850." (Reports of the
Insp. of Fact., for the half-year, ending 30th April, 1855, pp. 19, 20.) In the year 1848, after the passing
of the 10 hours' bill, the masters of some flax spinning mills, scattered, few and far between, over the
country on the borders of Dorset and Somerset, foisted a petition against the bill on to the shoulders of a
few of their work-people. One of the clauses of this petition is as follows: "Your petitioners, as parents,
conceive that an additional hour of leisure will tend more to demoralise the children than otherwise,
believing that idleness is the parent of vice." On this the factory report of 31st Oct., 1848, says: The
atmosphere of the flax mills, in which the children of these virtuous and tender parents work, is so loaded
with dust and fibre from the raw material, that it is exceptionally unpleasant to stand even 10 minutes in
the spinning rooms: for you are unable to do so without the most painful sensation, owing to the eyes, the
ears, the nostrils, and mouth, being immediately filled by the clouds of flax dust from which there is no
escape. The labour itself, owing to the feverish haste of the machinery, demands unceasing application of
skill and movement, under the control of a watchfulness that never tires, and it seems somewhat hard, to
let parents apply the term "idling" to their own children, who, after allowing for meal-times, are fettered
for 10 whole hours to such an occupation, in such an atmosphere.... These children work longer than the
labourers in the neighbouring villages.... Such cruel talk about "idleness and vice" ought to be branded as
the purest cant, and the most shameless hypocrisy.... That portion of the public, who, about 12 years ago,
were struck by the assurance with which, under the sanction of high authority, it was publicly and most
earnestly proclaimed, that the whole net profit of the manufacturer flows from the labour of the last hour,
and that, therefore, the reduction of the working-day by one hour, would destroy his net profit, that
portion of the public, we say, will hardly believe its own eyes, when it now finds, that the original
discovery of the virtues of "the last hour" has since been so far improved, as to include morals as well as
profit; so that, if the duration of the labour of children, is reduced to a full 10 hours, their morals, together
with the net profits of their employers, will vanish, both being dependent on this last, this fatal hour. (See
Repts., Insp. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1848, p. 101.) The same report then gives some examples of the
morality and virtue of these same pure-minded manufacturers, of the tricks, the artifices, the cajoling, the
threats, and the falsifications, they made use of, in order, first, to compel a few defenceless workmen to
sign petitions of such a kind, and then to impose them upon Parliament as the petitions of a whole branch
of industry, or a whole country. It is highly characteristic of the present status of so-called economic
science, that neither Senior himself, who, at a later period, to his honour be it said, energetically
supported the factory legislation, nor his opponents, from first to last, have ever been able to explain the
false conclusions of the "original discovery." They appeal to actual experience, but the why and
wherefore remains a mystery.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (13 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

fl21 Nevertheless, the learned professor was not without some benefit from his journey to Manchester. In
the "Letters on the Factory Act," he makes the whole net gains including "profit" and "interests" and even
"something more," depend upon a single unpaid hour's work of the labourer. One year previously, in his
"Outlines of Political Economy," written for the instruction of Oxford students and cultivated Philistines,
he had also "discovered, in opposition to Ricardo's determination of value by labour, that profit is derived
from the labour of the capitalist, and interest from his asceticism, in other words, from his abstinence. "
The dodge was an old one, but the word "abstinence " was new. Herr Roscher translates it rightly by
"Enthaltung." Some of his countrymen, the Browns, Jones, and Robinsons, of Germany, not so well
versed in Latin as he, have, monk-like, rendered it by "Entsagung" (renunciation).

f 131 "To an individual with a capital of £20,000, whose profits were £2,000 per annum, it would be a
matter quite indifferent whether his capital would employ a 100 or 1,000 men, whether the commodity
produced sold for £10,000 or £20,000, provided, in all cases, his profit were not diminished below
£2,000. Is not the real interest of the nation similar? Provided its net real income, its rent and profits, be
the same, it is of no importance whether the nation consists of 10 or of 12 millions of inhabitants." (Ric.
1. c.,.p. 416.) Long before Ricardo, Arthur Young, a fanatical upholder of surplus-produce, for the rest, a
rambling, uncritical writer, whose reputation is in the inverse ratio of his merit, says, "Of what use, in a
modem kingdom, would be a whole province thus divided [in the old Roman manner, by small
independent peasants], however well cultivated, except for the mere purpose of breeding men, which
taken singly is a most useless purpose?" (Arthur Young: "Political Arithmetic, &c." London, 1774, p.
47.)

Very curious is "the strong inclination... to represent net wealth as beneficial to the labouring class...
though it is evidently not on account of being net." (Th . Hopkins, "On Rent of Land, &c." London, 1828,
p. 126.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Ten: The Working Day
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (14 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute Surplus-Value



CHAPTER TEN:
THE WORKING-DAY

Contents

Section 1 - The Limits of the Working-Day

Section 2 - The Greed for Surplus-Labour. Manufacturer and Boyard

Section 3 - Branches of English Industry without Legal Limits to Exploitation

Section 4 - Day and Night Work. The Relay System

Section 5 - The Struggle for a Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Laws for the Extension of the Working-Day

from the Middle of the 14th to the End of the 17th Century

Section 6 - The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Limitation by Law of the Working-Time. The

English Factory Acts, 1833 to 1864

Section 7 - The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Reaction of the English Factory Acts on Other Countries



SECTION 1

THE LIMITS OF THE WORKING-DAY



We started with the supposition that labour-power is bought and sold at its value. Its value, like that of all other
commodities, is determined by the working-time necessary to its production. If the production of the average daily
means of subsistence of the labourer takes up 6 hours, he must work, on the average, 6 hours every day, to produce
his daily labour-power, or to reproduce the value received as the result of its sale. The necessary part of his
working-day amounts to 6 hours, and is, therefore, caeteris paribus, a given quantity. But with this, the extent of the
working-day itself is not yet given.

Let us assume that the line A — B represents the length of the necessary working-time, say 6 hours. If the labour be
prolonged 1, 3, or 6 hours beyond A — B, we have 3 other lines:

Working-day I. Working-day II. Working-day III.

A B-C. A B — C. A B C.



representing 3 different working-days of 7, 9, and 12 hours. The extension B — C of the line A — B represents the
length of the surplus-labour. As the working-day is A — B + B — C or A — C, it varies with the variable quantity



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (1 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:42]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

B — C. Since A — B is constant, the ratio of B — C to A — B can always be calculated. In working-day I, it is 1/6,
in working-day II, 3/6, in working day III 6/6 of A — B. Since further the ratio

surplus working-time,



necessary working-time,



determines the rate of the surplus-value, the latter is given by the ratio of B — C to A — B. It amounts in the 3
different working-days respectively to 16 2/3, 50 and 100 per cent. On the other hand, the rate of surplus-value
alone would not give us the extent of the working-day. If this rate, e.g., were 100 per cent., the working-day might
be of 8, 10, 12, or more hours. It would indicate that the 2 constituent parts of the working-day, necessary-labour
and surplus-labour time, were equal in extent, but not how long each of these two constituent parts was.

The working-day is thus not a constant, but a variable quantity. One of its parts, certainly, is determined by the
working-time required for the reproduction of the labour-power of the labourer himself. But its total amount varies
with the duration of the surplus-labour. The working-day is, therefore, determinable, but is, per se, indeterminate.

m

Although the working-day is not a fixed, but a fluent quantity, it can, on the other hand, only vary within certain
limits. The minimum limit is, however, not determinable; of course, if we make the extension line B — C or the
surplus-labour = 0, we have a minimum limit, i.e., the part of the day which the labourer must necessarily work for
his own maintenance. On the basis of capitalist production, however, this necessary labour can form a part only of
the working-day; the working-day itself can never be reduced to this minimum. On the other hand, the working-day
has a maximum limit. It cannot be prolonged beyond a certain point. This maximum limit is conditioned by two
things. First, by the physical bounds of labour-power. Within the 24 hours of the natural day a man can expend only
a definite quantity of his vital force. A horse, in like manner, can only work from day to day, 8 hours. During part
of the day this force must rest, sleep; during another part the man has to satisfy other physical needs, to feed, wash,
and clothe himself. Besides these purely physical limitations, the extension of the working-day encounters moral
ones. The labourer needs time for satisfying his intellectual and social wants, the extent and number of which are
conditioned by the general state of social advancement. The variation of the working-day fluctuates, therefore,
within physical and social bounds. But both these limiting conditions are of a very elastic nature, and allow the
greatest latitude. So we find working-days of 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18 hours, i.e., of the most different lengths.

The capitalist has bought the labour-power at its day-rate. To him its use-value belongs during one working-day. He
has thus acquired the right to make the labourer work for him during one day. But, what is a working-day? [21

At all events, less than a natural day. By how much? The capitalist has his own views of this ultima Thule, the
necessary limit of the working-day. As capitalist, he is only capital personified. His soul is the soul of capital. But
capital has one single life impulse, the tendency to create value and surplus-value, to make its constant factor, the
means of production, absorb the greatest possible amount of surplus-labour. [3]

Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it
sucks. The time during which the labourer works, is the time during which the capitalist consumes the labour-power
he has purchased of him. [4J

If the labourer consumes his disposable time for himself, he robs the capitalist. [5J

The capitalist then takes his stand on the law of the exchange of commodities. He, like all other buyers, seeks to get
the greatest possible benefit out of the use-value of his commodity. Suddenly the voice of the labourer, which had
been stifled in the storm and stress of the process of production, rises:

The commodity that I have sold to you differs from the crowd of other commodities, in that its use creates value,
and a value greater than its own. That is why you bought it. That which on your side appears a spontaneous



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (2 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:42]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

expansion of capital, is on mine extra expenditure of labour-power. You and I know on the market only one law,
that of the exchange of commodities. And the consumption of the commodity belongs not to the seller who parts
with it, but to the buyer, who acquires it. To you, therefore, belongs the use of my daily labour-power. But by
means of the price that you pay for it each day, I must be able to reproduce it daily, and to sell it again. Apart from
natural exhaustion through age, &c, I must be able on the morrow to work with the same normal amount of force,
health and freshness as to-day. You preach to me constantly the gospel of "saving" and "abstinence." Good! I will,
like a sensible saving owner, husband my sole wealth, labour-power, and abstain from all foolish waste of it. I will
each day spend, set in motion, put into action only as much of it as is compatible with its normal duration, and
healthy development. By an unlimited extension of the working-day, you may in one day use up a quantity of
labour-power greater than I can restore in three. What you gain in labour I lose in substance. The use of my
labour-power and the spoliation of it are quite different things. If the average time that (doing a reasonable amount
of work) an average labourer can live, is 30 years, the value of my labour-power, which you pay me from day to
day is 1 / 365 x 30 or 1 / 10950 of its total value. But if you consume it in 10 years, you pay me daily 1 / 10950
instead of 1 / 3650 of its total value, i.e., only 1/3 of its daily value, and you rob me, therefore, every day of 2/3 of
the value of my commodity. You pay me for one day's labour-power, whilst you use that of 3 days. That is against
our contract and the law of exchanges. I demand, therefore, a working-day of normal length, and I demand it
without any appeal to your heart, for in money matters sentiment is out of place. You may be a model citizen,
perhaps a member of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and in the odour of sanctity to boot; but
the thing that you represent face to face with me has no heart in its breast. That which seems to throb there is my
own heart-beating. I demand the normal working-day because I, like every other seller, demand the value of my
commodity. [6J

We see then, that, apart from extremely elastic bounds, the nature of the exchange of commodities itself imposes no
limit to the working-day, no limit to surplus-labour. The capitalist maintains his rights as a purchaser when he tries
to make the working-day as long as possible, and to make, whenever possible, two working-days out of one. On the
other hand, the peculiar nature of the commodity sold implies a limit to its consumption by the purchaser, and the
labourer maintains his right as seller when he wishes to reduce the working-day to one of definite normal duration.
There is here, therefore, an antinomy, right against right, both equally bearing the seal of the law of exchanges.
Between equal rights force decides. Hence is it that in the history of capitalist production, the determination of what
is a working-day, presents itself as the result of a struggle, a struggle between collective capital, i.e., the class of
capitalists, and collective labour, i.e., the working-class.



SECTION 2

THE GREED FOR SURPLUS-LABOUR. MANUFACTURER AND BOYARD



Capital has not invented surplus-labour. Wherever a part of society possesses the monopoly of the means of
production, the labourer, free or not free, must add to the working-time necessary for his own maintenance an extra
working-time in order to produce the means of subsistence for the owners of the means of production, J7] whether
this proprietor be the Athenian xxxxx xxxxxxx, Etruscan theocrat, civis Romanus, Norman baron, American
slave-owner, Wallachian Boyard, modern landlord or capitalist. £8] It is, however, clear that in any given economic
formation of society, where not the exchange-value but the use-value of the product predominates, surplus-labour
will be limited by a given set of wants which may be greater or less, and that here no boundless thirst for
surplus-labour arises from the nature of the production itself. Hence in antiquity over- work becomes horrible only
when the object is to obtain exchange-value in its specific independent money-form; in the production of gold and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (3 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

silver. Compulsory working to death is here the recognised form of over- work. Only read Diodorus Siculus. \9]
Still these are exceptions in antiquity. But as soon as people, whose production still moves within the lower forms
of slave-labour, corvee-labour, &c, are drawn into the whirlpool of an international market dominated by the
capitalistic mode of production, the sale of their products for export becoming their principal interest, the civilised
horrors of over-work are grafted on the barbaric horrors of slavery, serfdom, &c. Hence the negro labour in the
Southern States of the American Union preserved something of a patriarchal character, so long as production was
chiefly directed to immediate local consumption. But in proportion, as the export of cotton became of vital interest
to these states, the over- working of the negro and sometimes the using up of his life in 7 years of labour became a
factor in a calculated and calculating system. It was no longer a question of obtaining from him a certain quantity of
useful products. It was now a question of production of surplus-labour itself: So was it also with the corvee, e.g., in
the Danubian Principalities (now Roumania).

The comparison of the greed for surplus-labour in the Danubian Principalities with the same greed in English
factories has a special interest, because surplus-labour in the corvee has an independent and palpable form.

Suppose the working-day consists of 6 hours of necessary labour, and 6 hours of surplus-labour. Then the free
labourer gives the capitalist every week 6 x 6 or 36 hours of surplus-labour. It is the same as if he worked 3 days in
the week for himself, and 3 days in the week gratis for the capitalist. But this is not evident on the surface.
Surplus-labour and necessary labour glide one into the other. I can, therefore, express the same relationship by
saying, e.g., that the labourer in every minute works 30 seconds for himself, and 30 for the capitalist, etc. It is
otherwise with the corvee. The necessary labour which the Wallachian peasant does for his own maintenance is
distinctly marked off from his surplus-labour on behalf of the Boyard. The one he does on his own field, the other
on the seignorial estate. Both parts of the labour-time exist, therefore, independently, side by side one with the
other. In the corvee the surplus-labour is accurately marked off from the necessary labour. This, however, can make
no difference with regard to the quantitative relation of surplus-labour to necessary labour. Three days'
surplus-labour in the week remain three days that yield no equivalent to the labourer himself, whether it be called
corvee or wage-labour. But in the capitalist the greed for surplus-labour appears in the straining after an unlimited
extension of the working-day, in the Boyard more simply in a direct hunting after days of corvee. [101

In the Danubian Principalities the corvee was mixed up with rents in kind and other appurtenances of bondage, but
it formed the most important tribute paid to the ruling class. Where this was the case, the corvee rarely arose from
serfdom; serfdom much more frequently on the other hand took origin from the corvee. [Ill This is what took
place in the Roumanian provinces. Their original mode of production was based on community of the soil, but not
in the Slavonic or Indian form. Part of the land was cultivated in severally as freehold by the members of the
community, another part — ager publicus — was cultivated by them in common. The products of this common
labour served partly as a reserve fund against bad harvests and other accidents, partly as a public store for providing
the costs of war, religion, and other common expenses. In course of time military and clerical dignitaries usurped,
along with the common land, the labour spent upon it. The labour of the free peasants on their common land was
transformed into corvee for the thieves of the common land. This corvee soon developed into a servile relationship
existing in point of fact, not in point of law, until Russia, the liberator of the world, made it legal under presence of
abolishing serfdom. The code of the corvee, which the Russian General Kisseleff proclaimed in 1831, was of course
dictated by the Boyards themselves. Thus Russia conquered with one blow the magnates of the Danubian
provinces, and the applause of liberal cretins throughout Europe.

According to the "Reglement organique," as this code of the corvee is called, every Wallachian peasant owes to the
so-called landlord, besides a mass of detailed payments in kind: (1), 12 days of general labour; (2), one day of field
labour; (3), one day of wood carrying. In all, 14 days in the year. With deep insight into Political Economy,
however, the working-day is not taken in its ordinary sense, but as the working-day necessary to the production of
an average daily product; and that average daily product is determined in so crafty a way that no Cyclops would be
done with it in 24 hours. In dry words, the Reglement itself declares with true Russian irony that by 12
working-days one must understand the product of the manual labour of 36 days, by 1 day of field labour 3 days, and



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (4 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

by 1 day of wood carrying in like manner three times as much. In all, 42 corvee days. To this had to be added the
so-called jobagie, service due to the lord for extraordinary occasions. In proportion to the size of its population,
every village has to furnish annually a definite contingent to the jobagie. This additional corvee is estimated at 14
days for each Wallachian peasant. Thus the prescribed corvee amounts to 56 working-days yearly. But the
agricultural year in Wallachia numbers in consequence of the severe climate only 210 days, of which 40 for
Sundays and holidays, 30 on an average for bad weather, together 70 days, do not count. 140 working-days remain.
The ratio of the corvee to the necessary labour 56/84 or 66 2/3 % gives a much smaller rate of surplus-value than
that which regulates the labour of the English agricultural or factory labourer. This is, however, only the legally
prescribed corvee. And in a spirit yet more "liberal" than the English Factory Acts, the "Reglement organique" has
known how to facilitate its own evasion. After it has made 56 days out of 12, the nominal day's work of each of the
56 corvee days is again so arranged that a portion of it must fall on the ensuing day. In one day, e.g., must be
weeded an extent of land, which, for this work, especially in maize plantations, needs twice as much time. The legal
day's work for some kinds of agricultural labour is interpretable in such a way that the day begins in May and ends
in October. In Moldavia conditions are still harder. "The 12 corvee days of the 'Reglement organique' cried a
Boyard drunk with victory, amount to 365 days in the year." [121

If the Reglement organique of the Danubian provinces was a positive expression of the greed for surplus-labour
which every paragraph legalised, the English Factory Acts are the negative expression of the same greed. These acts
curb the passion of capital for a limitless draining of labour-power, by forcibly limiting the working-day by state
regulations, made by a state that is ruled by capitalist-and landlord. Apart from the working-class movement that
daily grew more threatening, the limiting of factory labour was dictated by the same necessity which spread guano
over the English fields. The same blind eagerness for plunder that in the one case exhausted the soil, had, in the
other, torn up by the roots the living force of the nation. Periodical epidemics speak on this point as clearly as the
diminishing military standard in Germany and France. [131

The Factory Act of 1850 now in force (1867) allows for the average working-day 10 hours, i.e., for the first 5 days
12 hours from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., including 1/2 an hour for breakfast, and an hour for dinner, and thus leaving 10 1/2
working -hours, and 8 hours for Saturday, from 6 a.m. to 2 p.m., of which 1/2 an hour is subtracted for breakfast. 60
working-hours are left, 10 1/2 for each of the first 5 days, 7 1/2 for the last. [141

Certain guardians of these laws are appointed, Factory Inspectors, directly under the Home Secretary, whose reports
are published half-yearly, by order of Parliament. They give regular and official statistics of the capitalistic greed
for surplus-labour.

Let us listen, for a moment, to the Factory Inspectors. [151 "The fraudulent mill-owner begins work a quarter of an
hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) before 6 a.m., and leaves off a quarter of an hour (sometimes more,
sometimes less) after 6 p.m. He takes 5 minutes from the beginning and from the end of the half hour nominally
allowed for breakfast, and 10 minutes at the beginning and end of the hour nominally allowed for dinner. He works
for a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 2 p.m. on Saturday. Thus his gain is —

Before 6 a.m., 15 minutes.

After 6 p.m., 15"

At breakfast time, 10 "

At dinner time, 20 "



Five days — 300 minutes, 60 "

On Saturday before 6 a.m., 15 minutes.

At breakfast time, 10 "

After 2 p.m., 15"



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (5 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

40 minutes.
Total weekly, 340 minutes.

Or 5 hours and 40 minutes weekly, which multiplied by 50 working weeks in the year (allowing two for holidays
and occasional stoppages) is equal to 27 working-days." [161

"Five minutes a day's increased work, multiplied by weeks, are equal to two and a half days of produce in the year."
£121

"An additional hour a day gained by small instalments before 6 a.m., after 6 p.m., and at the beginning and end of
the times nominally fixed for meals, is nearly equivalent to working 13 months in the year." [181

Crises during which production is interrupted and the factories work "short time," i.e., for only a part of the week,
naturally do not affect the tendency to extend the working-day. The less business there is, the more profit has to be
made on the business done. The less time spent in work, the more of that time has to be turned into surplus
labour- time.

Thus the Factory Inspector's report on the period of the crisis from 1857 to 1858:

"It may seem inconsistent that there should be any overworking at a time when trade is so bad; but that very
badness leads to the transgression by unscrupulous men, they get the extra profit of it. ... In the last half year, says
Leonard Homer, 122 mills in my district have been given up; 143 were found standing," yet, over-work is
continued beyond the legal hours. [191

"For a great part of the time," says Mr. Howell, "owing to the depression of trade, many factories were altogether
closed, and a still greater number were working short time. I continue, however, to receive about the usual number
of complaints that half, or three-quarters of an hour in the day, are snatched from the workers by encroaching upon
the times professedly allowed for rest and refreshment." [201 The same phenomenon was reproduced on a smaller

scale during the frightful cotton-crises from 1861 to 1865. [211 "It is sometimes advanced by way of excuse, when
persons are found at work in a factory, either at a meal hour, or at some illegal time, that they will not leave the mill
at the appointed hour, and that compulsion is necessary to force them to cease work [cleaning their machinery,
&c], especially on Saturday afternoons. But, if the hands remain in a factory after the machinery has ceased to
revolve ... they would not have been so employed if sufficient time had been set apart specially for cleaning, &c,
either before 6 a.m. [sic.!] or before 2 p.m. on Saturday afternoons." [221

"The profit to be gained by it (over-working in violation of the Act) appears to be, to many, a greater temptation
than they can resist; they calculate upon the chance of not being found out; and when they see the small amount of
penalty and costs, which those who have been convicted have had to pay, they find that if they should be detected
there will still be a considerable balance of gain.... [231 In cases where the additional time is gained by a
multiplication of small thefts in the course of the day, there are insuperable difficulties to the inspectors making out
a case." [241

These "small thefts" of capital from the labourer's meal and recreation time, the factory inspectors also designate as
"petty pilferings of minutes," [251 "snatching a few minutes," [261 or, as the labourers technically called them,
"nibbling and cribbling at meal-times." [271

It is evident that in this atmosphere the formation of surplus-value by surplus-labour, is no secret. "If you allow
me," said a highly respectable master to me, "to work only ten minutes in the day over- time, you put one thousand a
year in my pocket." [281 "Moments are the elements of profit." [291

Nothing is from this point of view more characteristic than the designation of the workers who work full time as
"full-timers," and the children under 13 who are only allowed to work 6 hours as "half-timers." The worker is here
nothing more than personified labour- time. All individual distinctions are merged in those of "full-timers" and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (6 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
"half-timers " [301



SECTION 3

BRANCHES OF ENGLISH INDUSTRY WITHOUT LEGAL LIMITS TO EXPLOITATION



We have hitherto considered the tendency to the extension of the working-day, the were-wolfs hunger for
surplus-labour in a department where the monstrous exactions, not surpassed, says an English bourgeois economist,
by the cruelties of the Spaniards to the American red-skins, [311 caused capital at last to be bound by the chains of
legal regulations. Now, let us cast a glance at certain branches of production in which the exploitation of labour is
either free from fetters to this day, or was so yesterday.

Mr. Broughton Charlton, county magistrate, declared, as chairman of a meeting held at the Assembly Rooms,
Nottingham, on the 14th January, 1860, "that there was an amount of privation and suffering among that portion of
the population connected with the lace trade, unknown in other parts of the kingdom, indeed, in the civilised world
.... Children of nine or ten years are dragged from their squalid beds at two, three, or four o'clock in the morning
and compelled to work for a bare subsistence until ten, eleven, or twelve at night, their limbs wearing away, their
frames dwindling, their faces whitening, and their humanity absolutely sinking into a stone-like torpor, utterly
horrible to contemplate.... We are not surprised that Mr. Mallett, or any other manufacturer, should stand forward
and protest against discussion.... The system, as the Rev. Montagu Valpy describes it, is one of unmitigated slavery,
socially, physically, morally, and spiritually.... What can be thought of a town which holds a public meeting to
petition that the period of labour for men shall be diminished to eighteen hours a day? .... We declaim against the
Virginian and Carolinian cotton-planters. Is their black-market, their lash, and their barter of human flesh more
detestable than this slow sacrifice of humanity which takes place in order that veils and collars may be fabricated
for the benefit of capitalists?" [321

The potteries of Staffordshire have, during the last 22 years, been the subject of three parliamentary inquiries. The
result is embodied in Mr. Scriven's Report of 1841 to the "Children's Employment Commissioners," in the report of
Dr. Greenhow of 1860 published by order of the medical officer of the Privy Council (Public Health, 3rd Report,
112-113), lastly, in the report of Mr. Longe of 1862 in the "First Report of the Children's Employment Commission,
of the 13th June, 1863." For my purpose it is enough to take, from the reports of 1860 and 1863, some depositions
of the exploited children themselves. From the children we may form an opinion as to the adults, especially the girls
and women, and that in a branch of industry by the side of which cotton-spinning appears an agreeable and
healthful occupation. [331

William Wood, 9 years old, was 7 years and 10 months when he began to work. He "ran moulds" (carried
ready-moulded articles into the drying-room, afterwards bringing back the empty mould) from the beginning. He
came to work every day in the week at 6 a.m., and left off about 9 p.m. "I work till 9 o'clock at night six days in the
week. I have done so seven or eight weeks." Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 years old! J. Murray, 12 years of
age, says: "I turn jigger, and run moulds. I come at 6. Sometimes I come at 4. 1 worked all night last night, till 6
o'clock this morning. I have not been in bed since the night before last. There were eight or nine other boys working
last night. All but one have come this morning. I get 3 shillings and sixpence. I do not get any more for working at
night. I worked two nights last week." Fernyhough, a boy of ten: "I have not always an hour (for dinner). I have
only half an hour sometimes; on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday. [341

Dr. Greenhow states that the average duration of life in the pottery districts of Stoke-on-Trent, and Wolstanton is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (7 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

extraordinarily short. Although in the district of Stoke, only 36.6% and in Wolstanton only 30.4% of the adult male
population above 20 are employed in the potteries, among the men of that age in the first district more than half, in
the second, nearly 2/5 of the whole deaths are the result of pulmonary diseases among the potters. Dr. Boothroyd, a
medical practitioner at Hanley, says: "Each successive generation of potters is more dwarfed and less robust than
the preceding one." In like manner another doctor, Mr. M'Bean: "Since he began to practice among the potters 25
years ago, he had observed a marked degeneration especially shown in diminution of stature and breadth." These
statements are taken from the report of Dr. Greenhow in 1860. [351

From the report of the Commissioners in 1863, the following: Dr. J. T. Arledge, senior physician of the North
Staffordshire Infirmary, says: "The potters as a class, both men and women, represent a degenerated population,
both physically and morally. They are, as a rule, stunted in growth, ill-shaped, and frequently ill-formed in the
chest; they become prematurely old, and are certainly short-lived; they are phlegmatic and bloodless, and exhibit
their debility of constitution by obstinate attacks of dyspepsia, and disorders of the liver and kidneys, and by
rheumatism. But of all diseases they are especially prone to chest-disease, to pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, and
asthma. One form would appear peculiar to them, and is known as potter's asthma, or potter's consumption.
Scrofula attacking the glands, or bones, or other parts of the body, is a disease of two-thirds or more of the potters
.... That the 'degenerescence' of the population of this district is not even greater than it is, is due to the constant
recruiting from the adjacent country, and intermarriages with more healthy races." [361

Mr. Charles Parsons, late house surgeon of the same institution, writes in a letter to Commissioner Longe, amongst
other things: "I can only speak from personal observation and not from statistical data, but I do not hesitate to assert
that my indignation has been aroused again and again at the sight of poor children whose health has been sacrificed
to gratify the avarice of either parents or employers." He enumerates the causes of the diseases of the potters, and
sums them up in the phrase, "long hours." The report of the Commission trusts that "a manufacture which has
assumed so prominent a place in the whole world, will not long be subject to the remark that its great success is
accompanied with the physical deterioration, widespread bodily suffering, and early death of the workpeople ... by
whose labour and skill such great results have been achieved." [371 And all that holds of the potteries in England is
true of those in Scotland. [381

The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, from the discovery of the method of applying phosphorus to
the match itself. Since 1845 this manufacture has rapidly developed in England, and has extended especially
amongst the thickly populated parts of London as well as in Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Norwich,
Newcastle and Glasgow. With it has spread the form of lockjaw, which a Vienna physician in 1845 discovered to be
a disease peculiar to lucifer-matchmakers. Half the workers are children under thirteen, and young persons under
eighteen. The manufacture is on account of its unhealthiness and unpleasantness in such bad odour that only the
most miserable part of the labouring class, half-starved widows and so forth, deliver up their children to it, "the
ragged, half-starved, untaught children." [391

Of the witnesses that Commissioner White examined (1863), 270 were under 18, 50 under 10, 10 only 8, and 5 only
6 years old. A range of the working-day from 12 to 14 or 15 hours, night-labour, irregular meal-times, meals for the
most part taken in the very workrooms that are pestilent with phosphorus. Dante would have found the worst
horrors of his Inferno surpassed in this manufacture.

In the manufacture of paper-hangings the coarser sorts are printed by machine; the finer by hand (block-printing).
The most active business months are from the beginning of October to the end of April. During this time the work
goes on fast and furious without intermission from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m. or further into the night.

J. Leach deposes: "Last winter six out of nineteen girls were away from ill-health at one time from over-work. I
have to bawl at them to keep them awake." W. Duffy: "I have seen when the children could none of them keep their
eyes open for the work; indeed, none of us could." J. Lightbourne: "Am 13 We worked last winter till 9 (evening),
and the winter before till 10. 1 used to cry with sore feet every night last winter." G. Apsden: "That boy of mine
when he was 7 years old I used to carry him on my back to and fro through the snow, and he used to have 16 hours

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (8 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

a day ... I have often knelt down to feed him as he stood by the machine, for he could not leave it or stop." Smith,
the managing partner of a Manchester factory: "We (he means his "hands" who work for "us") work on with no
stoppage for meals, so that day's work of 10 1/2 hours is finished by 4.30 p.m., and all after that is over-time." [401
(Does this Mr. Smith take no meals himself during 10 1/2 hours?) "We (this same Smith) seldom leave off working
before 6 p.m. (he means leave off the consumption of "our" labour-power machines), so that we (iterum Crispinus)
are really working over-time the whole year round For all these, children and adults alike (152 children and young
persons and 140 adults), the average work for the last 18 months has been at the very least 7 days, 5 hours, or 78 1/2
hours a week. For the six weeks ending May 2nd this year (1862), the average was higher — 8 days or 84 hours a
week." Still this same Mr. Smith, who is so extremely devoted to the pluralis majestatis, adds with a smile,
"Machine- work is not great." So the employers in the block-printing say: "Hand labour is more healthy than
machine work." On the whole, manufacturers declare with indignation against the proposal "to stop the machines at
least during meal-times." A clause, says Mr. Otley, manager of a wall-paper factory in the Borough, "which allowed
work between, say 6 a.m. and 9 p. in would suit us (!) very well, but the factory hours, 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., are not
suitable. Our machine is always stopped for dinner. (What generosity!) There is no waste of paper and colour to
speak of. But," he adds sympathetically, "I can understand the loss of time not being liked." The report of the
Commission opines with naivete that the fear of some "leading firms" of losing time, i.e., the time for appropriating
the labour of others, and thence losing profit is not a sufficient reason for allowing children under 13, and young
persons under 18, working 12 to 16 hours per day, to lose their dinner, nor for giving it to them as coal and water
are supplied to the steam-engine, soap to wool, oil to the wheel — as merely auxiliary material to the instruments of
labour, during the process of production itself. [411

No branch of industry in England (we do not take into account the making of bread by machinery recently
introduced) has preserved up to the present day a method of production so archaic, so — as we see from the poets
of the Roman Empire — pre-christian, as baking. But capital, as was said earlier, is at first indifferent as to
the technical character of the labour-process; it begins by taking it just as it finds it.

The incredible adulteration of bread, especially in London, was first revealed by the House of Commons Committee
"on the adulteration of articles of food" (1855-56), and Dr. Hassall's work, "Adulterations detected." [421 The
consequence of these revelations was the Act of August 6th, 1860, "for preventing the adulteration of articles of
food and drink," an inoperative law, as it naturally shows the tenderest consideration for every Free-trader who
determines by the buying or selling of adulterated commodities "to turn an honest penny." [431 The Committee
itself formulated more or less naively its conviction that Free-trade meant essentially trade with adulterated, or as
the English ingeniously put it, "sophisticated" goods. In fact this kind of sophistry knows better than Protagoras
how to make white black, and black white, and better than the Eleatics how to demonstrate ad oculos that
everything is only appearance. [441

At all events the Committee had directed the attention of the public to its "daily bread," and therefore to the baking
trade. At the same time in public meetings and in petitions to Parliament rose the cry of the London journeymen
bakers against their over-work, &c. The cry was so urgent that Mr. H. S. Tremenheere, also a member of the
Commission of 1863 several times mentioned, was appointed Royal Commissioner of Inquiry. His report. [451
together with the evidence given, roused capitalist, or landlord, or sinecurist, is commanded to eat his bread in the
sweat of his brow, but they did not know that he had to eat daily in his bread a certain quantity of human
perspiration mixed with the discharge of abscesses, cobwebs, dead black-beetles, and putrid German yeast, without
counting alum, sand, and other agreeable mineral ingredients. Without any regard to his holiness, Free-trade, the
free baking-trade was therefore placed under the supervision of the State inspectors (Close of the Parliamentary
session of 1863), and by the same Act of Parliament, work from 9 in the evening to 5 in the morning was forbidden
for journeymen bakers under 18. The last clause speaks volumes as to the over-work in this old-fashioned, homely
line of business.

"The work of a London journeyman baker begins, as a rule, at about eleven at night. At that hour he 'makes the
dough,' — a laborious process, which lasts from half an hour to three quarters of an hour, according to the size of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (9 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

the batch or the labour bestowed upon it. He then lies down upon the kneading-board, which is also the covering of
the trough in which the dough is 'made'; and with a sack under him, and another rolled up as a pillow, he sleeps for
about a couple of hours. He is then engaged in a rapid and continuous labour for about five hours — throwing out
the dough, 'scaling it off,' moulding it, putting it into the oven, preparing and baking rolls and fancy bread, taking
the batch bread out of the oven, and up into the shop, &c, &c. The temperature of a bakehouse ranges from about
75 to upwards of 90 degrees, and in the smaller bakehouses approximates usually to the higher rather than to the
lower degree of heat. When the business of making the bread, rolls, &c, is over, that of its distribution begins, and
a considerable proportion of the journeymen in the trade, after working hard in the manner described during the
night, are upon their legs for many hours during the day, carrying baskets, or wheeling hand-carts, and sometimes
again in the bakehouse, leaving off work at various hours between 1 and 6 p.m. according to the season of the year,
or the amount and nature of their master's business; while others are again engaged in the bakehouse in 'bringing
out' more batches until late in the afternoon. [461 ■■■ During what is called 'the London season, 'the operatives
belonging to the 'full-priced' bakers at the West End of the town, generally begin work at 1 1 p.m., and are engaged
in making the bread, with one or two short (sometimes very short) intervals of rest, up to 8 o'clock the next
morning. They are then engaged all day long, up to 4, 5, 6, and as late as 7 o'clock in the evening carrying out
bread, or sometimes in the afternoon in the bakehouse again, assisting in the biscuit-baking. They may have, after
they have done their work, sometimes five or six, sometimes only four or five hours' sleep before they begin again.
On Fridays they always begin sooner, some about ten o'clock, and continue in some cases, at work, either in making
or delivering the bread up to 8 p.m. on Saturday night, but more generally up to 4 or 5 o'clock, Sunday morning. On
Sundays the men must attend twice or three times during the day for an hour or two to make preparations for the
next day's bread.... The men employed by the underselling masters (who sell their bread under the 'full price,' and
who, as already pointed out, comprise three-fourths of the London bakers) have not only to work on the average
longer hours, but their work is almost entirely confined to the bakehouse. The underselling masters generally sell
their bread... in the shop. If they send it out, which is not common, except as supplying chandlers' shops, they
usually employ other hands for that purpose. It is not their practice to deliver bread from house to house. Towards
the end of the week ... the men begin on Thursday night at 10 o'clock, and continue on with only slight intermission
until late on Saturday evening." [471

Even the bourgeois intellect understands the position of the "underselling" masters. "The unpaid labour of the men
was made the source whereby the competition was carried on." [481 And the "full-priced" baker denounces his
underselling competitors to the Commission of Inquiry as thieves of foreign labour and adulterators. "They only
exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for 12 hours' wages." [491

The adulteration of bread and the formation of a class of bakers that sells the bread below the full price, date from
the beginning of the 18th century, from the time when the corporate character of the trade was lost, and the
capitalist in the form of the miller or flour-factor, rises behind the nominal master baker [501 Thus was laid the

foundation of capitalistic production in this trade, of the unlimited extension of the working-day and of
night-labour, although the latter only since 1824 gained a serious footing, even in London. [511

After what has just been said, it will be understood that the Report of the Commission classes journeymen bakers
among the short-lived labourers, who, having by good luck escaped the normal decimation of the children of the
working-class, rarely reach the age of 42. Nevertheless, the baking trade is always overwhelmed with applicants.
The sources of the supply of these labour-powers to London are Scotland, the western agricultural districts of
England, and Germany.

In the years 1858-60, the journeymen bakers in Ireland organised at their own expense great meetings to agitate
against night and Sunday work. The public — e.g., at the Dublin meeting in May, 1860 — took their part with Irish
warmth. As a result of this movement, day-labour alone was successfully established in Wexford, Kilkenny,
Clonmel, Waterford, &c. "In Limerick, where the grievances of the journeymen are demonstrated to be excessive,
the movement has been defeated by the opposition of the master bakers, the miller bakers being the greatest
opponents. The example of Limerick led to a retrogression in Ennis and Tipperary. In Cork, where the strongest

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (10 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

possible demonstration of feeling took place, the masters, by exercising their power of turning the men out of
employment, have defeated the movement. In Dublin, the master bakers have offered the most determined
opposition to the movement, and by discountenancing as much as possible the journeymen promoting it, have
succeeded in leading the men into acquiescence in Sunday work and night- work, contrary to the convictions of the
men." [52]

The Committee of the English Government, which Government, in Ireland, is armed to the teeth, and generally
knows how to show it, remonstrates in mild, though funereal, tones with the implacable master bakers of Dublin,
Limerick, Cork, &c: "The Committee believe that the hours of labour are limited by natural laws, which cannot be
violated with impunity. That for master bakers to induce their workmen, by the fear of losing employment, to
violate their religious convictions and their better feelings, to disobey the laws of the land, and to disregard public
opinion (this all refers to Sunday labour), is calculated to provoke ill-feeling between workmen and masters, ... and
affords an example dangerous to religion, morality, and social order.... The Committee believe that any constant
work beyond 12 hours a-day encroaches on the domestic and private life of the working-man, and so leads to
disastrous moral results, interfering with each man's home, and the discharge of his family duties as a son, a brother,
a husband, a father. That work beyond 12 hours has a tendency to undermine the health of the workingman, and so
leads to premature old age and death, to the great injury of families of working-men, thus deprived of the care and
support of the head of the family when most required." [531

So far, we have dealt with Ireland. On the other side of the channel, in Scotland, the agricultural labourer, the
ploughman, protests against his 13-14 hours' work in the most inclement climate, with 4 hours' additional work on
Sunday (in this land of Sabbatarians!), [541 whilst, at the same time, three railway men are standing before a
London coroner's jury — a guard, an engine-driver, a signalman. A tremendous railway accident has hurried
hundreds of passengers into another world. The negligence of the employee is the cause of the misfortune. They
declare with one voice before the jury that ten or twelve years before, their labour only lasted eight hours a-day.
During the last five or six years it had been screwed up to 14, 18, and 20 hours, and under a specially severe
pressure of holiday-makers, at times of excursion trains, it often lasted for 40 or 50 hours without a break. They
were ordinary men, not Cyclops. At a certain point their labour-power failed. Torpor seized them. Their brain
ceased to think, their eyes to see. The thoroughly "respectable" British jurymen answered by a verdict that sent
them to the next assizes on a charge of manslaughter, and, in a gentle "rider" to their verdict, expressed the pious
hope that the capitalistic magnates of the railways would, in future, be more extravagant in the purchase of a
sufficient quantity of labour-power, and more "abstemious", more "self-denying,' more "thrifty," in the draining of
paid labour-power. [551

From the motley crowd of labourers of all callings, ages, sexes, that press on us more busily than the souls of the
slain on Ulysses, on whom — without referring to the Blue books under their arms — we see at a glance the mark
of over-work, let us take two more figures whose striking contrast proves that before capital all men are alike — a
milliner and a blacksmith.

In the last week of June, 1863, all the London daily papers published a paragraph with the "sensational" heading,
"Death from simple over-work." It dealt with the death of the milliner, Mary Anne Walkley, 20 years of age,
employed in a highly-respectable dressmaking establishment, exploited by a lady with the pleasant name of Elise.
The old, often-told story, [561 was once more recounted. This girl worked, on an average, 16 1/2 hours, during the
season often 30 hours, without a break, whilst her failing labour-power was revived by occasional supplies of
sherry, port, or coffee. It was just now the height of the season. It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling of an
eye the gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to the ball in honour of the newly-imported Princess of Wales.
Mary Anne Walkley had worked without intermission for 26 1/2 hours, with 60 other girls, 30 in one room, that
only afforded 3 of the cubic feet of air required for them. At night, they slept in pairs in one of the stifling holes into
which the bedroom was divided by partitions of board. [571 And this was one of the best millinery establishments in
London. Mary Anne Walkley fell ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without, to the astonishment of Madame Elise,
having previously completed the work in hand. The doctor, Mr. Keys, called too late to the death-bed, duly bore

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (11 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

witness before the coroner's jury that "Mary Anne Walkley had died from long hours of work in an over-crowded
work-room, and a too small and badly ventilated bedroom." In order to give the doctor a lesson in good manners,
the coroner's jury thereupon brought in a verdict that "the deceased had died of apoplexy, but there was reason to
fear that her death had been accelerated by over-work in an over-crowded workroom, &c." "Our white slaves,"
cried the Morning Star, the organ of the Free-traders, Cobden and Bright, "our white slaves, who are toiled into the
grave, for the most part silently pine and die." [581

"It is not in dressmakers' rooms that working to death is the order of the day, but in a thousand other places; in
every place I had almost said, where 'a thriving business' has to be done.... We will take the blacksmith as a type. If
the poets were true, there is no man so hearty, so merry, as the blacksmith; he rises early and strikes his sparks
before the sun; he eats and drinks and sleeps as no other man. Working in moderation, he is, in fact, in one of the
best of human positions, physically speaking. But we follow him into the city or town, and we see the stress of
work on that strong man, and what then is his position in the death-rate of his country. In Marylebone, blacksmiths
die at the rate of 3 1 per thousand per annum, or 1 1 above the mean of the male adults of the country in its entirety.
The occupation, instinctive almost as a portion of human art, unobjectionable as a branch of human industry, is
made by mere excess of work, the destroyer of the man. He can strike so many blows per day, walk so many steps,
breathe so many breaths, produce so much work, and live an average, say of fifty years; he is made to strike so
many more blows, to walk so many more steps, to breathe so many more breaths per day, and to increase altogether
a fourth of his life. He meets the effort; the result is, that producing for a limited time a fourth more work, he dies at
37 for 50. "159]



SECTION 4

DAY AND NIGHT WORK. THE RELAY SYSTEM.



Constant capital, the means of production, considered from the standpoint of the creation of surplus-value, only
exist to absorb labour, and with every drop of labour a proportional quantity of surplus-labour. While they fail to do
this, their mere existence causes a relative loss to the capitalist, for they represent during the time they lie fallow, a
useless advance of capital. And this loss becomes positive and absolute as soon as the intermission of their
employment necessitates additional outlay at the recommencement of work. The prolongation of the working-day
beyond the limits of the natural day, into the night, only acts as a palliative. It quenches only in a slight degree the
vampire thirst for the living blood of labour. To appropriate labour during all the 24 hours of the day is, therefore,
the inherent tendency of capitalist production. But as it is physically impossible to exploit the same individual
labour-power constantly during the night as well as the day, to overcome this physical hindrance, an alternation
becomes necessary between the workpeople whose powers are exhausted by day, and those who are used up by
night. This alternation may be effected in various ways; e.g., it may be so arranged that part of the workers are one
week employed on day-work, the next week on night-work. It is well known that this relay system, this alternation
of two sets of workers, held full sway in the full-blooded youth-time of the English cotton manufacture, and that at
the present time it still flourishes, among others, in the cotton spinning of the Moscow district. This 24 hours'
process of production exists to-day as a system in many of the branches of industry of Great Britain that are still
"free," in the blast-furnaces, forges, plate -rolling mills, and other metallurgical establishments in England, Wales,
and Scotland. The working-time here includes, besides the 24 hours of the 6 working-days, a great part also of the
24 hours of Sunday. The workers consist of men and women, adults and children of both sexes. The ages of the
children and young persons run through all intermediate grades, from 8 (in some cases from 6) to 18. [601



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (12 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
In some branches of industry, the girls and women work through the night together with the males. [611

Placing on one side the generally injurious influence of night-labour, [621 the duration of the process of production,
unbroken during the 24 hours, offers very welcome opportunities of exceeding the limits of the normal
working-day, e.g., in the branches of industry already mentioned, which are of an exceedingly fatiguing nature; the
official working-day means for each worker usually 12 hours by night or day. But the over-work beyond this
amount is in many cases, to use the words of the English official report, "truly fearful." [631

"It is impossible," the report continues, "for any mind to realise the amount of work described in the following
passages as being performed by boys of from 9 to 12 years of age ... without coming irresistibly to the conclusion
that such abuses of the power of parents and of employers can no longer be allowed to exist." [641

"The practice of boys working at all by day and night turns either in the usual course of things, or at pressing times,
seems inevitably to open the door to their not unfrequently working unduly long hours. These hours are, indeed, in
some cases, not only cruelly but even incredibly long for children. Amongst a number of boys it will, of course, not
unfrequently happen that one or more are from some cause absent. When this happens, their place is made up by
one or more boys, who work in the other turn. That this is a well understood system is plain ... from the answer of
the manager of some large rolling-mills, who, when I asked him how the place of the boys absent from their turn
was made up, 'I daresay, sir, you know that as well as I do,' and admitted the fact." [651

"At a rolling-mill where the proper hours were from 6 a.m. to 5 1/2 p.m., a boy worked about four nights every
week till 8 1/2 p.m. at least ... and this for six months. Another, at 9 years old, sometimes made three 12-hour shifts
running, and, when 10, has made two days and two nights running." A third, "now 10 ... worked from 6 a.m. till 12
p.m. three nights, and till 9 p.m. the other nights." "Another, now 13, ... worked from 6 p.m. till 12 noon next day,
for a week together, and sometimes for three shifts together, e.g., from Monday morning till Tuesday night."
"Another, now 12, has worked in an iron foundry at Stavely from 6 a.m. till 12 p.m. for a fortnight on end; could
not do it any more." "George Allinsworth, age 9, came here as cellar-boy last Friday; next morning we had to begin
at 3, so I stopped here all night. Live five miles off. Slept on the floor of the furnace, over head, with an apron under
me, and a bit of a jacket over me. The two other days I have been here at 6 a.m. Aye! it is hot in here. Before I came
here I was nearly a year at the same work at some works in the country. Began there, too, at 3 on Saturday morning
— always did, but was very gain [near] home, and could sleep at home. Other days I began at 6 in the morning, and
gi'en over at 6 or 7 in the evening," &c. [661

Let us now hear how capital itself regards this 24 hours' system. The extreme forms of the system, its abuse in the
"cruel and incredible" extension of the working-day are naturally passed over in silence. Capital only speaks of the
system in its "normal" form.

Messrs. Naylor & Vickers, steel manufacturers, who employ between 600 and 700 persons, among whom only 10
per cent are under 18, and of those, only 20 boys under 18 work in night sets, thus express themselves: "The boys
do not suffer from the heat. The temperature is probably from 86° to 90°.... At the forges and in the rollingmills the
hands work night and day, in relays, but all the other parts of the work are day-work, i.e., from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. In
the forge the hours are from 12 to 12. Some of the hands always work in the night, without any alternation of day
and night work.... We do not find any difference in the health of those who work regularly by night and those who
work by day, and probably people can sleep better if they have the same period of rest than if it is changed.... About
20 of the boys under the age of 18 work in the night sets.... We could not well do without lads under 18 working by
night. The objection would be the increase in the cost of production.... Skilled hands and the heads in every
department are difficult to get, but of lads we could get any number.... But from the small proportion of boys that
we employ, the subject (i.e., of restrictions on night-work) is of little importance or interest to us." [671

Mr. J. Ellis, one of the firm of Messrs. John Brown & Co., steel and iron works, employing about 3,000 men and
boys, part of whose operations, namely, iron and heavier steel work, goes on night and day by relays, states "that in
the heavier steel work one or two boys are employed to a score or two men." Their concern employs upwards of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (13 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

500 boys under 18, of whom about 1/3 or 170 are under the age of 13. With reference to the proposed alteration of
the law, Mr. Ellis says: "I do not think it would be very objectionable to require that no person under the age of 18
should work more than 12 hours in the 24. But we do not think that any line could be drawn over the age of 12, at
which boys could be dispensed with for night-work. But we would sooner be prevented from employing boys under
the age of 13, or even so high as 14, at all, than not be allowed to employ boys that we do have at night. Those boys
who work in the day sets must take their turn in the night sets also, because the men could not work in the night sets
only; it would ruin their health.... We think, however, that night-work in alternate weeks is no harm. (Messrs.
Naylor & Vickers, on the other hand, in conformity with the interest of their business, considered that periodically
changed night-labour might possibly do more harm than continual night-labour.) We find the men who do it, as
well as the others who do other work only by day.... Our objections to not allowing boys under 18 to work at night,
would be on account of the increase of expense, but this is the only reason. (What cynical naivete!) We think that
the increase would be more than the trade, with due regard to its being successfully carried out, could fairly bear.
(What mealy-mouthed phraseology!) labour is scarce here, and might fall short if there were such a regulation."
(i.e., Ellis Brown & Co. might fall into the fatal perplexity of being obliged to pay labour-power its full value.) [681

The "Cyclops Steel and Iron Works," of Messrs. Cammell & Co., are concocted on the same large scale as those of
the above-mentioned John Brown & Co. The managing director had handed in his evidence to the Government
Commissioner, Mr. White, in writing. Later he found it convenient to suppress the MS. when it had been returned
to him for revision. Mr. White, however, has a good memory. He remembered quite clearly that for the Messrs.
Cyclops the forbidding of the night-labour of children and young persons "would be impossible, it would be
tantamount to stopping their works," and yet their business employs little more than 6% of boys under 18, and less
than 1% under 13.[691

On the same subject Mr. E. F. Sanderson, of the firm of Sanderson, Bros., & Co., steel rolling-mills and forges,
Attercliffe, says: "Great difficulty would be caused by preventing boys under 18 from working at night. The chief
would be the increase of cost from employing men instead of boys. I cannot say what this would be, but probably it
would not be enough to enable the manufacturers to raise the price of steel, and consequently it would fall on them,
as of course the men (what queer-headed folk!) would refuse to pay it." Mr. Sanderson does not know how much he
pays the children, but "perhaps the younger boys get from 4s. to Ss. a week.... The boys' work is of a kind for which
the strength of the boys is generally ('generally,' of course not always) quite sufficient, and consequently there
would be no gain in the greater strength of the men to counterbalance the loss, or it would be only in the few cases
in which the metal is heavy. The men would not like so well not to have boys under them, as men would be less
obedient. Besides, boys must begin young to learn the trade. Leaving day-work alone open to boys would not
answer this purpose." And why not? Why could not boys learn their handicraft in the day-time? Your reason?
"Owing to the men working days and nights in alternate weeks, the men would be separated half the time from their
boys, and would lose half the profit which they make from them. The training which they give to. an apprentice is
considered as part of the return for the boys' labour, and thus enables the man to get it at a cheaper rate. Each man
would want half of this profit." In other words, Messrs. Sanderson would have to pay part of the wages of the adult
men out of their own pockets instead of by the night-work of the boys. Messrs. Sanderson's profit would thus fall to
some extent, and this is the good Sandersonian reason why boys cannot learn their handicraft in the day. [701 In
addition to this, it would throw night-labour on those who worked instead of the boys, which they would not be able
to stand. The difficulties in fact would be so great that they would very likely lead to the giving up of night-work
altogether, and "as far as the work itself is concerned," says E. F. Sanderson, "this would suit as well, but — " But
Messrs. Sanderson have something else to make besides steel. Steel-making is simply a pretext for surplus-value
making. The smelting furnaces, rolling-mills, &c, the buildings, machinery, iron, coal, &c, have something more
to do than transform themselves into steel. They are there to absorb surplus-labour, and naturally absorb more in 24
hours than in 12. In fact they give, by grace of God and law, the Sandersons a cheque on the working-time of a
certain number of hands for all the 24 hours of the day, and they lose their character as capital, are therefore a pure
loss for the Sandersons, as soon as their function of absorbing labour is interrupted. "But then there would be the
loss from so much expensive machinery, lying idle half the time, and to get through the amount of work which we



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (14 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

are able to do on the present system, we should have to double our premises and plant, which would double the
outlay." But why should these Sandersons pretend to a privilege not enjoyed by the other capitalists who only work
during the day, and whose buildings, machinery, raw material, therefore lie "idle" during the night? E. F. Sanderson
answers in the name of all the Sandersons: "It is true that there is this loss from machinery lying idle in those
manufactories in which work only goes on by day. But the use of furnaces would involve a further loss in our case.
If they were kept up there would be a waste of fuel (instead of, as now, a waste of the living substance of the
workers), and if they were not, there would be loss of time in laying the fires and getting the heat up (whilst the loss
of sleeping time, even to children of 8 is a gain of working-time for the Sanderson tribe), and the furnaces
themselves would suffer from the changes of temperature." (Whilst those same furnaces suffer nothing from the day
and night change of labour.) [711



SECTION 5

THE STRUGGLE FOR A NORMAL WORKING-DAY.

COMPULSORY LAWS FOR THE EXTENSION OF THE WORKING-DAY FROM THE MIDDLE OF THE

14TH TO THE END OF THE 17TH CENTURY



"What is a working-day? What is the length of time during which capital may consume the labour-power whose
daily value it buys? How far may the working-day be extended beyond the working-time necessary for the
reproduction of labour-power itself?" It has been seen that to these questions capital replies: the working-day
contains the full 24 hours, with the deduction of the few hours of repose without which labour-power absolutely
refuses its services again. Hence it is self-evident that the labourer is nothing else, his whole life through, than
labour-power, that therefore all his disposable time is by nature and law labour-time, to be devoted to the
self-expansion of capital. Time for education, for intellectual development, for the fulfilling of social functions and
for social intercourse, for the free-play of his bodily and mental activity, even the rest time of Sunday (and that in a
country of Sabbatarians!) [721 — moonshine! But in its blind unrestrainable passion, its were- wolf hunger for
surplus-labour, capital oversteps not only the moral, but even the merely physical maximum bounds of the
working-day. It usurps the time for growth, development, and healthy maintenance of the body. It steals the time
required for the consumption of fresh air and sunlight. It higgles over a meal-time, incorporating it where possible
with the process of production itself, so that food is given to the labourer as to a mere means of production, as coal
is supplied to the boiler, grease and oil to the machinery. It reduces the sound sleep needed for the restoration,
reparation, refreshment of the bodily powers to just so many hours of torpor as the revival of an organism,
absolutely exhausted, renders essential. It is not the normal maintenance of the labour-power which is to determine
the limits of the working-day; it is the greatest possible daily expenditure of labour-power, no matter how diseased,
compulsory, and painful it may be, which is to determine the limits of the labourers' period of repose. Capital cares
nothing for the length of life of labour-power. All that concerns it is simply and solely the maximum of
labour-power, that can be rendered fluent in a working-day. It attains this end by shortening the extent of the
labourer's life, as a greedy farmer snatches increased produce from the soil by robbing it of its fertility.

The capitalistic mode of production (essentially the production of surplus- value, the absorption of surplus-labour),
produces thus, with the extension of the working-day, not only the deterioration of human labour-power by robbing
it of its normal, moral and physical, conditions of development and function. It produces also the premature
exhaustion and death of this labour-power itself. [731 It extends the labourer's time of production during a given
period by shortening his actual life-time.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (15 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

But the value of the labour-power includes the value of the commodities necessary for the reproduction of the
worker, or for the keeping up of the working-class. If then the unnatural extension of the working-day, that capital
necessarily strives after in its unmeasured passion for self-expansion, shortens the length of life of the individual
labourer, and therefore the duration of his labour-power, the forces used up have to be replaced at a more rapid rate
and the sum of the expenses for the reproduction of labour-power will be greater; just as in a machine the part of its
value to be reproduced every day is greater the more rapidly the machine is worn out. It would seem therefore that
the interest capital itself points in the direction of a normal working-day.

The slave-owner buys his labourer as he buys his horse. If he loses his slave, he loses capital that can only be
restored by new outlay in the slave-mart. But "the rice-grounds of Georgia, or the swamps of the Mississippi may
be fatally injurious to the human constitution; but the waste of human life which the cultivation of these districts
necessitates, is not so great that it cannot be repaired from the teeming preserves of Virginia and Kentucky.
Considerations of economy, moreover, which, under a natural system, afford some security for humane treatment
by identifying the master's interest with the slave's preservation, when once trading in slaves is practiced, become
reasons for racking to the uttermost the toil of the slave; for, when his place can at once be supplied from foreign
preserves, the duration of his life becomes a matter of less moment than its productiveness while it lasts. It is
accordingly a maxim of slave management, in slave-importing countries, that the most effective economy is that
which takes out of the human chattel in the shortest space of time the utmost amount of exertion it is capable of
putting forth. It is in tropical culture, where annual profits often equal the whole capital of plantations, that negro
life is most recklessly sacrificed. It is the agriculture of the West Indies, which has been for centuries prolific of
fabulous wealth, that has engulfed millions of the African race. It is in Cuba, at this day, whose revenues are
reckoned by millions, and whose planters are princes, that we see in the servile class, the coarsest fare, the most
exhausting and unremitting toil, and even the absolute destruction of a portion of its numbers every year." [741

Mutato nomine de tefabula narratur. For slave-trade read labour-market, for Kentucky and Virginia, Ireland and
the agricultural districts of England, Scotland, and Wales, for Africa, Germany. We heard how over-work thinned
the ranks of the bakers in London. Nevertheless, the London labour-market is always over-stocked with German
and other candidates for death in the bakeries. Pottery, as we saw, is one of the shortest-lived industries. Is there any
want therefore of potters? Josiah Wedgwood, the inventor of modern pottery, himself originally a common
workman, said in 1785 before the House of Commons that the whole trade employed from 15,000 to 20,000 people.
[751 In the year 1861 the population alone of the town centres of this industry in Great Britain numbered 101,302.
"The cotton trade has existed for ninety years.... It has existed for three generations of the English race, and I
believe I may safely say that during that period it has destroyed nine generations of factory operatives." [761

No doubt in certain epochs of feverish activity the labour-market shows significant gaps. In 1834, e.g. But then the
manufacturers proposed to the Poor Law Commissioners that they should send the "surplus-population" of the
agricultural districts to the north, with the explanation "that the manufacturers would absorb and use it up." [771
Agents were appointed with the consent of the Poor Law Commissioners. ... An office was set up in Manchester, to
which lists were sent of those workpeople in the agricultural districts wanting employment, and their names were
registered in books. The manufacturers attended at these offices, and selected such persons as they chose; when
they had selected such persons as their 'wants required', they gave instructions to have them forwarded to
Manchester, and they were sent, ticketed like bales of goods, by canals, or with carriers, others tramping on the
road, and many of them were found on the way lost and half-starved. This system had grown up unto a regular
trade. This House will hardly believe it, but I tell them, that this traffic in human flesh was as well kept up, they
were in effect as regularly sold to these [Manchester] manufacturers as slaves are sold to the cotton-grower in the
United States.... In 1860, 'the cotton trade was at its zenith.' ... The manufacturers again found that they were short
of hands.... They applied to the 'flesh agents, as they are called. Those agents sent to the southern downs of
England, to the pastures of Dorsetshire, to the glades of Devonshire, to the people tending kine in Wiltshire, but
they sought in vain. The surplus-population was 'absorbed.'" The Bury Guardian said, on the completion of the
French treaty, that "10,000 additional hands could be absorbed by Lancashire, and that 30,000 or 40,000 will be
needed." After the "flesh agents and sub-agents" had in vain sought through the agricultural districts, "a deputation

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (16 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

came up to London, and waited on the right hon. gentleman [Mr. Villiers, President of the Poor Law Board] with a
view of obtaining poor children from certain union houses for the mills of Lancashire." [781

What experience shows to the capitalist generally is a constant excess of population, i.e., an excess in relation to the
momentary requirements of surplus-labour-absorbing capital, although this excess is made up of generations of
human beings stunted, short-lived, swiftly replacing each other, plucked, so to say, before maturity. [791 And,
indeed, experience shows to the intelligent observer with what swiftness and grip the capitalist mode of production,
dating, historically speaking, only from yesterday, has seized the vital power of the people by the very root —
shows how the degeneration of the industrial population is only retarded by the constant absorption of primitive and
physically uncorrupted elements from the country — shows how even the country labourers, in spite of fresh air
and the principle of natural selection, that works so powerfully amongst them, and only permits the survival of the
strongest, are already beginning to die off. [801 Capital that has such good reasons for denying the sufferings of the
legions of workers that surround it, is in practice moved as much and as little by the sight of the coming degradation
and final depopulation of the human race, as by the probable fall of the earth into the sun. In every stockjobbing
swindle every one knows that some time or other the crash must come, but every one hopes that it may fall on the
head of his neighbour, after he himself has caught the shower of gold and placed it in safety. Apres moi le deluge! is
the watchword of every capitalist and of every capitalist nation. Hence Capital is reckless of the health or length of
life of the labourer, unless under compulsion from society. [811 To the out-cry as to the physical and mental
degradation, the premature death, the torture of over-work, it answers: Ought these to trouble us since they increase
our profits? But looking at things as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good or ill will of the
individual capitalist. Free competition brings out the inherent laws of capitalist production, in the shape of external
coercive laws having power over every individual capitalist. [821

The establishment of a normal working-day is the result of centuries of struggle between capitalist and labourer.
The history of this struggle shows two opposed tendencies. Compare, e.g., the English factory legislation of our
time with the English labour Statutes from the 14th century to well into the middle of the 18th. [831 Whilst the
modern Factory Acts compulsorily shortened the working-day, the earlier statutes tried to lengthen it by
compulsion. Of course the pretensions of capital in embryo — when, beginning to grow, it secures the right of
absorbing a quantum sufficit of surplus-labour, not merely by the force of economic relations, but by the help of the
State — appear very modest when put face to face with the concessions that, growling and struggling, it has to
make in its adult condition. It takes centuries ere the "free" labourer, thanks to the development of capitalistic
production, agrees, i.e., is compelled by social conditions, to sell the whole of his active life, his very capacity for
work, for the price of the necessaries of life, his birth-right for a mess of pottage. Hence it is natural that the
lengthening of the working-day, which capital, from the middle of the 14th to the end of the 17th century, tries to
impose by State-measures on adult labourers, approximately coincides with the shortening of the working-day
which, in the second half of the 19th century, has here and there been effected by the State to prevent the coining of
children's blood into capital. That which to-day, e.g., in the State of Massachusetts, until recently the freest State of
the North-American Republic, has been proclaimed as the statutory limit of the labour of children under 12, was in
England, even in the middle of the 17th century, the normal working-day of able-bodied artisans, robust labourers,
athletic blacksmiths. [841

The first "Statute of Labourers" (23 Edward III., 1349) found its immediate pretext (not its cause, for legislation of
this kind lasts centuries after the pretext for it has disappeared) in the great plague that decimated the people, so
that, as a Tory writer says, "The difficulty of getting men to work on reasonable terms (i.e., at a price that left their
employers a reasonable quantity of surplus-labour) grew to such a height as to be quite intolerable." [851
Reasonable wages were, therefore, fixed by law as well as the limits of the working-day. The latter point, the only
one that here interests us, is repeated in the Statute of 1496 (Henry VII.). The working-day for all artificers and field
labourers from March to September ought, according to this statute (which, however, could not be enforced), to last
from 5 in the morning to between 7 and 8 in the evening. But the meal-times consist of 1 hour for breakfast, 1 1/2
hours for dinner, and 1/2 an hour for "noon-meate," i.e., exactly twice as much as under the factory acts now in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (17 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

force. [861 In winter, work was to last from 5 in the morning until dark, with the same intervals. A statute of
Elizabeth of 1562 leaves the length of the working-day for all labourers "hired for daily or weekly wage"
untouched, but aims at limiting the intervals to 2 1/2 hours in the summer, or to 2 in the winter. Dinner is only to
last 1 hour, and the "afternoon- sleep of half an hour" is only allowed between the middle of May and the middle of
August. For every hour of absence Id. is to be subtracted from the wage. In practice, however, the conditions were
much more favourable to the labourers than in the statute-book. William Petty, the father of Political Economy, and
to some extent the founder of Statistics, says in a work that he published in the last third of the 17th century:
"Labouring-men (then meaning field-labourers) work 10 hours per diem, and make 20 meals per week, viz., 3 a day
for working-days, and 2 on Sundays; whereby it is plain, that if they could fast on Friday nights, and dine in one
hour and an half, whereas they take two, from eleven to one; thereby thus working 1/20 more, and spending 1/20
less, the above-mentioned (tax) might be raised." [871 Was not Dr. Andrew Ure right in crying down the 12 hours'

bill of 1833 as a retrogression to the times of the dark ages? It is true these regulations contained in the statute
mentioned by Petty, apply also to apprentices. But the condition of child-labour, even at the end of the 17th century,
is seen from the following complaint: "Tis not their practice (in Germany) as with us in this kingdom, to bind
an apprentice for seven years; three or four is their common standard: and the reason is, because they are educated
from their cradle to something of employment, which renders them the more apt and docile, and consequently the
more capable of attaining to a ripeness and quicker proficiency in business. Whereas our youth, here in England,
being bred to nothing before they come to be apprentices, make a very slow progress and require much longer time
wherein to reach the perfection of accomplished artists." [881

Still, during the greater part of the 18th century, up to the epoch of Modern Industry and machinism, capital in
England had not succeeded in seizing for itself, by the payment of the weekly value of labour-power, the whole
week of the labourer, with the exception, however, of the agricultural labourers. The fact that they could live for a
whole week on the wage of four days, did not appear to the labourers a sufficient reason that they should work the
other two days for the capitalist. One party of English economists, in the interest of capital, denounces this
obstinacy in the most violent manner, another party defends the labourers. Let us listen, e.g., to the contest between
Postlethwayt whose Dictionary of Trade then had the same reputation as the kindred works of MacCulloch and
MacGregor to-day, and the author (already quoted) of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce." [891

Postlethwayt says among other things: "We cannot put an end to those few observations, without noticing that trite
remark in the mouth of too many; that if the industrious poor can obtain enough to maintain themselves in five
days, they will not work the whole six. Whence they infer the necessity of even the necessaries of life being made
dear by taxes, or any other means, to compel the working artisan and manufacturer to labour the whole six days in
the week, without ceasing. I must beg leave to differ in sentiment from those great politicians, who contend for the
perpetual slavery of the working people of this kingdom; they forget the vulgar adage, all work and no play. Have
not the English boasted of the ingenuity and dexterity of her working artists and manufacturers which have
heretofore given credit and reputation to British wares in general? What has this been owing to? To nothing more
probably than the relaxation of the working people in their own way. Were they obliged to toil the year round, the
whole six days in the week, in a repetition of the same work, might it not blunt their ingenuity, and render them
stupid instead of alert and dexterous; and might not our workmen lose their reputation instead of maintaining it by
such eternal slavery? ... And what sort of workmanship could we expect from such hard-driven animals? ... Many of
them will execute as much work in four days as a Frenchman will in five or six. But if Englishmen are to be eternal
drudges, 'tis to be feared they will degenerate below the Frenchmen. As our people are famed for bravery in war, do
we not say that it is owing to good English roes t beef and pudding in their bellies, as well as their constitutional
spirit of liberty? And why may not the superior ingenuity and dexterity of, our artists and manufacturers, be owing
to that freedom and liberty to direct themselves in their own way, and I hope we shall never have them deprived of
such privileges and that good living from whence their ingenuity no less than their courage may proceed. " [901
Thereupon the author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" replies: "If the making of every seventh day an
holiday is supposed to be of divine institution, as it implies the appropriating the other six days to labour" (he
means capital as we shall soon see) "surely it will not be thought cruel to enforce it .... That mankind in general, are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (18 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

naturally inclined to ease and indolence, we fatally experience to be true, from the conduct of our manufacturing
populace, who do not labour, upon an average, above four days in a week, unless provisions happen to be very
dear.... Put all the necessaries of the poor under one denomination; for instance, call them all wheat, or suppose that
... the bushel of wheat shall cost five shillings and that he (a manufacturer) earns a shilling by his labour, he then
would be obliged to work five days only in a week. If the bushel of wheat should cost but four shillings, he would
be obliged to work but four days; but as wages in this kingdom are much higher in proportion to the price of
necessaries ... the manufacturer, who labours four days, has a surplus of money to live idle with the rest of the week
. ... I hope I have said enough to make it appear that the moderate labour of six days in a week is no slavery. Our
labouring people do this, and to all appearance are the happiest of all our labouring poor, [911 but the Dutch do this
in manufactures, and appear to be a very happy people. The French do so, when holidays do not intervene. [921 But
our populace have adopted a notion, that as Englishmen they enjoy a birthright privilege of being more free and
independent than in any country in Europe. Now this idea, as far as it may affect the bravery of our troops, may be
of some use; nut the less the manufacturing poor have of it, certainly the better for themselves and for the State. The
labouring people should never) think themselves independent of their superiors.... It is extremely dangerous to
encourage mobs in a commercial state like ours, where, perhaps, seven parts out of eight of the whole, are people
with little or no property. The cure will not be perfect, till our manufacturing poor are contented to labour six days
for the same sum which they now earn in four days." [931 To this end, and for "extirpating idleness debauchery and
excess," promoting a spirit of industry, "lowering the price of labour in our manufactories, and easing the lands of
the heavy burden of poor's rates," our "faithful Eckart" of capital proposes this approved device: to shut up such
labourers as become dependent on public support, in a word, paupers, in "an ideal workhouse. " Such ideal
workhouse must be made a "House of Terror," and not an asylum for the poor, "where they are to be plentifully fed,
warmly and decently clothed, and where they do but little work." [941 In this "House of Terror," this "ideal
workhouse, the poor shall work 14 hours in a day, allowing proper time for meals, in such manner that there shall
remain 12 hours of neat-labour." [951

Twelve working-hours daily in the Ideal Workhouse, in the "House of Terror" of 1770! 63 years later, in 1833,
when the English Parliament reduced the working-day for children of 13 to 18, in four branches of industry to 12
full hours, the judgment day of English Industry had dawned! In 1852, when Louis Bonaparte sought to secure his
position with the bourgeoisie by tampering with the legal working-day, the French working people cried out with
one voice "the law that limits the working-day to 12 hours is the one good that has remained to us of the legislation
of the Republic!" [961 At Zurich the work of children over 10, is limited to 12 hours; in Aargau in 1862, the work
of children between 13 and 16, was reduced from 12 1/2 to 12 hours; in Austria in 1860, for children between 14
and 16, the same reduction was made. [971 "What a progress," since 1770! Macaulay would shout with exultation!

The "House of Terror" for paupers of which the capitalistic soul of 1770 only dreamed, was realised a few years
later in the shape of a gigantic "Workhouse" for the industrial worker himself. It is called the Factory. And the ideal
this time fades before the reality.



SECTION 6

THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY.
COMPULSORY LIMITATION BY LAW OF THE WORKING-TIME.
THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS, 1833 TO 1864



After capital had taken centuries in extending the working-day to its normal maximum limit, and then beyond this

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (19 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

to the limit of the natural day of 12 hours, [981 there followed on the birth of machinism and modern industry in the
last third of the 1 8th century, a violent encroachment like that of an avalanche in its intensity and extent. All bounds
of morals and nature, age and sex, day and night, were broken down. Even the ideas of day and night, of rustic
simplicity in the old statutes, became so confused that an English judge, as late as 1860, needed a quite Talmudic
sagacity to explain "judicially" what was day and what was night. [991 Capital celebrated its orgies.

As soon as the working-class, stunned at first by the noise and turmoil of the new system of production, recovered,
in some measure, its senses, its resistance began, and first in the native land of machinism, in England. For 30
years, however, the concessions conquered by the workpeople were purely nominal. Parliament passed 5 labour
Laws between 1802 and 1833, but was shrewd enough not to vote a penny for their carrying out, for the requisite
officials, &c. £1001

They remained a dead letter. "The fact is, that prior to the Act of 1833, young persons and children were worked all
night, all day, or both ad libitum." [1011

A normal working-day for modern industry only dates from the Factory Act of 1833, which included cotton, wool,
flax, and silk factories. Nothing is more characteristic of the spirit of capital than the history of the English Factory
Acts from 1833 to 1864.

The Act of 1833 declares the ordinary factory working-day to be from half-past five in the morning to half-past
eight in the evening and within these limits, a period of 15 hours, it is lawful to employ young persons (i.e., persons
between 13 and 18 years of age), at any time of the day, provided no one individual young person should work
more than 12 hours in any one day, except in certain cases especially provided for. The 6th section of the Act
provided. "That there shall be allowed in the course of every day not less than one and a half hours for meals to
every such person restricted as hereinbefore provided." The employment of children under 9, with exceptions
mentioned later was forbidden; the work of children between 9 and 13 was limited to 8 hours a day, night-work,
i.e., according to this Act, work between 8:30 p.m. and 5:30 a.m., was forbidden for all persons between 9 and 18.

The law-makers were so far from wishing to trench on the freedom of capital to exploit adult labour-power, or, as
they called it, "the freedom of labour," that they created a special system in order to prevent the Factory Acts from
having a consequence so outrageous.

"The great evil of the factory system as at present conducted," says the first report of the Central Board of the
Commission of June 28th 1833, "has appeared to us to be that it entails the necessity of continuing the labour of
children to the utmost length of that of the adults. The only remedy for this evil, short of the limitation of the labour
of adults which would, in our opinion, create an evil greater than that which is sought to be remedied, appears to be
the plan of working double sets of children." ... Under the name of System of Relays, this "plan" was therefore
carried out, so that, e.g., from 5.30 a.m. until 1.30 in the afternoon, one set of children between 9 and 13, and from
1.30 p.m. to 8.30 in the evening another set were "put to," &c.

In order to reward the manufacturers for having, in the most barefaced way, ignored all the Acts as to children's
labour passed during the last twenty-two years, the pill was yet further gilded for them. Parliament decreed that
after March 1st, 1834, no child under 11, after March 1st 1835, no child under 12, and after March 1st, 1836, no
child under 13 was to work more than eight hours in a factory. This "liberalism," so full of consideration for
"capital," was the more noteworthy as. Dr. Farre, Sir A. Carlisle, Sir B. Brodie, Sir C. Bell, Mr. Guthrie, &c, in a
word, the most distinguished physicians and surgeons in London, had declared in their evidence before the House
of Commons, that there was danger in delay. Dr. Farre expressed himself still more coarsely. "Legislation is
necessary for the prevention of death, in any form in which it can be prematurely inflicted, and certainly this (i.e.,
the factory method) must be viewed as a most cruel mode of inflicting it."

That same "reformed" Parliament, which in its delicate consideration for the manufacturers, condemned children
under 13, for years to come, to 72 hours of work per week in the Factory Hell, on the other hand, in the
Emancipation Act, which also administered freedom drop by drop, forbade the planters, from the outset, to work

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (20 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
any negro slave more than 45 hours a week.

But in no wise conciliated, capital now began a noisy agitation that went on for several years. It turned chiefly on
the age of those who, under the name of children, were limited to 8 hours' work, and were subject to a certain
amount of compulsory education. According to capitalistic anthropology, the age of childhood ended at 10, or at the
outside, at 1 1. The more nearly the time approached for the coming into full force of the Factory Act, the fatal year
1836, the more wildly raged the mob of manufacturers. They managed, in fact, to intimidate the government to such
an extent that in 1835 it proposed to lower the limit of the age of childhood from 13 to 12. In the meantime the
pressure from without grew more threatening. Courage failed the House of Commons. It refused to throw children
of 13 under the Juggernaut Car of capital for more than 8 hours a day, and the Act of 1833 came into full operation.
It remained unaltered until June, 1844.

In the ten years during which it regulated factory work, first in part, and then entirely, the official reports of the
factory inspectors teem with complaints as to the impossibility of putting the Act into force. As the law of 1833 left
it optional with the lords of capital during the 15 hours, from 5.30 a.m. to 8.30 p.m., to make every "young person,"
and "every child" begin, break off, resume, or end his 12 or 8 hours at any moment they liked, and also permitted
them to assign to different persons, different times for meals, these gentlemen soon discovered a new "system of
relays," by which the labour-horses were not changed at fixed stations, but were constantly re-harnessed at
changing stations. We do not pause longer on the beauty of this system, as we shall have to return to it later. But
this much is clear at the first glance: that this system annulled the whole Factory Act, not only in the spirit, but in
the letter. How could factory inspectors, with this complex bookkeeping in respect to each individual child or young
person, enforce the legally determined work- time and the granting of the legal mealtimes? In a great many of the
factories, the old brutalities soon blossomed out again unpunished. In an interview with the Home Secretary (1844),
the factory inspectors demonstrated the impossibility of any control under the newly invented relay system. [1021 In
the meantime, however, circumstances had greatly changed. The factory hands, especially since 1838, had made the
Ten Hours' Bill their economic, as they had made the Charter their political, election-cry. Some of the
manufacturers, even, who had managed their factories in conformity with the Act of 1833, overwhelmed Parliament
with memorials on the immoral competition of their false brethren whom greater impudence, or more fortunate
local circumstances, enabled to break the law. Moreover, however much the individual manufacturer might give the
rein to his old lust for gain, the spokesmen and political leaders of the manufacturing class ordered a change of front
and of speech towards the workpeople. They had entered upon the contest for the repeal of the Corn Laws, and
needed the workers to help them to victory. They promised therefore, not only a double-sized loaf of bread, but the
enactment of the Ten Hours' Bill in the Free-trade millennium. [1031 Thus they still less dared to oppose a measure
intended only to make the law of 1833 a reality. Threatened in their holiest interest, the rent of land, the Tories
thundered with philanthropic indignation against the "nefarious practices" [1041 of their foes.

This was the origin of the additional Factory Act of June 7th, 1844. It came into effect on September 10th, 1844. It
places under protection a new category of workers, viz., the women over 18. They were placed in every respect on
the same footing as the young persons, their worktime limited to twelve hours, their night-labour forbidden, &c. For
the first time, legislation saw itself compelled to control directly and officially the labour of adults. In the Factory
Report of 1844-1845, it is said with irony: "No instances have come to my knowledge of adult women having
expressed any regret at their rights being thus far interfered with." [1051 The working-time of children under 13 was
reduced to 61, and in certain circumstances to 7 hours a-day. [1061

To get rid of the abuses of the "spurious relay system," the law established besides others the following important
regulations: — "That the hours of work of children and young persons shall be reckoned from the time when any
child or young person shall begin to work in the morning." So that if A, e.g., begins work at 8 in the morning, and
B at 10, B's work-day must nevertheless end at the same hour as A's. "The time shall be regulated by a public
clock," for example, the nearest railway clock, by which the factory clock is to be set. The occupier is to hang up a
"legible" printed notice stating the hours for the beginning and ending of work and the times allowed for the several
meals. Children beginning work before 12 noon may not be again employed after I p.m. The afternoon shift must

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (21 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

therefore consist of other children than those employed in the morning. Of the hour and a half for meal-times, "one
hour thereof at the least shall be given before three of the clock in the afternoon ... and at the same period of the
day. No child or young person shall be employed more than five hours before I p.m. without an interval for
meal-time of at least 30 minutes. No child or young person [or female] shall be employed or allowed to remain in
any room in which any manufacturing process is then [i.e., at mealtimes] carried on," &c.

It has been seen that these minutiae, which, with military uniformity, regulate by stroke of the clock the times,
limits, pauses of the work were not at all the products of Parliamentary fancy. They developed gradually out of
circumstances as natural laws of the modern mode of production. Their formulation, official recognition, and
proclamation by the State, were the result of a long struggle of classes. One of their first consequences was that in
practice the working-day of the adult males in factories became subject to the same limitations, since in most
processes of production the co-operation of the children, young persons, and women is indispensable. On the
whole, therefore, during the period from 1844 to 1847, the 12 hours' working-day became general and uniform in
all branches of industry under the Factory Act.

The manufacturers, however, did not allow this "progress" without a compensating "retrogression." At their
instigation the House of Commons reduced the minimum age for exploitable children from 9 to 8, in order to assure
that additional supply of factory children which is due to capitalists, according to divine and human law. [107]

The years 1846-47 are epoch-making in the economic history of England. The Repeal of the Corn Laws, and of the
duties on cotton and other raw material; Free-trade proclaimed as the guiding star of legislation; in a word, the
arrival of the millennium. On the other hand, in the same years, the Chartist movement and the 10 hours' agitation
reached their highest point. They found allies in the Tories panting for revenge. Despite the fanatical opposition of
the army of perjured Free-traders, with Bright and Cobden at their head, the Ten Hours' Bill, struggled for so long,
went through Parliament.

The new Factory Act of June 8th, 1847, enacted that on July 1st, 1847, there should be a preliminary shortening of
the working-day for "young persons" (from 13 to 18), and all females to 11 hours, but that on May 1st, 1848, there
should be a definite limitation of the working-day to 10 hours. In other respects, the Act only amended and
completed the Acts of 1833 and 1844.

Capital now entered upon a preliminary campaign in order to hinder the Act from coming into full force on May
1st, 1848. And the workers themselves, under the presence that they had been taught by experience, were to help in
the destruction of their own work. The moment was cleverly chosen. "It must be remembered, too, that there has
been more than two years of great suffering (in consequence of the terrible crisis of 1846-47) among the factory
operatives, from many mills having worked short time, and many being altogether closed. A considerable number
of the operatives must therefore be in very narrow circumstances many, it is to be feared, in debt; so that it might
fairly have been presumed that at the present time they would prefer working the longer time, in order to make up
for past losses, perhaps to pay off debts, or get their furniture out of pawn, or replace that sold, or to get a new
supply of clothes for themselves and their families." [108]

The manufacturers tried to aggravate the natural effect of these circumstances by a general reduction of wages by
10%. This was done so to say, to celebrate the inauguration of the new Free-trade era. Then followed a further
reduction of 8 1/3% as soon as the working-day was shortened to 1 1, and a reduction of double that amount as soon
as it was finally shortened to 10 hours. Wherever, therefore, circumstances allowed it, a reduction of wages of at
least 25% took place. [109] Under such favourably prepared conditions the agitation among the factory workers for
the repeal of the Act of 1847 was begun. Neither lies, bribery, nor threats were spared in this attempt. But all was in
vain. Concerning the half-dozen petitions in which workpeople were made to complain of "their oppression by the
Act," the petitioners themselves declared under oral examination, that their signatures had been extorted from them.
"They felt themselves oppressed, but not exactly by the Factory Act." [110] But if the manufacturers did not
succeed in making the workpeople speak as they wished, they themselves shrieked all the louder in press and
Parliament in the name of the workpeople. They denounced the Factory Inspectors as a kind of revolutionary

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (22 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

commissioners like those of the French National Convention ruthlessly sacrificing the unhappy factory workers to
their humanitarian crotchet. This maneuvre also failed. Factory Inspector Leonard Homer conducted in his own
person, and through his sub-inspectors, many examinations of witnesses in the factories of Lancashire. About 70%
of the workpeople examined declared in favour of 10 hours, a much smaller percentage in favour of 1 1, and an
altogether insignificant minority for the old 12 hours. [1111

Another "friendly" dodge was to make the adult males work 12 to 15 hours, and then to blazon abroad this fact as
the best proof of what the proletariat desired in its heart of hearts. But the "ruthless" Factory Inspector Leonard
Homer was again to the fore. The majority of the "over-times" declared: "They would much prefer working ten
hours for less wages, but that they had no choice; that so many were out of employment (so many spinners getting
very low wages by having to work as piecers, being unable to do better), that if they refused to work the longer
time, others would immediately get their places, so that it was a question with them of agreeing to work the longer
time, or of being thrown out of employment altogether." [1121

The preliminary campaign of capital thus came to grief, and the Ten Hours' Act came into force May 1st, 1848. But
meanwhile the fiasco of the Chartist party whose leaders were imprisoned, and whose organisation was
dismembered, had shaken the confidence of the English working-class in its own strength. Soon after this the June
insurrection in Paris and its bloody suppression united, in England as on the Continent, all fractions of the ruling
classes, landlords and capitalists, stock-exchange wolves and shop-keepers, Protectionists and Freetraders,
government and opposition, priests and freethinkers, young whores and old nuns, under the common cry for the
salvation of Property, Religion, the Family and Society. The working-class was everywhere proclaimed, placed
under a ban, under a virtual law of suspects. The manufacturers had no need any longer to restrain themselves. They
broke out in open revolt not only against the Ten Hours' Act, but against the whole of the legislation that since 1833
had aimed at restricting in some measure the "free" exploitation of labour-power. It was a pro-slavery rebellion in
miniature, carried on for over two years with a cynical recklessness, a terrorist energy all the cheaper because the
rebel capitalist risked nothing except the skin of his "hands."

To understand that which follows we must remember that the Factory Acts of 1833, 1844, and 1847 were all three
in force so far as the one did not amend the other: that not one of these limited the working-day of the male worker
over 18, and that since 1833 the 15 hours from 5.30 a.m. to 8.30 p.m. had remained the legal "day," within the
limits of which at first the 12, and later the 10 hours' labour of young persons and women had to be performed
under the prescribed conditions.

The manufacturers began by here and there discharging a part of, in many cases half of the young persons and
women employed by them, and then, for the adult males, restoring the almost obsolete night-work. The Ten Hours'
Act, they cried, leaves no other alternative. [1131

Their second step dealt with the legal pauses for meals. Let us hear the Factory Inspectors. "Since the restriction of
the hours of work to ten, the factory occupiers maintain, although they have not yet practically gone the whole
length, that supposing the hours of work to be from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. they fulfil the provisions of the statutes by
allowing an hour before 9 a.m. and half an hour after 7 p.m. [for meals]. In some cases they now allow an hour, or
half an hour for dinner, insisting at the same time, that they are not bound to allow any part of the hour and a half in
the course of the factory working-day." [1141 The manufacturers maintained therefore that the scrupulously strict
provisions of the Act of 1844 with regard to meal-times only gave the operatives permission to eat and drink before
coming into, and after leaving the factory — i.e., at home. And why should not the workpeople eat their dinner
before 9 in the morning? The crown lawyers, however, decided that the prescribed meal-times "must be in the
interval during the working-hours, and that it will not be lawful to work for 10 hours continuously, from 9 a.m. to 7
p.m., without any interval." [1151

After these pleasant demonstrations, Capital preluded its revolt by a step which agreed with the letter of the law of
1844, and was therefore legal.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (23 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

The Act of 1844 certainly prohibited the employment after 1 p.m. of such children, from 8 to 13, as had been
employed before noon. But it did not regulate in any way the 6 1/2 hours' work of the children whose work-time
began at 12 midday or later. Children of 8 might, if they began work at noon, be employed from 12 to 1, 1 hour;
from 2 to 4 in the afternoon, 2 hours; from 5 to 8.30 in the evening, 3 1/2 hours; in all, the legal 6 1/2 hours. Or
better still. In order to make their work coincide with that of the adult male labourers up to 8.30 p.m., the
manufacturers only had to give them no work till 2 in the afternoon, they could then keep them in the factory
without intermission till 8.30 in the evening. "And it is now expressly admitted that the practice exists in England
from the desire of mill-owners to have their machinery at work for more than 10 hours a-day, to keep the children at
work with male adults after all the young persons and women have left, and until 8.30 p.m. if the factory-owners
choose." [1161 Workmen and factory inspectors protested on hygienic and moral grounds, but Capital answered:

"My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond."

In fact, according to statistics laid before the House of Commons on July 26th, 1850, in spite of all protests, on July
15th, 1850, 3,742 children were subjected to this "practice" in 257 factories. [1171 Still, this was not enough. The
Lynx eye of Capital discovered that the Act of 1844 did not allow 5 hours' work before mid-day without a pause of
at least 30 minutes for refreshment, but prescribed nothing of the kind for work after mid-day. Therefore, it claimed
and obtained the enjoyment not only of making children of 8 drudge without intermission from 2 to 8.30 p.m., but
also of making them hunger during that time.

"Ay, his heart.
So says the bond."

This Shy lock-clinging [1181 to the letter of the law of 1844, so far as it regulated children's labour, was but to lead
up to an open revolt against the same law, so far as it regulated the labour of "young persons and women." It will be
remembered that the abolition of the "false relay system" was the chief aim and object of that law. The masters
began their revolt with the simple declaration that the sections of the Act of 1844 which prohibited the ad libitum
use of young persons and women in such short fractions of the day of 15 hours as the employer chose, were
"comparatively harmless" so long as the work-time was fixed at 12 hours. But under the Ten Hours' Act they were a
"grievous hardship." [1191 They informed the inspectors in the coolest manner that they should place themselves
above the letter of the law, and re-introduce the old system on their own account. [1201 They were acting in the
interests of the ill-advised operatives themselves, "in order to be able to pay them higher wages." "This was the only
possible plan by which to maintain, under the Ten Hours' Act, the industrial supremacy of Great Britain." "Perhaps
it may be a little difficult to detect irregularities under the relay system; but what of that? Is the great manufacturing
interest of this country to be treated as a secondary matter in order to save some little trouble to Inspectors and
Sub-Inspectors of Factories?" [1211

All these shifts naturally were of no avail. The Factory Inspectors appealed to the Law Courts. But soon such a
cloud of dust in the way of petitions from the masters overwhelmed the Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, that in a
circular of August 5th, 1848, he recommends the inspectors not "to lay informations against mill-owners for a
breach of the letter of the Act, or for employment of young persons by relays in cases in which there is no reason to
believe that such young persons have been actually employed for a longer period than that sanctioned by law."
Hereupon, Factory Inspector J. Stuart allowed the so-called relay system during the 15 hours of the factory day
throughout Scotland, where it soon flourished again as of old. The English Factory Inspectors, on the other hand,
declared that the Home Secretary had no power dictatorially to suspend the law, and continued their legal
proceedings against the pro-slavery rebellion.

But what was the good of summoning the capitalists when the Courts in this case the country magistrates —
Cobbett's "Great Unpaid" — acquitted them? In these tribunals, the masters sat in judgment on themselves An
example. One Eskrigge, cotton-spinner, of the firm of Kershaw, Leese, & Co., had laid before the Factory Inspector
of his district the scheme of a relay system intended for his mill. Receiving a refusal, he at first kept quiet. A few

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (24 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

months later, an individual named Robinson, also a cotton- spinner, and if not his Man Friday, at all events related to
Eskrigge, appeared before the borough magistrates of Stockport on a charge of introducing the identical plan of
relays invented by Eskrigge. Four Justices sat, among them three cottonspinners, at their head this same inevitable
Eskrigge. Eskrigge acquitted Robinson, and now was of opinion that what was right for Robinson was fair for
Eskrigge. Supported by his own legal decision, he introduced the system at once into his own factory. [1221 Of
course, the composition of this tribunal was in itself a violation of the law. [1231 These judicial farces, exclaims
Inspector Howell, "urgently call for a remedy — either that the law should be so altered as to be made to conform to
these decisions, or that it should be administered by a less fallible tribunal, whose decisions would conform to the
law ... when these cases are brought forward. I long for a stipendiary magistrate." [1241

The crown lawyers declared the masters' interpretation of the Act of 1848 absurd. But the Saviours of Society
would not allow themselves to be turned from their purpose. Leonard Homer reports, "Having endeavoured to
enforce the Act ... by ten prosecutions in seven magisterial divisions, and having been supported by the magistrates
in one case only ... I considered it useless to prosecute more for this evasion of the law. That part of the Act of 1848
which was framed for securing uniformity in the hours of work, ... is thus no longer in force in my district
(Lancashire). Neither have the sub-inspectors or myself any means of satisfying ourselves, when we inspect a mill
working by shifts, that the young persons and women are not working more than 10 hours a-day.... In a return of the
30th April, ... of millowners working by shifts, the number amounts to 1 14, and has been for some time rapidly
increasing. In general, the time of working the mill is extended to 13 1/2 hours' from 6 a.m. to 7 1/2 p.m., .... in
some instances it amounts to 15 hours, from 5 1/2 a.m. to 8 1/2 p.m." [1251 Already, in December, 1848, Leonard
Homer had a list of 65 manufacturers and 29 overlookers who unanimously declared that no system of supervision
could, under this relay system, prevent enormous over-work. [1261 Now, the same children and young persons were
shifted from the spinning-room to the weaving -room, now, during 15 hours, from one factory to another. [1271 How
was it possible to control a system which, "under the guise of relays, is some one of the many plans for shuffling
'the hands' about in endless variety, and shifting the hours of work and of rest for different individuals throughout
the day, so that you may never have one complete set of hands working together in the same room at the same
time." £128]

But altogether independently of actual over-work, this so-called relay system was an offspring of capitalistic
fantasy, such as Fourier, in his humorous sketches of "Courses Seances," has never surpassed, except that the
"attraction of labour" was changed into the attraction of capital. Look, for example, at those schemes of the masters
which the "respectable" press praised as models of "what a reasonable degree of care and method can accomplish."
The personnel of the workpeople was sometimes divided into from 12 to 14 categories, which themselves
constantly changed and recharged their constituent parts. During the 15 hours of the factory day, capital dragged in
the labourer now for 30 minutes, now for an hour, and then pushed him out again, to drag him into the factory and
to thrust him out afresh, hounding him hither and thither, in scattered shreds of time, without ever losing hold of
him until the full 10 hours' work was done. As on the stage, the same persons had to appear in turns in the different
scenes of the different acts. But as an actor during the whole course of the play belongs to the stage, so the
operatives, during 15 hours, belonged to the factory, without reckoning the time for going and coming. Thus the
hours of rest were turned into hours of enforced idleness, which drove the youths to the pot-house, and the girls to
the brothel. At every new trick that the capitalist, from day to day, hit upon for keeping his machinery going 12 or
15 hours without increasing the number of his hands, the worker had to swallow his meals now in this fragment of
time, now in that. At the time of the 10 hours' agitation, the masters cried out that the working mob petitioned in the
hope of obtaining 12 hours' wages for 10 hours' work. Now they reversed the medal. They paid 10 hours' wages for
12 or 15 hours' lordship over labour-power. [1291 This was the gist of the matter, this the masters' interpretation of
the 10 hours' law! These were the same unctuous Free-traders, perspiring with the love of humanity, who for full 10
years, during the Anti-Corn Law agitation, had preached to the operatives, by a reckoning of pounds, shillings, and
pence, that with free importation of corn, and with the means possessed by English industry, 10 hours' labour would
be quite enough to enrich the capitalists. [1301 This revolt of capital, after two years was at last crowned with
victory by a decision of one of the four highest Courts of Justice in England, the Court of Exchequer, which in a

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (25 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

case brought before it on February 8th, 1850, decided that the manufacturers were certainly acting against the sense
of the Act of 1844, but that this Act itself contained certain words that rendered it meaningless. "By this decision,
the Ten Hours' Act was abolished." [1311 A crowd of masters, who until then had been afraid of using the relay
system for young persons and women, now took it up heart and soul. [1321

But on this apparently decisive victory of capital, followed at once a revulsion. The workpeople had hitherto offered
a passive, although inflexible and unremitting resistance. They now protested in Lancashire and Yorkshire in
threatening meetings. The pretended Ten Hours' Act was thus simple humbug, parliamentary cheating, had never
existed! The Factory Inspectors urgently warned the Government that the antagonism of classes had arrived at an
incredible tension. Some of the masters themselves murmured: "On account of the contradictory decisions of the
magistrates, a condition of things altogether abnormal and anarchical obtains. One law holds in Yorkshire, another
in Lancashire, one law in one parish of Lancashire, another in its immediate neighbourhood. The manufacturer in
large towns could evade the law, the manufacturer in country districts could not find the people necessary for the
relay system, still less for the shifting of hands from one factory to another," &c. And the first birthright of capital is
equal exploitation of labour-power by all capitalists.

Under these circumstances a compromise between masters and men was effected that received the seal of
Parliament in the additional Factory Act of August 5th, 1850. The working-day for "young persons and women,"
was raised from 10 to 10 — hours for the first five days of the week, and shortened to 7 1/2 on the Saturday. The
work was to go on between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m., [1331 with pauses of not less than 1 1/2 hours for meal-times, these
meal-times to be allowed at one and the same time for all, and conformably to the conditions of 1844. By this an
end was put to the relay system once for all. [1341 For children's labour, the Act of 1844 remained in force.

One set of masters, this time as before, secured to itself special seigneurial rights over the children of the proletariat.
These were the silk manufacturers. In 1833 they had howled out in threatening fashion, "if the liberty of working
children of any age for 10 hours a day were taken away, it would stop their works." [1351 It would be impossible
for them to buy a sufficient number of children over 13. They extorted the privilege they desired. The pretext was
shown on subsequent investigation to be a deliberate lie. [1361 It did not, however, prevent them, during 10 years,
from spinning silk 10 hours a day out of the blood of little children who had to be placed upon stools for the
performance of their work. [1371 The Act of 1844 certainly "robbed" them of the "liberty" of employing children
under 1 1 longer than 6 1/2 hours a day. But it secured to them, on the other hand, the privilege of working children
between 11 and 13, 10 hours a day, and of annulling in their case the education made compulsory for all other
factory children. This time the pretext was "the delicate texture of the fabric in which they were employed,
requiring a lightness of touch, only to be acquired by their early introduction to these factories." [1381 The children
were slaughtered out-and-out for the sake of their delicate fingers, as in Southern Russia the horned cattle for the
sake of their hide and tallow. At length, in 1850, the privilege granted in 1844, was limited to the departments of
silk- twisting and silk- winding. But here, to make amends to capital bereft of its "freedom," the work-lime for
children from 11 to 13 was raised from 10 to 10 1/2 hours. Pretext: "Labour in silk mills was lighter than in mills

for other fabrics, and less likely in other respects also to be prejudicial to health." [1391 Official medical inquiries
proved afterwards that, on the contrary, "the average death-rate is exceedingly high in the silk districts and amongst
the female part of the population is higher even than it is in the cotton districts of Lancashire." [1401 Despite the
protests of the Factory Inspector, renewed every 6 months, the mischief continues to this hour. [1411

The Act of 1850 changed the 15 hours' time from 6 a.m. to 8.30 p.m., into the 12 hours from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. for
"young persons and women" only. It did not, therefore, affect children who could always be employed for half an
hour before and 2 1/2 hours after this period, provided the whole of their labour did not exceed 6 1/2 hours. Whilst
the bill was under discussion, the Factory Inspectors laid before Parliament statistics of the infamous abuses due to
this anomaly. To no purpose. In the background lurked the intention of screwing up, during prosperous years, the
working-day of adult males to 15 hours by the aid of the children. The experience of the three following years
showed that such an attempt must come to grief against the resistance of the adult male operatives. The Act of 1850

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (26 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

was therefore finally completed in 1853 by forbidding the "employment of children in the morning before and in
the evening after young persons and women." Henceforth with a few exceptions the Factory Act of 1850 regulated
the working-day of all workers in the branches of industry that come under it. [1421 Since the passing of the first
Factory Act half a century had elapsed. [1431

Factory legislation for the first time went beyond its original sphere in the "Printworks' Act of 1845." The
displeasure with which capital received this new "extravagance" speaks through every line of the Act. It limits the
working-day for children from 8 to 13, and for women to 16 hours, between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m., without any legal
pause for meal-times. It allows males over 13 to be worked at will day and night. [1441 It is a Parliamentary
abortion. [1451

However, the principle had triumphed with its victory in those great branches of industry which form the most
characteristic creation of the modern mode of production. Their wonderful development from 1853 to 1860,
hand-in-hand with the physical and moral regeneration of the factory workers, struck the most purblind. The
masters from whom the legal limitation and regulation had been wrung step by step after a civil war of half a
century, themselves referred ostentatiously to the contrast with the branches of exploitation still "free." [1461 The
Pharisees of "Political Economy" now proclaimed the discernment of the necessity of a legally fixed working-day
as a characteristic new discovery of their "science." [1471 It will be easily understood that after the factory
magnates had resigned themselves and become reconciled to the inevitable, the power of resistance of capital
gradually weakened, whilst at the same time the power of attack of the working-class grew with the number of its
allies in the classes of society not immediately interested in the question. Hence the comparatively rapid advance
since 1860.

The dye-works and bleach- works all came under the Factory Act of 1850 in 1860; [1481 lace and stocking
manufactures in 1861.

In consequence of the first report of the Commission on the employment of children (1863) the same fate was
shared by the manufacturers of all earthenwares (not merely pottery), Lucifer-matches, percussioncaps, cartridges,
carpets, fustian-cutting, and many processes included under the name of "finishing." In the year 1863 bleaching in
the open air [1491 and baking were placed under special Acts, by which, in the former, the labour of young persons
and women during the night-time (from 8 in the evening to 6 in the morning), and in the latter, the employment of
journeymen bakers under 18, between 9 in the evening and 5 in the morning were forbidden. We shall return to the
later proposals of the same Commission, which threatened to deprive of their "freedom" all the important branches
of English Industry, with the exception of agriculture, mines, and the means of transport. [1501



SECTION 7

THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY.

RE-ACTION OF THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS ON OTHER COUNTRIES



The reader will bear in mind that the production of surplus-value, or the extraction of surplus-labour, is the specific
end and aim, the sum and substance, of capitalist production, quite apart from any changes in the mode of
production, which may arise from the subordination of labour to capital. He will remember that as far as we have at
present gone only the independent labourer, and therefore only the labourer legally qualified to act for himself,
enters as a vendor of a commodity into a contract with the capitalist. If, therefore, in our historical sketch, on the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (27 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

one hand, modern industry, on the other, the labour of those who are physically and legally minors, play important
parts, the former was to us only a special department, and the latter only a specially striking example of labour
exploitation. Without, however, anticipating the subsequent development of our inquiry, from the mere connexion
of the historic facts before us it follows:

First. The passion of capital for an unlimited and reckless extension of the working-day, is first gratified in the
industries earliest revolutionised by water-power, steam, and machinery, in those first creations of the modern mode
of production, cotton, wool, flax, and silk spinning, and weaving. The changes in the material mode of production,
and the corresponding changes in the social relations of the producers [1511 gave rise first to an extravagance
beyond all bounds, and then in opposition to this, called forth a control on the part of Society which legally limits,
regulates, and makes uniform the working-day and its pauses. This control appears, therefore, during the first half
of the nineteenth century simply as exceptional legislation. [1521 As soon as this primitive dominion of the new
mode of production was conquered, it was found that, in the meantime, not only had many other branches of
production been made to adopt the same factory system, but that manufactures with more or less obsolete methods,
such as potteries, glass-making, &c, that old-fashioned handicrafts, like baking, and, finally, even that the so-called
domestic industries, such as nail-making, [1531 had long since fallen as completely under capitalist exploitation as
the factories themselves. Legislation was, therefore, compelled to gradually get rid of its exceptional character, or
where, as in England, it proceeds after the manner of the Roman Casuists, to declare any house in which work was
done to be a factory. [1541

Second. The history of the regulation of the working-day in certain branches of production, and the struggle still
going on in others in regard to this regulation, prove conclusively that the isolated labourer, the labourer as "free"
vendor of his labour-power, when capitalist production has once attained a certain stage, succumbs without any
power of resistance. The creation of a normal working-day is, therefore, the product of a protracted civil war, more
or less dissembled, between the capitalist class and the working-class. As the contest takes place in the arena of
modern industry, it first breaks out in the home of that industry — England. [1551 The English factory workers
were the champions, not only of the English, but of the modern working-class generally, as their theorists were the
first to throw down the gauntlet to the theory of capital. [1561 Hence, the philosopher of the Factory, Ure,
denounces as an ineffable disgrace to the English working-class that they inscribed "the slavery of the Factory
Acts" on the banner which they bore against capital, manfully striving for "perfect freedom of labour." [1571

France limps slowly behind England. The February revolution was necessary to bring into the world the 12 hours'
law, [1581 which is much more deficient than its English original. For all that, the French revolutionary method has
its special advantages. It once for all commands the same limit to the working-day in all shops and factories without
distinction, whilst English legislation reluctantly yields to the pressure of circumstances, now on this point, now on
that, and is getting lost in a hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments. [1591 On the other hand, the
French law proclaims as a principle that which in England was only won in the name of children, minors, and
women, and has been only recently for the first time claimed as a general right. [1601

In the United States of North America, every independent movement of the workers was paralysed so long as
slavery disfigured a part of the Republic. Labour cannot emancipate itself in the white skin where in the black it is
branded. But out of the death of slavery a new life at once arose. The first fruit of the Civil War was the eight hours'
agitation, that ran with the seven-leagued boots of the locomotive from the Atlantic to the Pacific, from New
England to California. The General Congress of labour at Baltimore (August 16th, 1866) declared: "The first and
great necessity of the present, to free the labour of this country from capitalistic slavery, is the passing of a law by
which eight hours shall be the normal working-day in all States of the American Union. We are resolved to put
forth all our strength until this glorious result is attained." [1611 At the same time, the Congress of the
International Working Men's Association at Geneva, on the proposition of the London General Council, resolved
that "the limitation of the working-day is a preliminary condition without which all further attempts at improvement
and emancipation must prove abortive... the Congress proposes eight hours as the legal limit of the working-day."



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (28 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

Thus the movement of the working-class on both sides of the Atlantic, that had grown instinctively out of the
conditions of production themselves, endorsed the words of the English Factory Inspector, R. J. Saunders "Further
steps towards a reformation of society can never be carried out with any hope of success, unless the hours of labour
be limited, and the prescribed limit strictly enforced." [1621

It must be acknowledged that our labourer comes out of the process of production other than he entered. In the
market he stood as owner of the commodity "labour-power" face to face with other owners of commodities, dealer
against dealer. The contract by which he sold to the capitalist his labour-power proved, so to say, in black and white
that he disposed of himself freely. The bargain concluded, it is discovered that he was no "free agent," that the time
for which he is free to sell his labour-power is the time for which he is forced to sell it, [1631 that in fact the
vampire will not lose its hold on him "so long as there is a muscle, a nerve, a drop of blood to be exploited." [1641
For "protection" against "the serpent of their agonies," the labourers must put their heads together, and, as a class,
compel the passing of a law, an all-powerful social barrier that shall prevent the very workers from selling, by
voluntary contract with capital, themselves and their families into slavery and death. [1651 In place of the pompous
catalogue of the "inalienable rights of man" comes the modest Magna Charta of a legally limited working-day,
which shall make clear "when the time which the worker sells is ended, and when his own begins." [1661 Quantum
mutatus ab illo !



Footnotes

fJJ "A day's labour is vague, it may be long or short." ("An Essay on Trade and Commerce, Containing
Observations on Taxes, &c." London. 1770, p. 73.)

[21 This question is far more important than the celebrated question of Sir Robert Peel to the Birmingham Chamber
of Commerce: What is a pound? A question that could only have been proposed, because Peel was as much in the
dark as to the nature of money as the "little shilling men" of Birmingham.

[31 "It is the aim of the capitalist to obtain with his expended capital the greatest possible quantity of labour
(d'obtenir du capital depense la plus forte somme de travail possible). J. G. Courcelle-Seneuil. "Traite theorique et
pratique des entreprises industrielles." 2nd ed. Paris, 1857, p. 63.

[41 "An hour's labour lost in a day is a prodigious injury to a commercial State.... There is a very great consumption
of luxuries among the labouring poor of this kingdom: particularly among the manufacturing populace, by which
they also consume their time, the most fatal of consumptions." "An Essay on Trade and Commerce, &c," p. 47, and
15 3.

[51 "Si le manouvrier libre prend un instant de repos, I'economie sordide qui le suit des yeux avec inquietude,
pretend qu'il la vole." N. Linguet, "Theorie des Lois Civiles. &c." London, 1767, t. II., p. 466.

[61 During the great strike of the London builders, 1860-61, for the reduction of the working-day to 9 hours, their
Committee published a manifesto that contained, to some extent, the plea of our worker. The manifesto alludes, not
without irony, to the fact, that the greatest profit-monger amongst the building masters, a certain Sir M. Peto, was in
the odour of sanctity (This same Peto, after 1867, came to an end a la Strousberg.)

[7] "Those who labour ... in reality feed both the pensioners ... [called the rich] and themselves." (Edmund Burke, 1.

c, p. 2.)

[81 Niebuhr in his "Roman History" says very naively: "It is evident that works like the Etruscan, which in their
ruins astound us, pre-suppose in little (!) states lords and vassals." Sismondi says far more to the purpose that



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (29 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
"Brussels lace" pre-supposes wage-lords and wage-slaves.

[91 "One cannot see these unfortunates (in the gold mines between Egypt, Ethiopia, and Arabia) who cannot even
have their bodies dean, or their nakedness clothed, without pitying their miserable lot. There is no indulgence, no
forbearance for the sick, the feeble, the aged, for woman's weakness. All must, forced by blows, work on until death
puts an end to their sufferings and their distress." ("Diod. Sic. Bibl. Hist.," lib. 2, c. 13.)

[101 That which follows refers to the situation in the Roumanian provinces before the change effected since the
Crimean war.

[Ill This holds likewise for Germany, and especially for Prussia east of the Elbe. In the 15th century the German
peasant was nearly everywhere a man, who, whilst subject to certain rents paid in produce and labour was otherwise
at least practically free. The German colonists in Brandenburg, Pomerania, Silesia, and Eastern Prussia, were even
legally acknowledged as free men. The victory of the nobility in the peasants' war put an end to that. Not only were
the conquered South German peasants again enslaved. From the middle of the 16th century the peasants of Eastern
Prussia, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and Silesia, and soon after the free peasants of Schleswig-Holstein were
degraded to the condition of serfs. (Maurer, Fronhofe iv. vol., — Meitzen, "Der Boden des preussischen Staats" —
Hanssen, vv Leibeigenschaft in Schleswig-Holstein." — F. E.)

[121 Further details are to be found in E. Regnault's "Histoire politique et sociale des Principautes Danubiennes,"
Paris, 1855.

[131 "In general and within certain limits, exceeding the medium size of their kind, is evidence of the prosperity of
organic beings. As to man, his bodily height lessens if his due growth is interfered with, either by physical or local
conditions. In all European countries in which the conscription holds, since its introduction, the medium height of
adult men, and generally their fitness for military service, has diminished. Before the revolution (1789), the
minimum for the infantry in France was 165 centimetres; in 1818 (law of March 10th), 157; by the law of March
21, 1832, 156 cm.; on the average in France more than half are rejected on account of deficient height or bodily
weakness. The military standard in Saxony was in 1780, 178 c. m. It is now 155. In Prussia it is 157. According to
the statement of Dr. Meyer in the Bavarian Gazette, May 9th, 1862, the result of an average of 9 years is, that in
Prussia out of 1,000 conscripts 716 were unfit for military service, 317 because of deficiency in height, and 399
because of bodily defects.... Berlin in 1858 could not provide its contingent of recruits, it was 156 men short." J.
von Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agrikultur und Physiologie. 1862," 7th Ed., vol. 1, pp. 1 17, 118.

[141 The history of the Factory Act of 1850 will be found in the course of this chapter.

[151 1 only touch here and there on the period from the beginning of modern industry in England to 1845. For this
period I refer the reader to "Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," von Friedrich Engels, Leipzig, 1845.
How completely Engels understood the nature of the capitalist mode of production is shown by the Factory Reports,
Reports on Mines, &c, that have appeared since 1845, and how wonderfully he painted the circumstances in detail
is seen on the most superficial comparison of his work with the off— cial reports of the Children's Employment
Commission, published 18 to 20 years later (1863-1867). These deal especially with the branches of industry in
which the Factory Acts had not, up to 1 862, been introduced, in fact are not yet introduced. Here, then, little or no
alteration had been enforced, by authority, in the conditions painted by Engels. I borrow my examples chiefly from
the Free-trade period after 1848, that age of paradise, of which the commercial travellers for the great firm of
Free-trade, blatant as ignorant, tell such fabulous tales. For the rest England figures here in the foreground because
she is the classic representative of capitalist production, and she alone has a continuous set of official ctatistics of
the thin~s we are considerinR.

[161 "Suggestions, &c. by Mr. L. Homer, Inspector of Factories," in Factories Regulation Acts. Ordered by the
House of Commons to be printed, 9th August, 1859, pp. 4, 5.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (30 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
[171 Reports of the Inspector of Factories for the half year. October, 1856, p. 35.

[18] Reports, &c, 30th April, 1858, p. 9.

£191 Reports, &c, 1. c, p. 10.

[201 Reports &c, 1. c, p. 25.

[211 Reports &c, for the half year ending 30th April, 1861. See Appendix No. 2; Reports, &c, 31st October, 1862,

pp. 7, 52, 53. The violations of the Acts became more numerous during the last half year 1863. Cf Reports, &c,
ending 31st October, 1863, p. 7.

[221 Reports, &c, October 31st, 1860, p. 23. With what fanaticism, according to the evidence of manufacturers
given in courts of law, their hands set themselves against every interruption in factory labour, the following curious
circumstance shows. In the beginning of June, 1836, information reached the magistrates of Dewsbury (Yorkshire)
that the owners of 8 large mills in the neighbourhood of Batley had violated the Factory Acts. Some of these
gentlemen were accused of having kept at work 5 boys between 12 and 15 years of age, from 6 a.m. on Friday to 4
p.m. on the following Saturday, not allowing them any respite except for meals and one hour for sleep at midnight.
And these children had to do this ceaseless labour of 30 hours in the "shoddyhole," as the hole is called, in which
the woollen rags are pulled in pieces, and where a dense atmosphere of dust, shreds, &c, forces even the adult
workman to cover his mouth continually with handkerchiefs for the protection of his lungs! The accused gentlemen
affirm in lieu of taking an oath — as quakers they were too scrupulously religious to take an oath — that they had,
in their great compassion for the unhappy children, allowed them four hours for sleep, but the obstinate children
absolutely would not go to bed. The quaker gentlemen were mulcted in £20. Dryden anticipated these gentry:

Fox full fraught in seeming sanctity,
That feared an oath, but like the devil would lie,
That look'd like Lent, and had the holy leer,
And durst not sin! before he said his prayer!"

[231 Rep., 31st Oct., 1856, p. 34.

T241 1. c, p. 35.

[25J I.e., p. 48.

[26J 1. c.,p. 48.

[2711. c, p. 48.

[28J I.e., p. 48.

[29J Report of the Insp. &c, 30th April 1860, p. 56.

[301 This is the official expression both in the factories and in the reports.

[311 "The cupidity of mill-owners whose cruelties in the pursuit of gain have hardly been exceeded by those
perpetrated by the Spaniards on the conquest of America in the pursuit of gold." John Wade, "History of the Middle
and Working Classes," 3rd Ed. London, 1835, p. 1 14. The theoretical part of this book, a kind of hand-book of
Political Economy, is, considering the time of its publication, original in some parts, e.g., on commercial crises. The
historical part is, to a great extent, a shameless plagiarism of Sir F. M. Eden's vv The State of the Poor," London,
1797.

[321 Daily Telegraph, 1 7th January, 1860.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (31 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
[331 Cf. F. Engels "Lage, etc." pp. 249-51.

[341 Children's Employment Commission. First report., etc., 1863. Evidence, pp. 16, 19, 18.

[35J Public Health, 3rd report, etc., pp. 102, 104, 105.

[36J Child. Empl. Comm. I. Report, p. 24.

[371 Children's Employment Commission, p. 22, and xi.

[381 1- c, p. xlviii.

[39J1. cp.liv.

[401 This is not to be taken in the same sense as our surplus-labour time. These gentlemen consider 10 1/2 hours of
labour as the normal working-day, which includes of course the normal surplus-labour. After this begins
"over-time" which is paid a little better. It will be seen later that the labour expended during the so-called normal
day is paid below its value, so that the over-time is simply a capitalist trick in order to extort more surplus-labour,
which it would still be, everi if the labour-power expended during the normal working-day were properly paid.

[4111. c, Evidence, pp. 123, 124, 125, 140, and 54.

[421 Alum finely powdered, or mixed with salt, is a normal article of commerce bearing the significant name of
"bakers' stuff."

[431 Soot is a well-known and very energetic form of carbon, and forms a manure that capitalistic chimney-sweeps
sell to English farmers. Now in 1862 the British juryman had in a law-suit to decide whether soot, with which,
unknown to the buyer, 90% of dust and sand are mixed, is genuine soot in the commercial sense or adulterated soot
in the legal sense. The "amis du commerce" decided it to be genuine commercial soot, and nonsuited the plaintiff
farmer, who had in addition to pay the costs of the suit.

[441 The French chemist, Chevallier, in his treatise on the "sophistications" of commodities, enumerates for many
of the 600 or more articles which he passes in review, 10, 20, 30 different methods of adulteration. He adds that he
does not know all the methods and does not mention all that he knows. He gives 6 kinds of adulteration of sugar, 9
of olive oil, 10 of butter, 12 of salt, 19 of milk, 20 of bread, 23 of brandy, 24 of meal, 28 of chocolate, 30 of wine,
32 of coffee, etc. Even God Almighty does not escape this fate. See Rouard de Card, "On the Falsifications of the
Materials of the Sacrament." ("De la falsification des substances sacramentelles," Paris, 1856.)

[451 "Report, &c, relative to the grievances complained of by the journeymen bakers, &c, London, 1862," and
"Second Report, &c, London, 1863."

[461 1- c, First Report, &c, p. vi.

[471 1. c, p. Ixxi.

[481 George Read, "The History of Baking," London, 1848, p. 16.

[491 Report (First) &c. Evidence of the "full-priced" baker Cheeseman, p. 108.

[501 George Read, 1. c. At the end of the 17th and the beginning of the 18th centuries the factors (agents) that
crowded into every possible trade were still denounced as "public nuisances." Thus the Grand Jury at the quarter
session of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Somerset, addressed a presentment to the Lower House which,
among other things, states, "that these factors of Blackwell Hall are a Public Nuisance and Prejudice to the Clothing
Trade, and ought to be put down as a Nuisance." "The Case of our English Wool., &c," London, 1685, pp. 6, 7.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (32 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
[51] First Report, &c.

[521 Report of Committee on the Baking Trade in Ireland for 1861.

[5311. c.

[541 Public meeting of agricultural labourers at Lasswade, near Edinburgh, January 5th, 1866. (See Workman's
Advocate, January 13th, 1866.) The formation since the close of 1865 of a Trades' Union among the agricultural
labourers at first in Scotland is a historic event. In one of the most oppressed agricultural districts of England,
Buckinghamshire, the labourers, in March, 1867, made a ueat strike for the raising of their weekly wage from 9-10
shillings to 12 shillings. (It will be seen from the preceding passage that the movement of the English agricultural
proletariat, entirely crushed since the suppression of its violent manifestations after 1830, and especially since the
introduction of the new Poor Laws, begins again in the sixties, until it becomes finally epoch-making in 1872. 1
return to this in the 2nd volume, as well as to the Blue books that have appeared since 1867 on the position of the
English land labourers. Addendum to the 3rd ea.)

[551 Reynolds' Newspaper, January, 1866. — Every week this same paper has, under the sensational headings,
"Fearful and fatal accidents," "Appalling tragedies," &c, a whole list of fresh railway catastrophes. On these an
employe on the North Staffordshire line comments: "Everyone knows the consequences that may occur if the driver
and fireman of a locomotive engine are not continually on the look-out. How can that be expected from a man who
has been at such work for 29 or 30 hours, exposed to the weather, and without rest. The following is an example
which is of very frequent occurrence: — One fireman commenced work on the Monday morning at a very early
hour. When he had finished what is called a day's work, he had been on duty 14 hours 50 minutes. Before he had
time to get his tea, he was again called on for duty.... The next time he finished he had been on duty 14 hours 25
minutes, making a total of 29 hours 15 minutes without intermission. The rest of the week's work was made up as
follows: — Wednesday. 15 hours: Thursday, 15 hours 35 minutes; Friday, 14 2 hours; Saturday, 14 hours 10
minutes, making a total for the week of 88 hours 40 minutes. Now, sir, fancy his astonishment on being paid 6 1/4
days for the whole. Thinking it was a mistake, he applied to the time-keeper,... and inquited what they considered a
day's work, and was told 13 hours for a goods man (i.e., 78 hours).... He then asked for what he had made over and
above the 78 hours per week, but was refused. However, he was at last told they would give him another quarter,
i.e., 10 d.," 1. c, 4th February. 1866.

[56J Cf F. Engels, 1. c, pp. 253, 254.

[571 Dr. Letheby, Consulting Physician of the Board of Health, declared: "The minimum of air for each adult ought
to be in a sleeping room 300, and in a dwelling room 500 cubic feet." Dr. Richardson, Senior Physician to one of
the London Hospitals: "With needlewomen of all kinds, including milliners, dressmakers, and ordinary
sempstresses, there are three miseries — over-work, deficient air, and either deficient food or deficient digestion....
Needlework, in the main, ... is infinitely better adapted to women than to men. But the mischiefs of the trade, in the
metropolis especially, are that it is monopolised by some twenty-six capitalists, who, under the advantages that
spring from capital, can bring in capital to force economy out of labour. This power tells throughout the whole
class. If a dressmaker can get a little circle of customers, such is the competition that, in her home, she must work to
the death to hold together, and this same over-work she must of necessity inflict on any who may assist her. If she
fail, or do not try independently, she must join an establishment, where her labour is oot less, but where her money
is safe. Placed thus, she becomes a mere slave, tossed about with the variations of society. Now at home, in one
room, starving, or near to it, then engaged 15, 16, aye, even 18 hours out of the 24, in an air that is scarcely
tolerable, and on food which, even if it be good, cannot be digested in the absence of pure air. On these victims,
consumption, which is purely a disease of bad air, feeds." Dr. Richardson: "Work and Over-work," in "Social
Science Review," 18th July, 1863.

[581 Morning Star, 23rd June, 1863. — The Times made useofthe circumstance to defend the American
slave-owners against Bright, &c. "Very many of us think," says a leader of July 2nd, 1863, "that, while we work our

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (33 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

own young women to death, using the scourge of starvation, instead of the crack of the whip, as the instrument of
compulsion, we have scarcely a right to hound on fire and slaughter against families who were born slave-owners,
and who, at least, feed their slaves well, and work them lightly." In the same manner, the Standard, a Tory organ,
fell foul of the Rev. Newman Hall: "He excommunicated the slave-owners, but prays with the fine folk who,
without remorse, make the omnibus drivers and conductors of London, &c, work 16 hours a-day for the wages of a
dog." Finally, spake the oracle, Thomas Carlyle, of whom I wrote, in 1850, "Zum Teufel ist der Genius, der Kultus
ist geblieben." In a short parable, he reduces the one great event of contemporary history, the American Civil War,
to this level, that the Peter of the North wants to break the head of the Paul of the South with all his might, because
the Peter of the North hires his labour by the day, and the Paul of the South hires his by the life. ("Macmillan's
Magazine." llias Americana in nuce. August, 1863.) Thus, the bubble of Tory sympathy for the urban workers —
by no means for the rural — has burst at last. The sum of all is — slavery!

[591 Dr. Richardson, 1. c.

[601 Children's Employment Commission. Third Report. London, 1864, pp. iv., v., vi.

[611 "Both in Staffordshire and in South Wales young girls and women are employed on the pit banks and on the
coke heaps, not only by day but also by night. This practice has been often noticed in Reports presented to
Parliament, as being attended with great and notorious evils. These females employed with the men, hardly
distinguished from them in their dress, and begrimed with dirt and smoke, are exposed to the deterioration of
character, arising from the loss of self-respect, which can hardly fail to follow from their unfeminine occupation."
(1. c, 194, p. xxvi. Cf. Fourth Report (1865), 61, p. xiii.) It is the same in glass-works.

[621 A steel manufacturer who employs children in night-labour remarked: "It seems but natural that boys who
work at night cannot sleep and get proper rest by day, but will be running about.' (1. c, Fourth Report, 63, p. xiii.)
On the importance of sunlight for the maintenance and growth of the body, a physician writes: "Light also acts upon
the tissues of the body directly in hardening them and supporting their elasticity. Tne muscles of animals, when
they are deprived of a proper amount of light, become sofl and inelastic, the nenous power loses its tone from
defective stimulation, and the daboration of all growth seems to be perverted.... In the case of children, constant
access to plenty of light during the day, and to the direct rays of the sun for a part of it, is most essential to health.
Light assists in the elaboration of good plastic blood, and hardens the fibre after it has been laid down. It also acts
as a stimulus upon the organs of sips, and by this means brings about more activity in the various cerebral
functions." Dr. W. Strange, Senior Physician of the Worcester General Hospital, from whose work on "Health"
(1864) this passage is taken, writes in a letter to Mr. White, one of the commissioners: "I have had opportunities
formerly, when in Lancashire, of observing the effects of nightwork upon children, and I have no hesitation in
saying, contrary to what some employers were fond of asserting, those children who were subjected to it soon
suffered in their health." (1. c, 284., p. 55.) That such a question should furnish the material of serious controversy,
shows plainly how capitalist production acts on the brain-functions of capitalists and their retainers.

[631 1- c, 57, p. xii.

[641 1- c. Fourth Report (1865). 58. p. xii.

T651 1. c.

[661 1. c, p. xiii. The degree of culture of these "labour-powers" must naturally be such as appears in the following
dialogues with one of the commissioners: Jeremiah Haynes, age 12 — "Four times four is 8; 4 fours are 16. A king
is him that has all the money and gold. We have aj king (told it is a Queen), they call her the Princess Alexandra.
Told that she married the Queen's son. The Queen's son is the Princess Alexandra. A Princess is a man " William
Turner, age 12 — "Don't live in England. Think it is a country, but didn't know before." John Morris, age 14 —
"Have heard say that God made the world, and that all the people was drowndedbut one, heard say that one was a
little bird." William Smith age 15 — "God made man, man made woman." Edward Taylor, age 15 — "Do not

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (34 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

know of London." Henry Matthewman, age 17 — "Had been to chapel, but missed a good many times lately. One
name that they preached about was Jesus Christ, but I cannot say any others, and I cannot te~l anything about him.
He was not killed, but died like other people. He was not the same as other people in some ways, because he was
religious in some ways and others isn't." (1. c, p. xv.) "The devil is a good person. I don't know where he lives." '
Christ was a wicked man." "This girl spelt God as dog, and did not know the name of the queen." ("Ch.
Employment Comm. V. Report, 1866 " p. 55, n. 278.) The same system obtains in the glass and paper works as in
the metallurgical, already cited. In the paper factories, where the paper is made by machinery, nips-work is the rule
for all processes, except rag-sorting. In some cases night-work, by relays, is carried on incessantly throup the whole
week, usually from Sunday nipt until midnipt of the following Saturday. Those who are on day-work work 5 days
of 12, and I day of 18 hours; those on nips-work 5 nipts of 12, and I of 6 hours in each week. In other cases each set
works 24 hours consecutively on alternate days, one set working 6 hours on Monday, and 18 on Saturday to make
up the 24 hours. In other cases an intermediate system prevails, by which all employed on the paper- making
machinery work 15 or 16 hours every day in the week. This system, says Commissioner Lord, "seems to combine
all the evils of both the 12 hours' and the 24 hours' relays." Children under 13, young persons under 18, and women,
work under this nipt system. Sometimes under the 12 hours' system they are obliged, on account of the
non-appearance of those that oupt to relieve them, to work a double turn of 24 hours. The evidence proves that boys
and girls very often work overtime, which, not unfrequently, extends to 24 or even 36 hours of uninterrupted toil. In
the continuous and unvarying process of glazing are found girls of 12 who work the whole month 14 hours a day,
"without any regular relief or cessation beyond 2 or, at most, 3 breaks of half an hour each for meals." In some
mills, where regular nips- work has been entirely given up, over- work goes on to a terrible extent, "and that often in
the dirtiest, and in the hottest, and in the most monotonous of the various processes." ("Ch. Employment Comm.
Report IV., 1865," p. xxxviii, and xxxix.)

[671 Fourth Report, &c. 1865, 79, p. xvi.

I6811.C, 80. p. xvi.

[69J1-C, 82. p. xvii.

[701 In our reflecting and reasoning age a man is not worth much who cannot give a good reason for everything, no
matter how bad or how crazy. Everything in the world that has been done wrong has been done wrong for the very
best of reasons. (Hegel, 1. c, p. 249 )

[711 1. c, 85, p. xvii. To similar tender scruples of the glass manufacturers that regular meal-times for the children
are impossible because as a consequence a certain quantity of heat, radiated by the furnaces, would be "a pure loss"
or "wasted," Commissioner White makes answer. His answer.is unlike that of Ure, Senior, &c, and their puny
German plagiarists. a la Roscher who are touched by the "abstinence," "self-denial," "saving," of the capitalists in
the expenditure of their gold, and by their Timur-Tamerlanish prodigality of human life! "A certain amount of heat
beyond what is usual at present might also be going to waste, if meal-times were secured in these cases, but it seems
likely not equal in money-value to the waste of animal power now going on in glass-houses throughout the
kingdom from growing boys not having enough quiet time to eat their meals at ease, with a little rest afterwards for
digestion." (1. c, p. xiv.) And this in the year of progress 1865! Without considering the expenditure of strength in
lifting and carrying, such a child, in the sheds where bottle and flint glass are made, walks during the performance
of his work 15-20 miles in every 6 hours! And the work often lasts 14 or 15 hours! In many of these glass works, as
in the Moscow spinning mills, the system of 6 hours' relays is in force. "During the working part of the week six
hours is the utmost unbroken period ever attained at any one time for rest, and out of this has to come the time spent
in coming and going to and from work, washing, dressing, and meals, leaving a very short period indeed for rest,
and none for fresh air and play, unless at the expense of the sleep necessary for young boys, especially at such hot
and fatiguing work.... Even the short sleep is obviously liable to be broken by a boy having to wake himself if it is
night, or by the noise, if it is day." Mr. White gives cases where a boy worked 36 consecutive hours; others
where,boys of 12 drudged on until 2 in the morning, and then slept in the works till 5 a.m. (3 hours!) only to resume



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (35 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

their work. "The amount of work," say Tremenheere and Tufnell, who drafted the general report, "done by boys,
youths, girls, and women, in the course of their daily or nightly spell of labour, is certainly extraordinary." (1. c,
xliii. and xliv.) Meanwhile, late by night, self-denying Mr. Glass-Capital, primed with port-wine, reels out of his
club homeward droning out idiotically. "Britons never, never shall be slaves!"

[721 In England even now occasionally in rural districts a labourer is condemned to imprisonment for desecrating
the Sabbath, by working in his front garden. The same labourer is punished for breach of contract if he remains
away from his metal, paper, or glass works on the Sunday, even if it be from a religious whim. The orthodox
Parliament will hear nothing of Sabbath-breaking if it occurs in the process of expanding capital. A memorial
(August 1863), in which the London day-labourers in fish and poultry shops asked for the abolition of Sunday
labour, states that their work lasts for the first 6 days of the week on an average 15 hours a-day, and on Sunday 8-10
hours. From this same memorial we learn also that the delicate gourmands among the aristocratic hypocrita of
Exeter Hall, especially encourage this "Sunday labour." These "holy ones," so zealous in cute curanda, show their
Christianity by the humility with which they bear the overwork, the privations, and the hunger of others.
Obsequium ventris istis (the labourers) perniciosius est.

[731 "We have given in our previous reports the statements of several experienced manufacturers to the effect that
over-hours ... certainly tend prematurely to exhaust the workine oower of the men." (1. c, 64. p. xiii.)

[741Cairnes, "The Slave Power," pp. 110. 111.

J75J John Ward: "The Borough of Stoke-upon-Trent," London, 1843, p. 42.

[761 Ferrand's Speech in the House of Commons, 27th April, 1863.

[771 Those were the very words used by the cotton manufacturers." 1. c.

[781 1- c. Mr. Villiers, despite the best of intentions on his part, was "legally" obliged to refuse the requests of the
manufacturers. These gentlemen, however, attained their end through the obliging nature of the local poor law
boards. Mr. A. Redgrave, Inspector of Factories, asserts that this time the system under which orphans and pauper
children were treated "legally" as apprentices "was not accompanied with the old abuses" (on these "abuses" see
Engels, 1. c), although in one case there certainly was "abuse of this system in respect to a number of girls and
young women brought from the agricultural districts of Scotland into Lancashire and Cheshire." Under this system
the manufacturer entered into a contract with the workhouse authorities for a certain period. He fed, clothed and
lodged the children, and gave them a small allowance of money. A remark of Mr. Redgrave to be quoted directly
seems strange, especially if we consider that even among the years of prosperity of the English cotton trade, the
year 1860 stands unparalleled, and that, besides, wages were exceptionally high. For this extraordinary demand for
work had to contend with the depopulation of Ireland, with unexampled emigration from the English and Scotch
agricultural districts to Australia and America, with an actual diminution of the population in some of the English
agricultural districts, in cons'equence partly of an actual breakdown of the vital force of the labourers, partly of the
already effected dispersion of the disposable population through the dealers in human flesh. Despite all this Mr.
Redgrave says: "This kind of labour, however, would only be sought after when none other could be procured, for it
is a high-priced labour. The ordinary wages of a boy of 13 would be about 4s. per week, but to lodge, to clothe, to
feed, and to provide medical attendance and proper superintendence for 50 or 100 of these boys, and to set aside
some remuneration for them, could not be accomplished for 4s. a- head per week." (Report of the Inspector of
Factories for 30th April, 1860, p. 27.) Mr. Redgrave forgets to tell us how the labourer himself can do all this for his
children out of their 4s. a-week wages, when the manufacturer cannot do it for the 50 or 100 children lodged,
boarded, superintended all together. To guard against false conclusions from the text, I ought here to remark that the
English cotton industry, since it was placed under the Factory Act of 1850 with its regulations of labour- time, &c,
must be regarded as the model industry of England. The English cotton operative is in every respect better off than
his Continental companion in misery. "The Prussian factory operative labours at least ten hours per week more than
his English competitor, and if employed at his own loom in his bwn house, his labour is not restricted to even those

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (36 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

additional hours. ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1855, p. 103.) Redgrave, the Factory Inspector mentioned
above, after the Industrial Exhibition in 1851, travelled on the Continent, especially in France and Germany, for the
purpose of inquiring into the conditions of the factories. Of the Prussian operative he says: "He receives a
remuneration sufficient to procure the simple fare, and to supply the slender comforts to which he has been
accustomed ... he lives upon his coarse fare, and works hard, wherein his position is subordinate to that of the
English operative." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact." 31st Oct., 1855, p. 85.)

[791 The over-worked "die off with strange rapidity; but the places of those who perish are instantly filled, and a
frequent change of persons makes no alteration in the scene." ("England and America." London, 1833, vol. I, p. 55.
By E. G. Wakefield.)

[801 See "Public Health. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council, 1863." Published in London
1864. This report deals especially with the agricultural labourers. "Sutherland ... is commonly represented as a
highly improved county ... but ... recent inquiry has discovered that even there, in districts once famous for fine men
and gallant soldiers, the inhabitants have degenerated into a meagre and stunted race. In the healthiest situations, on
hill sides fronting the sea, the faces of their famished children are as pale as they could be in the foul atmosphere of
a London alley." (W. Th. Thornton. "Overpopulation and its Remedy." 1. c, pp. 74, 75.) They resemble in fact the
30,000 "gallant Highlanders" whom Glasgow pigs together in its wynds and closes, with prostitutes and thieves.

[811 "But though the health of a population is so important a fact of the national capital, we are afraid it must be
said that the class of employers of labour have not been the most forward to guard and cherish this treasure.... The
consideration of the health of the operatives was forced upon the mill-owners." (Times, November 5th, 1861.) "The
men of the West Riding became the clothiers of mankind ... the health of the workpeople was sacnficed, and the
lace in a few generations must have degenerated. But a reaction set in. Lord Shaftesbury's Bill limited the hours of
children's labour," &c. ("Report of the Registrar-General," for October 1861.)

[821 We, therefore, find, e.g., that in the beginning of 1863, 26 firms owning extensive potteries in Staffordshire,
amongst others, Josiah Wedgwood, & Sons, petition in a memorial for "some legislative enactment." Competition
with other capitalists permits them no voluntary timitation of working-ti me for children, &c. "Much as we deplore
the evils before mentioned, it would not be possible to prevent them by any scheme of agreement between the
manufacturers.-.. Taking all these points into consideration, we have come to the conviction that some legislative
enactment is wanted." ("Children's Employment Comm." Rep. I, 1863, p. 322.) Most recently a much more striking
example offers. The rise in the price of cotton during a period of feverish activity, had induced the manufacturers in
Blackburn to shorten, by mutual consent, the working-time in their mills during a certain fixed period. This period
terminated about the end of November, 1871. Meanwhile, the wealthier manufacturers, who combined spinning
with weaving, used the diminution of production resulting from this agreement, to extend their own business and
thus to make great profits at the expense of the small employers. The latter thereupon turned in their extremity to
the operatives, urged them earnestly to agitate for the 9 hours' system, and promised contributions in money to this
end.

[831 The labour Statutes, the like of which were enacted at the same time in France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere,
were first formally repealed in England in 1813, long after the changes in n~ethods of production had rendered
them obsolete.

[841 "No child under 12 years of age shall be employed in any manufacturing establishment more than 10 hours in
one day." General Statutes of Massachusetts, 63, ch. 12. (The various Statutes were passed between 1836 and
1858.) "Labour performed during a period of 10 hours on any day in all cotton, woollen, silk, paper, glass, and flax
factories, or in manufactories of iron and brass, shall be considered a legal day's labour. And be it enacted, that
hereafter no minor engaged in any factory shall be holden or required to work more than 10 hours in any day, or 60
hours in any week; and that hereafter no minor shall be admitted as a worker under the age of 10 years in any
factory within this State." State of New Jersey. An Act to limit the hours of labour, ULc, § I and 2. (Law of 18th
March, 1851.) "No minor who has attained the age of 12 years, and is under the age of 15 years, shall be employed

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (37 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

in any manufacturing atablishment more than 1 1 hours in any one day, nor before 5 o'clock in the morning, nor
after 7.30 in the evening." ("Revised Statutes of the State of Rhode Island," &c, ch. 139, § 23, 1st July, 1857.)

[851 "Sophisms of Free Trade." 7th Ed. London, 1850, p. 205, 9th Ed., p. 253. This same Tory, moreover, admits
that "Acts of Parliament regulating wages, but against the labourer and in favour of the master, lasted for the long
period of 464 years. Population grew. These laws were then found, and really became, unnecessary and
burdensome." (1. c, p. 206.)

[861 In reference to this statute, J. Wade with truth remarks: "From the statement above (i.e., with regard to the
statute) it appears that in 1496 the diet was considered equivalent to one-third of the income of an artificer and
one-half the income of a labourer, which indicates a greater degree of independence among the working-classes
than prevails at present; for the board, both of labourers and artificers, would now be reckoned at a much higher
proportion of their wages." (J. Wade, "History of the Middle and Working Classes, ' pp. 24, 25, and 577.) The
opinion that this difference is due to the difference in the pricerelations between food and clothing then and now is
refuted by the most cursory glance at "Chronicon Preciosum, Ice." By Bishop Fleetwood. 1st Ed., London, 1707;
2nd Ed., London, 1 745.

[871 W. Petty. ""Political Anatomy of Ireland, Verbum Sapienti," 1672, Ed. 1691, p. 10.

[881 "A Discourse on the necessity of encouraging Mechanick Industry," London, 1690, p. 13. Macaulay, who has
falsified English history in the interests of the Whigs and the bourgeoisie, declares as follows: "The practice of
setting children prematurely to work ... prevailed in the 17th century to an extent which, when compared with the
extent of the manufacturing system, seems almost incredible. At Norwich, the chief seat of the clothing trade, a
little creature of six years old was thought fit for labour. Several writers of that time, and among them some who
were considered as eminently benevokot, mention with exultation the fact that in that single city, boys and girls of
very tender age create wealth exceeding what was necessary for their own subsistence by twelve thousand pounds a
year. The more carefully we examine the history of the past, the more reason shall we find to dissent from those
who imagine that our age has been fruitful of new social evils.... That which is new is the intelligence and the
humanity which remedies them." ("History of England," vol. 1., p. 417.) Macaulay might have reported further that
"extremely welldisposed" amfs du commerce in the 17th century, narrate with "exultation" how in a poorhouse in
Holland a child of four was employed, and that this example of "vertu m~se en praflque" passes muster in all the
humanitarian works, d la Macaulay, to the time of Adam Smith. It is true that with the substitution of manufacture
for handicrafts, traces of the exploitation of children begin to appear. This exploitation existed always to a certain
extent among peasants, and was the more dkvdoped, the heavier the yoke pressing on the husbandman. The
tendency of capital is there unmistakably; but the facts themselves are still as isolated as the phenomena of
two-headed children. Hence they were noted "with exultation" as especially worthy of remark and as wonders by
the far-seeing "amds du commerce, " and recommended as modds for their own time and for posterity. This same
Scotch sycophant and fine talker, Macaulay, says: "We hear to-day only of retrogression and see only progress."
What eyes, and especially what ears !

[891 Among the accusers of the workpeopk, the most angry is the anonymous author quoted in the text of "An
Essay on Trade and Commerce, containing Observations on Taxes, &c," London, 1770. He had already dealt with
this subject in his earlier work: "Considerations on Taxes." London, 1765. Gn the same side follows Polonius
Arthur Young, the unutterable statistical prattler. Among the defenders of the working-classes the foremost are:
Jacob Vanderlint, in: "Money Answers all Things." London, 1734 the Rev. Nathaniel Forster, D. D., in "An Enquiry
into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions,,' London, 1767; Dr. Price, and especially Postlethwayt, as
well in the supplement to his ""Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce," as in his "Great Bntain's
Commercial Interest explained and improved." 2nd Edition, 1755. The facts themselves are confirmed by many
other writers of the time, among others by Josiah Tucker

[901 Postlethwayt, 1. c, "First Preliminary Discourse," p. 14.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (38 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

[911 "An Essay," &c. He himself relates on p. 96 wherein the "happiness" of the English agricultural labourer
already in 1770 consisted. "Their powers are always upon the stretch, they cannot live cheaper than they do, nor
work harder."

[921 Protestantism, by changing almost all the traditional holidays into workdays, plays an important pan in the
genesis of capital.

[931 "An Essay," 4c, pp. 15, 41, 96, 97, 55, 57, 69. — Jacob Vanderlint, as early as 1734, declared that the secret of
the out-cry of the capitalists as to the laziness of the working people was simply that they claimed for the same
wages 6 days' labour instead of 4.

£9411. c, p. 242.

[951 1. c. "The French," he says, "laugh at our enthusiastic ideas of liberty." 1. c, p. 78.

[961 "They especially objected to work beyond the 12 hours per day, because the law which fixed those hours, is the
only good which remains to them of the legislation of the Republic." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact.", 31 st October, 1856,
p. 80.) The French Twelve Hours' Bill of September 5th, 1850, a bourgeois edition of the decree of the Provisional
Government of March 2nd, 1848, holds in all workshops without exceptions. Before this law the working-day in
France was without definite limit. It lasted in the factories 14, 15, or more hours. See &'Des classes ouvrieres en
France, pendant l'annee 1848. Par M. Blanqui." M. Blanqui the economist, not the Revolutionist, had been entrusted
by the Government with an inquiry into the condition of the working-class.

[971 Belgium is the model bourgeois state in regard to the regulation of the working-day. Lord Howard of Welden,
English Plenipotentiary at Brussels, reports to the Foreign Office May 12th, 1862: "M. Rogier, the minister,
informed me that children's labour is limited neither by a general law nor by any local regulations; that the
Government, during the last three years, intended in every session to propose a bill on the subject, but always found
an insuperable obstacle in the jealous opposition to any legislation in contradiction with the principle of perfect
freedom of labour."

[981 It is certainly much to be regretted that any class of persons should toil 12 hours a day, which, including the
time for their meals and for going to and returning from their work, amounts, in fact, to 14 of the 24 hours....
Without entering into the question of health, no one will hesitate, I think, to admit that, in a moral point of view, so
entire an absorption of the time of the working-classes, without intermission, from the early age of 13, and in trades
not subject to restriction, much younger, must be extremely prejudicial, and is an evil greatly to be deplored.... For
the sake, therefore, of public morals, of bringing up an orderly population, and of giving the great body of the
people a reasonable enjoyment of life, it is much to be desired that in all trades some portion of every working-day
should be reserved for rest and leisure." (Leonard Homer in vv Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Dec, 1841.")

[991 See "Judgment of Mr. J. H. Otway, Belfast. Hilary Sessions, County Antrim, 1860."

[1001 It is very characteristic of the regime of Louis Philippe, the bourgeois king, that the one Factory Act passed
during his reign, that of March 22nd, 1841, was never put in force. And this law only dealt with child-labour. It
fixed 8 hours a day for children between 8 and 12, 12 hours for children between 12 and 16, &c, with many
exceptions which allow night- work even for children 8 years old. The supervision and enforcement of this law are,
in a country where every mouse is under police administration, left to the good-will of the amis du commerce. Only
since 1853, in one single department — the Departement du Nord — has a paid government inspector been
appointed. Not less characteristic of the development of French society, generally, is the fact, that Louis Philippe~s
law stood solitary among the all-embracing mass of French laws, till the Revolution of 1848.

riOll Report of Insn. of Fact." 30th April, 1860, p. 50.

ri021 "Rept. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1849, p. 6.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (39 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

[103] "Rept. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1848, p. 98.

[1041 Leonard Homer uses the expression "nefarious practices" in his official reports. ("Report of Insp. of Fact.,"
31st October, 1859, p. 7.)

ri051 "Rept.," &c, 30th Sept., 1844, p. 15.

[1061 The Act allows children to be employed for 10 hours if they do not work day after day, but only on alternate
days. In the main, this clause remained inoperative.

[1071 "As a reduction in their hours of work would cause a larger number (of children) to be employed, it was
thought that the additional supply of children from 8 to 9 years oi age would meet the increased demand" (1. c, p.
13).

ri081 "Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1848, p. 16.

[1091 "I found that men who had been getting 10s. a week, had had Is. taken off for a reduction in the rate of 10 per
cent, and Is. 6d. off the remaining 9s. for the reduction in time, together 2s. 6d.. and notwithstanding this, many of
them said they would rather work 10 hours." 1. c.

[1101 "Though I signed it [the petition!, I said at the time I was putting my hand to a wrong thing.' 'Then why did
you put your hand to it?' 'Because I should have been turned off if I had refused.' Whence it would appear that this
petitioner felt himself 'oppressed,' but not exactly by the Factory Act." 1. c, p. 102.

[1111 P- 17, 1. c. In Mr. Homer's district 10,270 adult male labourers were thus examined in 181 factories. Their
evidence is to be found in the appendix to the Factory Reports for the half-year ending October 1848. These
examinations furnish valuable material in other connexions also.

[1121 1- c. See the evidence collected by Leonard Homer himself, Nos. 69, 70, 71, 72, 92, 93, and that collected by
Sub-Inspector A., Nos. 51, 52, 58, 59, 62, 70, of the Appendix. One manufacturer, too, tells the plain truth. See No.
14, and No. 265, 1. c.

fl 131 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, pp. 133, 134.

ri!41 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1848, p. 47.

ri!51 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 130.

[1161 Reports, &c, 1. c, p. 142.

fl 171 Reports &c, for 31st October, 1850, pp. 5, 6.

[1181 The nature of capital remains the same in its developed as in its undeveloped form. In the code which the
influence of the slave-owners, shortly before the outbreak of the American Civil War, imposed on the territory of
New Mexico, it is said that the labourer, in as much as the capitalist has bought his labour-power, "is his (the
capitalist's) money." The same view was current among the Roman patricians. The money they had advanced to the
plebeian debtor had been transformed via the means of subsistence into the flesh and blood of the debtor. This
"flesh and blood" were, therefore, "their money." Hence, the Shylock-law of the Ten Tables. Linguet's hypothesis
that the patrician creditors from time to time prepared, beyond the Tiber, bunquets of debtors' flesh, may remain as
undecided as that of Daumer on the Christian Euchanst.

ri!91 Reports, &c. for 30th April, 1848, p. 28.

[1201 Thus, among others, Philanthropist Ashworth to Leonard Homer, in a disgusting Quaker letter. (Reports, &c,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (40 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
April, 1849, p. 4.)

121] I.e., p. 140.



owner of a cotton- spinning or weaving mill, or the father, son, or brother of such owner, to act as Justice of the
Peace in any inquiries that concerned the Factory Act.

1241 1. c



Inspectors Howell and Saunders, in "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848." See also the petition to the Queen from
the clergy of Ashton and vicinity, in the spring of 1849, against the shift system."

1301 Cf. for example, v The Factory Question and the Ten Hours' gill.', By R. H. Greg, 1837.



1221 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, pp. 21, 22. Cf like examples ibid., pp. 4. 5.



1231 By I. and II. Will. IV., ch. 24, s. 10, known as Sir John Wobhouse's Factory Act, it was forbidden to any



1251 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. S.



1261 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1849, p. 6.



1271 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 21.



1281 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 95.



1291 See Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 6, and the detailed explanation of the "shifting system," by Factory



1311 F. Engels: 'The English Ten Hours' Bill." (In the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-oekonomische Revue."



Edited by K. Marx. April number, 1850, p. 13.) The same "high" Court of Justice discovered, during the American
Civil War, a verbal ambiguity which exactly reversed the meaning of the law against the arming of pirate ships.

1321 Rep., &c, for 30th April, 1850.



1331 In winter, from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. may be substituted.



1341 "The present law (of 1850) was a compromise whereby the employed surrendered the benefit of the Ten



Hours' Act for the advantage of one uniform period for the commencement and termination of the labour of those
whose labour is restricted." (Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1852, p. 14.)

1351 Repons, &c, for Sept., 1844, p. 13.



136J I.e.



137] I.e.



1381 "Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1846," p. 20.



1391 Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1861, p. 26.



1401 1- c.,p. 27. On the whole the working population, subject to the Factory Act, has greatly improved physically.



All medical testimony agrees on this point, and personal obsenation at different times has convinced me of it.
Nevertheless, and exclusive of the terrible death-rate of children in the first years of their life, the official reports of
Dr. Greenhow show the unfavourable health condition of the manufacturing districts as compared with "agricultural
districts of normal health." As evidence, take the following table from his 1861 report: —



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (41 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten



Pecentage of

Adult

Males

Engaged

in

Manufactures


14.9


42.6


37.3


41.9


31.0


14.9


36.6


30.4


—


Death-rate

from

Pulmonary

Affections

per 100,000

Males


598


708


547


611


691


588


721


726


305


Name of
District


Wigan


Blackburn


Halifax


Bradford


Maccles-
field


Leek


Stoke-
upon-Trent


Woolstanton


Eight
healthy
agricultural
districts


Death-rate

from

Pulmonary

Affections

per 100,000

Females


644


734


564


603


804


705


665


727


340


Pecentage of

Adult

Females

Engaged

in

Manufactures


18.0


34.9


20.4


30.0


26.0


17.2


19.3


13.9


—


Kind of
Female
Occupation


Cotton


Do.


Worsted


Do.


Silk


Do.


Earthenware


Do.


—



[1411 It is well known with what reluctance the English "Free-traders," gave up the protective duty on the silk
manufacture. Instead of the protection against French importation, the absence of protection to English factory
children now senes their turn.

[1421 During 1859 and 1860, the zenith years of the English cotton industry, some manufactured tried, by the
decoy bait of higher wages forover-time,to reconcile the adult male operatives to an extension of the working-day.
The hand-mule spinners and self-actor mincers put an end to the experiment by a petition to their employers in
which they say, "Plainly speaking, our lives are to us a burthen; and, while we are confined to the mills nearly two
days a week more than the other operatives of the country, we feel like helots in the land, and that we are
perpetuating a system injurious to ourselves and future generations.... This, therefore, is to give you most respectful
notice that when we commence work again after the Christmas and New Year's holidays, we shall work 60 hours
per week, and no more, or from six to six, with one hour and a half out." (Reports, &rc, for 30th April, 1860, p.
30.)

[1431 On the means that the wording of this Act afforded for its violation cf the Parliamentary Return "Factories
Regulation Act" (6th August, 1859), and in it Leonard Homer's "Suggestions for amending the Factory Acts to
enable the Inspectors to prevent illegal working, now becoming very prevalent."



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (42 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

[1441 "Children of the age of 8 years and upwards, have, indeed, been employed from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. during the
last half year in my district." (Reports, &c., for 31st October, 1857, p. 39.)

[1451 "The Printworks' Act is admitted to be a failure both with reference to its educational and protective
provisions." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, p. 52.)

[1461 Thus, e.g., E. Potter in a letter to the Times of March 24th, 1863. The Times reminded him of the
maoufacturers' revolt against the Ten Hours' Bill.

[1471 Thus, among others, Mr. W. Newmarch, collaborator and editor of Tooke's "History of Prices." Is it a
scientific advance to make cowardly concessions to public opinion?

[1481 The Act passed in 1860, determined that, in regard to dye and bleachworks, the working-day should be fixed
on August 1st, 1861, provisionally at 12 hours, and definitely on August 1st, 1862, at 10 hours, i.e., at 10 1/2 hours
for ordinary days, and 7 1/2 for Saturday. Now, when the fatal year, 1862, came, the old farce was repeated.
Besides, the manufacturers petitioned Parliament to allow the employment of young persons and women for 12
hours during one year longer. "In the existing condition of the trade (the time of the cotton famine), it was ueatly to
the advantage of the operatives to work 12 hours per day, and make wages when they could." A bill to this effect
had been brought in, "and it was mainly due to the action of the operative bleachers in Scotland that the bill was
abandoned." (Reports, &:c, for 31st October, 1862, pp. 14-15.) Thus defeated by -the very workpeople, in whose
name it pretended to speak Capital discovered, with the help of lawyer spectacles, that the Act of 1860, drawn up,
I;ke all the Acts of Parliament for the "protection of labour," in equivocal phrases, gave them a pretext to exclude
from its working the calenderers and finishers. English jurisprudence, ever the faithful servant of capital, sanctioned
in the COun of Common Pleas this piece of pettifogging. "The operatives have been greatly disappointed ... they
have comphined of over-work, and it is greatly to be regretted that the clear intention of the legislature should have
failed by reason of a faulty definition." (1. c, p. 18.)

[1491 The "open-air bleachers" had evaded the law of 1860, by means of the lie that no women worked at it in the
night. The lie was exposed by the Fwtory Inspectors, and at the same time Parliament was, by petitions ffom the
operatives, bereft of its notions as to the cool meadow-fragrance, in which bleaching in the open-air was reported to
take place. In this aerial bleaching, drying-rooms were used at temperatures of from 90° to 100° Fahrenheit, in
which the work was done for the most part by girls. "Cooling" is the technical expression for their occasional
escape from the drying-rooms into the fresh air. "Fifteen girls in stoves. Heat from 80° to 90° for linens, and 100°
and upwards for cambrics. Twelve girls ironing and doing-up in a small room about 10 feet square, in the centre of
which is a close stove. The girls stand round the stove, which throws out a terrific heat, and dries the cambrics
rapidly for the ironers. The hours of work for these hands are unlimited. If busy, they work till 9 or 12 at night for
successive nights." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, p. 56.) A medical man states: "No special hours are
allowed for cooling, but if the temperature gets too high, or the workers' hands get soiled from perspiration, they are
allowed to go out for a few minutes.... My experience, which is considerable, in treating the diseases of stove
workers, compels me to express the opinion that their sanitary condition is by no means so high as that of the
operatives in a spinning factory (and Capital, in its memorials to Parliament, had painted them as floridly healthy
after the manner of Rubens.) The diseases most observable amongst them are phthisis, bronchitis, irregularity of
uterine functions, hysteria in its most aggravated forms, and rheumatism. All of these, I believe, are either directly
or indirectly induced by the impure, overheated air of the apartments in which the hands are employed and the want
of sufficient comfortable clothing to protect them from the cold, damp atmosphere, in winter, when going to their
homes." (1. c, pp. 56-57.) The Factory Inspectors remarked on the supplementary law of 1860, torn from these
open-air bleachers: "The Act has not only failed to afford that protection to the workers which it appears to offer,
but contains a clause ... apparently so worded that, unless persons are detected working after 8 o'clock at night they
appear to come under no protective provisions at all, and if they do so work the mode of proof is so doubtful that a
conviction can scarcely follow." (1. c, p. 52.) "To all intents and purposes, therefore, as an Act for any benevolent
or educational purpose, it is a failure; since it can scarcely be called benevolent to permit, which is tantamount to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (43 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

compelling, women and children to work 14 hours a day with or without meals, as the case may be, and perhaps for
longer hours than these, without limit as to age, without reference to sex, and without regard to the social habits of
the families of the neighbourhood, in which such works (bleaching and dyeing) are situated." (Reports, &c, for
30th April, 1863, p. 40.)

[1501 Note to the 2nd Ed. Since 1866, when I wrote the above passages, a reaction has again set in.

[1511 "The conduct of each of these classes (capitalists and workmen) has been the result of the relative situatico in
which they have been placed." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 113.)

[1521 "The employments, placed under restriction, were connected with the manufacture of textile fabrics by the aid
of steam or water-power There were two conditions to which an employment must be subject to cause it to be
inspected, viz., the use of steam or waterpower, and the manufacture of certain specified fibr=." (Reports, &c, f.or
31st October, 1864, p. 8.)

[1531 On the condition of so-called domestic industries, specially valuable materials are to be found in the latfft
reports of the Children's Employment Commission.

[1541 "The Acts of last Session (1864) ... embrace a diversity of occupations, the customs in which differ greatly,
and the use of mechanical power to give motion to machinery is no longer one of the elements necessary, as
formerly, to constitute, in legal phrase, a 'Factory.'" (Reports, &c, for 31st Octaber, 1864, p. 8.)

[1551 Belgium, the paradise of Continental Liberalism, shows no trace of this movement. Even in the coal and
metal mines labourers of both sexes, and all ages, are consumed, in perfect "freedom" at any period and through any
length of time. Of every 1,000 persons employed there, 733 are men, 88 women. 135 boys, and 44 girls under 16; in
the blast furnaces, &c, of every 1,000, 668 are men, 149 women, 98 boys, and 85 girls under 16. Add to this the
low wages for the enormous exploitafion of mature and immature labour-power. The average daily pay for a man is
2s. 8d.. for a woman, Is. 8d.. for a boy. Is. 2 1/2 d. As a result, Belgium had in 1863, as compared with 1850,
nearly doubled both the amount and the value of its exports of coal, iron, &c.

[1561 Robert Owen, soon after 1810, not only maintained the necessity of a limitation of the working-day in theory,
but actually introduced the 10 hours' day into his factory at New Lanark. This was laughed at as a communistic
Utopia; so were his "Combination of children s education with productive labour and the Co-operative Societies of
workingmen. first called into being by him. To-day. the first Utopia is a Factory Act, the second figures as an
official phrase in all Factory Acts, the third is already being used as a cloak for reactionary humbug.

[1571 Ure: "French translation, Philosophic des Manufactures." Paris, 1836, Vol. II, pp. 39, 40, 67, 77, &c.

[1581 In the Compte Rendu of the International Statistical Congress at Paris, 1855, it is stated: "The French law,
which limits the length of daily labour in factories and workshops to 12 hours, does not confine this work to definite
fixed hours. For children's labour only the work-time is prescabed as between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. Therefore, some of
the masters use the nght which this fatal silence gives them to keep their works going, without intermission, day in,
day out, possibly with the exception of Sunday. For this purpose they use two different sets of workers, of whom
neither is in the workshop more than 12 hours at a time, but the work of the establishment lasts day and night. The
law is satisfied, but is humanity?" Besides "the destructive influence or night-labour on the human organism," stress
is also laid upon "the fatal influence of the association of the two sexes by night in the same badly-lighted
workshops."

[1591 "For instance, there is within my district one occupier who, within the same curtilage, is at the same time a
bleacher and dyer under the Bleaching and Dyeing Works Act, a printer under the Print Works Act, and a finisher
under the Factory Act." (Repon of Mr. Baker, in Reports, lie, for October 31st, 1861, p. 20.) Afler enumerating the
different provisions of these Acts, and the complications arising from them, Mr. Baker says: "It will hence appear
that it must be very difficult to secure the execution of these three Acts of Parliament where the occupier chooses to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (44 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
evade the law." But what is assured to the lawyers by this is law-suits.

[1601 Thus the Factory Inspectors at last venture to say: "These objections (of capital to the legal limitation of the
working-day) must succumb before the broad principle of the rights of labour.... There is a time when the master's
right in his workman's labour ceases, and his time becomes his own, even if there were no exhaustion in the
question." (Reports, 8cc, for 31 st Oct., 1862, p. 54.)

[1611 "We, the workers of Dunkirk, declare that the length of time of labour required under the present system is
too great, and that, far from leaving the worker time for rest and educatioo, it plunges him into a coodition of
servitude but little better than slavery. That is why we decide that 8 hours are enough for a working-day, and ought
to be legally recognised as enough; why we call to our help that powerful lever, the press; ... and why we shall
consider all those that refuse us this help as enemies of the reform of labour and of the rights of the labourer."
(Resolution of the Working Men of Dunkirk, New York State, 1866.)

ri621 Reports, &c, for Oct., 1848, p. 112.

[1631 "The proceedings (the manoeuvres of capital, e.g., from 1848-50) have afforded, moreover, incontrovertible
proof of the fallacy of the assertion so often advanced, that operatives need no protection, but may be considered as
free agents in the disposal of the only property which they possess — the labour of their hands and the sweat of
their brows." (Reports, &c, for April 30th, 1850, p. 45.) "Free labour (if so it may be termed) even in a free
country, requires the strong arm of the law to protect it." (Reports, &c, f orOctober3 1 st, 1864, p. 34.) "To permit,
which is tantamount to compelling ... to work 14 hours a day with or without meals," &c. (Repts., &c, for April
30th, 1863, p. 40.)

[1641 Friedrich Engels, 1. c, p. 5.

[1651 The 10 Hours' Act has, in the branches of industry that come under it, "put an end to the premature
decrepitude of the former long-hour workers." (Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1859, p. 47.) "Capital (in factories) can
never be employed in keeping the machinery in motion beyond a limited time, without certain injury to the health
and morals of the labourers employed; and they are not in a position to protect themselves." 1. c, p. 8)

[1661 "A still greater boon is the distinction at last made clear between the worker's own time and his master's. The
worker knows now when that which he sells is ended, and when his own begins; and by possessing a sure
foreknowledge of this, is enabled to prearrange his own minutes for his own purposes." (1. c, p. 52.) "By making
them masters of their own time (the Factory Acts) have given them a moral energy which is directing them to the
eventual possession of political power" (1. c, p. 47). With suppressed irony, and in very well weighed words, the
Factory Inspectors hint that the actual law also frees the capitalist from some of the brutality natural to a man who is
a mere embodiment of capital, and that it has given him time for a little "culture." "Formerly the master had no time
for anything but money; the servant had no time for anything but labour" (1. c, p. 48).



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Eleven: Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (45 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute

Surplus-Value



CHAPTER ELEVEN:

RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS VALUE



In this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, and therefore the part of the workingday necessary
for the reproduction or maintenance of that labour-power, are supposed to be given, constant magnitudes.

This premised, with the rate, the mass is at the same time given of the surplusvalue that the individual
labourer furnishes to the capitalist in a definite period of time. If, e.g., the necessary labour amounts to 6
hours daily, expressed in a quantum of gold = 3 shillings, then 3s. is the daily value of one labour-power
or the value of the capital advanced in the buying of one labour-power. If, further, the rate of
surplusvalue be = 100%, this variable capital of 3s. produces a mass of surplusvalue of 3s., or the
labourer supplies daily a mass of surpluslabour equal to 6 hours.

But the variable capital of a capitalist is the expression in money of the total value of all the
labour-powers that he employs simultaneously. Its value is, therefore, equal to the average value of one
labour-power, multiplied by the number of labour-powers employed. With a given value of
labour-power, therefore, the magnitude of the variable capital varies directly as the number of labourers
employed simultaneously. If the daily value of one labour-power = 3s., then a capital of 300s. must be
advanced in order to exploit daily 100 labour-powers, of n times 3s., in order to exploit daily n
labour-powers.

In the same way, if a variable capital of 3s., being the daily value of one labour-power, produce a daily
surplusvalue of 3s., a variable capital of 300s. will produce a daily surplusvalue of 300s., and one of n
times 3s. a daily surplusvalue of n x 3s. The mass of the surplusvalue produced is therefore equal to the
surplusvalue which the workingday of one labourer supplies multiplied by the number of labourers
employed. But as further the mass of surplusvalue which a single labourer produces, the value of
labour-power being given, is determined by the rate of the surplusvalue, this law follows: the mass of the
surplusvalue produced is equal to the amount of the variable capital advanced, multiplied by the rate of
surplusvalue, in other words: it is determined by the compound ratio between the number of
labour-powers exploited simultaneously by the same capitalist and the degree of exploitation of each
individual labour-power.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

Let the mass of the surplusvalue be S, the surplusvalue supplied by the individual labourer in the
average day s the variable capital daily advanced in the purchase of one individual labour-power v, the
sum total of the variable capital V, the value of an average labour-power P, its degree of exploitation



a' (surplus-labour)



a (necessary-labour)
and the number of labourers employed n; we have:



/ s

— x V

V



S =



a'
P x — x n .

\ a

It is always supposed, not only that the value of an average labour-power is constant, but that the
labourers employed by a capitalist are reduced to average labourers. There are exceptional cases in which
the surplusvalue produced does not increase in proportion to the number of labourers exploited, but then
the value of the labour-power does not remain constant.

In the production of a definite mass of surplusvalue, therefore the decrease of one factor may be
compensated by the increase of the other. If the variable capital diminishes, and at the same time the rate
of surplusvalue increases in the same ratio, the mass of surplusvalue produced remains unaltered. If on
our earlier assumption the capitalist must advance 300s., in order to exploit 100 labourers a day, and if
the rate of surplusvalue amounts to 50%, this variable capital of 300s. yields a surplusvalue of 150s. or of
100 x 3 workinghours. If the rate of surplusvalue doubles, or the workingday, instead of being extended
from 6 to 9, is extended from 6 to 12 hours and at the same time variable capital is lessened by half, and
reduced to 150s., it yields also a surplus-value of 150s. or 50 x 6 workinghours. Diminution of the
variable capital may therefore be compensated by a proportionate rise in the degree of exploitation of
labour-power, or the decrease in the number of the labourers employed by a proportionate extension of
the workingday. Within certain limits therefore the supply of labour exploitable by capital is independent
of the supply of labourers. £1} On the contrary, a fall in the rate of surplusvalue leaves unaltered the mass
of the surplus-value produced, if the amount of the variable capital, or number of the labourers
employed, increases in the same proportion.

Nevertheless, the compensation of a decrease in the number of labourers employed, or of the amount of
variable capital advanced by a rise in the rate of surplusvalue. or by the lengthening of the working-day,
has impassable limits. Whatever the value of labour-power may be, whether the workingtime necessary
for the maintenance of the labourer is 2 or 10 hours, the total value that a labourer can produce, day in,
day out, is always less than the value in which 24 hours of labour are embodied, less than 12s., if 12s. is
the money expression for 24 hours of realised labour. In our former assumption, according to which 6
workinghours are daily necessary in order to reproduce the labour-power itself or to replace the value of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

the capital advanced in its purchase, a variable capital of 1,500s., that employs 500 labourers at a rate of
surplusvalue of 100% with a 12 hours' workingday, produces daily a surplusvalue of 1,500s. or of 6 x
500 workinghours. A capital of 300s. that employs 100 labourers a day with a rate of surplusvalue of
200% or with a workingday of 18 hours, produces only a mass of surplusvalue of 600s. or 12 x 100
workinghours; and its total value-product, the equivalent of the variable capital advanced plus the
surplus-value, can, day in, day out, never reach the sum of 1,200s. or 24 x 100 workinghours. The
absolute limit of the average workingday — this being by nature always less than 24 hours — sets an
absolute limit to the compensation of a reduction of variable capital by a higher rate of surplusvalue, or
of the decrease of the number of labourers exploited by a higher degree of exploitation of labour-power.
This palpable law is of importance for the clearing up of many phenomena, arising from a tendency (to
be worked out later on) of capital to reduce as much as possible the number of labourers employed by it,
or its variable constituent transformed into labour-power, in contradiction to its other tendency to
produce the greatest possible mass of surplusvalue. On the other hand, if the mass of labour-power
employed, or the amount of variable capital, increases, but not in proportion to the fall in the rate of
surplusvalue, the mass of the surplusvalue produced, falls.

A third law results from the determination, of the mass of the surplus-value produced, by the two
factors: rate of surplusvalue and amount of variable capital advanced. The rate of surplusvalue, or the
degree of exploitation of labour-power, and the value of labour-power, or the amount of necessary
workingtime being given, it is selfevident that the greater the variable capital, the greater would be the
mass of the value produced and of the surplusvalue. If the limit of the working-day is given, and also the
limit of its necessary constituent, the mass of value and surplusvalue that an individual capitalist
produces, is clearly exclusively dependent on the mass of labour that he sets in motion. But this, under
the conditions supposed above, depends on the mass of labour-power, or the number of labourers whom
he exploits, and this number in its turn is determined by the amount of the variable capital advanced.
With a given rate of surplusvalue, and a given value of labour-power, therefore, the masses of
surplusvalue produced vary directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advanced. Now we know that
the capitalist divides his capital into two parts. One part he lays out in means of production. This is the
constant part of his capital. The other part he lays out in living labour-power. This part forms his variable
capital. On the basis of the same mode of social production, the division of capital into constant and
variable differs in different branches of production, and within the same branch of production, too, this
relation changes with changes in the technical conditions and in the social combinations of the processes
of production. But in whatever proportion a given capital breaks up into a constant and a variable part,
whether the latter is to the former as 1 :2 or 1 : 10 or 1 :x, the law just laid down is not affected by this. For,
according to our previous analysis, the value of the constant capital reappears in the value of the product,
but does not enter into the newly produced value, the newly created valueproduct. To employ 1 ,000
spinners, more raw material, spindles, &c, are, of course, required, than to employ 100. The value of
these additional means of production however may rise, fall, remain unaltered, be large or small; it has
no influence on the process of creation of surplusvalue by means of the labour-powers that put them in
motion. The law demonstrated above now, therefore, takes this form: the masses of value and of
surplusvalue produced by different capitals — the value of labour-power being given and its degree of
exploitation being equal — vary directly as the amounts of the variable constituents of these capitals, i.e.,
as their constituents transformed into living labour-power.

This law clearly contradicts all experience based on appearance. Everyone knows that a cotton spinner,
who, reckoning the percentage on the whole of his applied capital, employs much constant and little



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

variable capital, does not, on account of this, pocket less profit or surplusvalue than a baker, who
relatively sets in motion much variable and little constant capital. For the solution of this apparent
contradiction, many intermediate terms are as yet wanted, as from the standpoint of elementary algebra
many intermediate terms are wanted to understand that 0/0 may represent an actual magnitude. Classical
economy, although not formulating the law, holds instinctively to it, because it is a necessary
consequence of the general law of value. It tries to rescue the law from collision with contradictory
phenomena by a violent abstraction. It will be seen later £2£ how the school of Ricardo has come to grief
over this stumblingblock. Vulgar economy which, indeed, "has really learnt nothing," here as everywhere
sticks to appearances in opposition to the law which regulates and explains them. In opposition to
Spinoza, it believes that "ignorance is a sufficient reason."

The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a society, day in, day out, may be regarded as a
single collective workingday. If, e.g., the number of labourers is a million, and the average working-day
of a labourer is 10 hours, the social workingday consists of ten million hours. With a given length of this
workingday, whether its limits are fixed physically or socially, the mass of surplusvalue can only be
increased by increasing the number of labourers, i.e., of the labouring population. The growth of
population here forms the mathematical limit to the production of surplusvalue by the total social capital.
On the contrary, with a given amount of population, this limit is formed by the possible lengthening of
the workingday. £31 It will, however, be seen in the following chapter that this law only holds for the
form of surplusvalue dealt with up to the present.

From the treatment of the production of surplusvalue, so far, it follows that not every sum of money, or
of value, is at pleasure transformable into capital. To effect this transformation, in fact, a certain
minimum of money or of exchangevalue must be presupposed in the hands of the individual possessor of
money or commodities. The minimum of variable capital is the cost price of a single labour-power,
employed the whole year through, day in, day out, for the production of surplusvalue. If this labourer
were in possession of his own means of production, and were satisfied to live as a labourer, he need not
work beyond the time necessary for the reproduction of his means of subsistence, say 8 hours a day. He
would, besides, only require the means of production sufficient for 8 workinghours. The capitalist, on the
other hand, who makes him do, besides these 8 hours, say 4 hours' surplus-labour, requires an additional
sum of money for furnishing the additional means of production. On our supposition, however, he would
have to employ two labourers in order to live, on the surplusvalue appropriated daily, as well as, and no
better than a labourer, i.e., to be able to satisfy his necessary wants. In this case the mere maintenance of
life would be the end of his production, not the increase of wealth; but this latter is implied in capitalist
production. That he may live only twice as well as an ordinary labourer, and besides turn half of the
surplusvalue produced into capital, he would have to raise, with the number of labourers, the minimum
of the capital advanced 8 times. Of course he can, like his labourer, take to work himself, participate
directly in the process of production, but he is then only a hybrid between capitalist and labourer, a
"small master." A certain stage of capitalist production necessitates that the capitalist be able to devote
the whole of the time during which he functions as a capitalist, i.e., as personified capital, to the
appropriation and therefore control of the labour of others, and to the selling of the products of this
labour. £4J The guilds of the middle ages therefore tried to prevent by force the transformation of the
master of a trade into a capitalist, by limiting the number of labourers that could be employed by one
master within a very small maximum. The possessor of money or commodities actually turns into a
capitalist in such cases only where the minimum sum advanced for production greatly exceeds the
maximum of the middle ages. Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law discovered

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

by Hegel (in his "Logic"), that merely quantitative differences beyond a certain point pass into qualitative
changes. [5]

The minimum of the sum of value that the individual possessor of money or commodities must
command, in order to metamorphose himself into a capitalist, changes with the different stages of
development of capitalist production, and is at given stages different in different spheres of production,
according to their special and technical conditions. Certain spheres of production demand, even at the
very outset of capitalist production, a minimum of capital that is not as yet found in the hands of single
individuals. This gives rise partly to state subsidies to private persons, as in France in the time of
Clobber, and as in many German states up to our own epoch, partly to the formation of societies with
legal monopoly for the exploitation of certain branches of industry and commerce, the forerunners of our
modern jointstock companies. \6]

Within the process of production, as we have seen, capital acquired the command over labour, i.e., over
functioning labour-power or the labourer himself. Personified capital, the capitalist takes care that the
labourer does his work regularly and with the proper degree of intensity.

Capital further developed into a coercive relation, which compels the workingclass to do more work
than the narrow round of its own lifewants prescribes. As a producer of the activity of others, as a
pumper-out of surpluslabour and exploiter of labour-power, it surpasses in energy, disregard of bounds,
recklessness and efficiency, all earlier systems of production based on directly compulsory labour.

At first, capital subordinates labour on the basis of the technical conditions in which it historically finds
it. It does not, therefore, change immediately the mode of production. The production of surplusvalue —
in the form hitherto considered by us — by means of simple extension of the workingday, proved,
therefore, to be independent of any change in the mode of production itself. It was not less active in the
oldfashioned bakeries than in the modern cotton factories.

If we consider the process of production from the point of view of the simple labourprocess, the labourer
stands in relation to the means of production, not in their quality as capital, but as the mere means and
material of his own intelligent productive activity. In tanning, e.g., he deals with the skins as his simple
object of labour. It is not the capitalist whose skin he tans. But it is different as soon as we deal with the
process of production from the point of view of the process of creation of surplusvalue. The means of
production are at once changed into means for the absorption of the labour of others. It is now no longer
the labourer that employs the means of production, but the means of production that employ the labourer.
Instead of being consumed by him as material elements of his productive activity, they consume him as
the ferment necessary to their own lifeprocess, and the lifeprocess of capital consists only in its
movement as value constantly expanding, constantly multiplying itself. Furnaces and workshops that
stand idle by night, and absorb no living labour, are "a mere loss" to the capitalist. Hence, furnaces and
workshops constitute lawful claims upon the nightlabour of the work-people. The simple transformation
of money into the material factors of the process of production, into means of production, transforms the
latter into a title and a right to the labour and surpluslabour of others. An example will show, in
conclusion, how this sophistication, peculiar to and characteristic of capitalist production, this complete
inversion of the relation between dead and living labour, between value and the force that creates value,
mirrors itself in the consciousness of capitalists. During the revolt of the English factory lords between
1848 and 1850, "the head of one of the oldest and most respectable houses in the West of Scotland,
Messrs. Carlile Sons & Co., of the linen and cotton thread factory at Paisley, a company which has now



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

existed for about a century, which was in operation in 1752, and four generations of the same family
have conducted it" ... this "very intelligent gentleman" then wrote a letter [71 in the Glasgow Daily Mail
of April 25th, 1849, with the title, "The relay system," in which among other things the following
grotesquely naive passage occurs: "Let us now ... see what evils will attend the limiting to 10 hours the
working of the factory.... They amount to the most serious damage to the millowner's prospects and
property. If he (i.e., his "hands") worked 12 hours before,and is limited to 10, then every 12 machines or
spindles in his establishment shrink to 10, and should the works be disposed of, they will be valued only
as 10, so that a sixth part would thus be deducted from the value of every factory in the country." [81

To this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, inheriting the accumulated capitalistic qualities of "four
generations." the value of the means of production, spindles, &c, is so inseparably mixed up with their
property, as capital, to expand their own value, and to swallow up daily a definite quantity of the unpaid
labour of others, that the head of the firm of Carlile & Co. actually imagines that if he sells his factory,
not only will the value of the spindles be paid to him, but, in addition, their power of annexing
surplusvalue, not only the labour which is embodied in them, and is necessary to the production of
spindles of this kind, but also the surpluslabour which they help to pump out daily from the brave Scots
of Paisley, and for that very reason he thinks that with the shortening of the workingday by 2 hours, the
sellingprice of 12 spinning machines dwindles to that of 10!



Footnotes

T 1 1 This elementary law appears to be unknown to the vulgar economists, who, upside-down
Archimedes, in the determination of the market-price of labour by supply and demand, imagine they
have found the fulcrum by means of which, not to move the world, but to stop its motion.

\2] Further particulars will be given in Book IV.

[31 "The Labour, that is the economic time, of society, is a given portion, say ten hours a day of a million
of people, or ten million hours.... Capital has its boundary of increase. This boundary may, at any given
period, be attained in the actual extent of economic time employed." ("An Essay on the Political
Economy of Nations." London, 1821, pp. 47, 49.)

[4J "The farmer cannot rely on his own labour, and if he does, I will maintain that he is a loser by it. His
employment should be a general attention to the whole: his thresher must be watched, or he will soon
lose his wages in corn not threshed out, his mowers reapers, &c, must be looked after; he must
constantly go round his fences; he must see there is no neglect; which would be the case if he was
confined to any one spot." ( ,v An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and
the Size of Farms, &c. By a Farmer." London, 1773, p. 12.) This book is very interesting. In it the
genesis of the "capitalist farmer" or "merchant farmer," as he is explicitly called, may be studied, and his
selfglorification at the expense of the small farmer who has only to do with bare subsistence, be noted.
"The class of capitalists are from the first partially, and they become ultimately completely, discharged
from the necessity of the manual labour." ("Textbook of Lectures on the Political Economy of Nations.
By the Rev. Richard Jones." Hertford 1852. Lecture III., p. 39.)

[51 The molecular theory of modern chemistry first scientifically worked out by Laurent and Gerhardt

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

rests on no other law. (Addition to 3rd Edition.) For the explanation of this statement, which is not very
clear to nonchemists, we remark that the author speaks here of the homologous series of carbon
compounds, first so named by C. Gerhardt in 1843, each series of which has its own general algebraic
formula. Thus the series of paraffins: CnH2n+2, that of the normal alcohols: CnH2n+20; of the normal
fatty acids: CnH2n02 and many others. In the above examples, by the simply quantitative addition of
CH2 to the molecular formula, a qualitatively different body is each time formed. On the share
(overestimated by Marx) of Laurent and Gerhardt in the determination of this important fact see Kopp,
"Entwicklung der Chemie." Munchen, 1873, pp. 709, 716, and Schorkmmer, 'The Rise and Development
of Organic Chemistry." London, 1879, p. 54. — F. E.

[61 Martin Luther calls these kinds of institutions: "The Company Monopolia."

[71 Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 30th, 1849, p. 59.

[81 1. c, p. 60. Factory Inspector Stuart, himself a Scotchman, and in contrast to the English Factory
Inspectors, quite taken captive by the capitalistic method of thinking, remarks expressly on this letter
which he incorporates in his report that it is "the most useful of the communications which any of the
factoryowners working with relays have given to those engaged in the same trade, and which is the most
calculated to remove the prejudices of such of them as have scruples respecting any change of the
arrangement of the hours of work."



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twelve: The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part IV:

Production of Relative Surplus Value



CHAPTER TWELVE:

THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE



That portion of the working-day which merely produces an equivalent for the value paid by the capitalist
for his labour-power, has, up to this point, been treated by us as a constant magnitude, and such in fact it
is, under given conditions of production and at a given stage in the economic development of society.
Beyond this, his necessary labour-time, the labourer, we saw, could continue to work for 2, 3, 4, 6, &c,
hours. The rate of surplus-value and the length of the working-day depended on the magnitude of this
prolongation. Though the necessary labour-time was constant, we saw, on the other hand, that the total
working-day was variable. Now suppose we have a working-day whose length, and whose
apportionment between necessary labour and surplus-labour, are given. Let the whole line a c, abc
represent, for example, a working-day of 12 hours; the portion of a b 10 hours of necessary labour, and
the portion b c 2 hours of surplus-labour. How now can the production of surplus-value be increased, i.e.,
how can the surplus-labour be prolonged, without, or independently of, any prolongation of a c?

Although the length of a c is given, b c appears to be capable of prolongation, if not by extension beyond
its end c, which is also the end of the working-day a c, yet, at all events, by pushing back its
starting-point b in the direction of a. Assume that b'b in the line ab'bc is equal to half of b c or to one
hour's labour-time. If now, in a c, the working-day of 12 hours, we move the point b to b', b c becomes b'
c; the surplus-labour increases by one half, from 2 hours to 3 hours, although the working-day remains as
before at 12 hours. This extension of the surplus labour-time from b c to b' c, from 2 hours to 3 hours, is,
however, evidently impossible, without a simultaneous contraction of the necessary labour-time from a b
into a b', from 10 hours to 9 hours. The prolongation of the surplus-labour would correspond to a
shortening of the necessary labour; or a portion of the labour-time previously consumed, in reality, for
the labourer's own benefit, would be converted into labour-time for the benefit of the capitalist. There
would be an alteration, not in the length of the working-day, but in its division into necessary labour-time
and surplus labour- time.

On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of the surplus-labour is given, when the length of the
working-day, and the value of labour-power, are given. The value of labour-power, i.e., the labour-time
requisite to produce labour-power, determines the labour-time necessary for the reproduction of that
value. If one working-hour be embodied in sixpence, and the value of a day's labour-power be five



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

shillings, the labourer must work 10 hours a day, in order to replace the value paid by capital for his
labour-power, or to produce an equivalent for the value of his daily necessary means of subsistence.
Given the value of these means of subsistence, the value of his labour-power is given; £1} and given the
value of his labour-power, the duration of his necessary labour-time is given. The duration of the
surplus-labour, however, is arrived at, by subtracting the necessary labour-time from the total
working-day. Ten hours subtracted from twelve, leave two, and it is not easy to see, how, under the given
conditions, the surplus-labour can possibly be prolonged beyond two hours. No doubt, the capitalist can,
instead of five shillings, pay the labourer four shillings and sixpence or even less. For the reproduction of
this value of four shillings and sixpence, nine hours' labour-time would suffice; and consequently three
hours of surplus-labour, instead of two, would accrue to the capitalist, and the surplus-value would rise
from one shilling to eighteen-pence. This result, however, would be obtained only by lowering the wages
of the labourer below the value of his labour-power. With the four shillings and sixpence which he
produces in nine hours, he commands one-tenth less of the necessaries of life than before, and
consequently the proper reproduction of his labour-power is crippled. The surplus-labour would in this
case be prolonged only by an overstepping of its normal limits; its domain would be extended only by a
usurpation of part of the domain of necessary labour-time. Despite the important part which this method
plays in actual practice, we are excluded from considering it in this place, by our assumption, that all
commodities, including labour-power, are bought and sold at their full value. Granted this, it follows that
the labour-time necessary for the production of labour-power, or for the reproduction of its value, cannot
be lessened by a fall in the labourer's wages below the value of his labour-power, but only by a fall in this
value itself. Given the length of the working-day, the prolongation of the surplus-labour must of
necessity originate in the curtailment of the necessary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from the
former. In the example we have taken, it is necessary that the value of labour-power should actually fall
by one-tenth, in order that the necessary labour-time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.e., from ten hours
to nine, and in order that the surplus labour may consequently be prolonged from two hours to three.

Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, that the same necessaries of life which were
formerly produced in ten hours, can now be produced in nine hours. But this is impossible without an
increase in the productiveness of labour. For example, suppose a shoe-maker, with given tools, makes in
one working-day of twelve hours, one pair of boots. If he must make two pairs in the same time, the
productiveness of his labour must be doubled; and this cannot be done, except by an alteration in his
tools or in his mode of working, or in both. Hence, the conditions of production, i.e., his mode of
production, and the labour-process itself, must be revolutionised. By increase in the productiveness of
labour, we mean, generally, an alteration in the labour-process, of such a kind as to shorten the
labour-time socially necessary for the production of a commodity, and to endow a given quantity of
labour with the power of producing a greater quantity of use- value. [2] Hitherto in treating of
surplus-value, arising from a simple prolongation of the working-day, we have assumed the mode of
production to be given and invariable. But when surplus-value has to be produced by the conversion of
necessary labour into surplus-labour, it by no means suffices for capital to take over the labour-process in
the form under which it has been historically handed down, and then simply to prolong the duration of
that process. The technical and social conditions of the process, and consequently the very mode of
production must be revolutionised, before the productiveness of labour can be increased. By that means
alone can the value of labour-power be made to sink, and the portion of the working-day necessary for
the reproduction of that value, be shortened.

The surplus-value produced by prolongation of the working-day, I call absolute surplus-value. On the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

other hand, the surplus-value arising from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and from the
corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of the two components of the working-day, I call
relative surplus-value.

In order to effect a fall in the value of labour-power, the increase in the productiveness of labour must
seize upon those branches of industry whose products determine the value of labour-power, and
consequently either belong to the class of customary means of subsistence, or are capable of supplying
the place of those means. But the value of a commodity is determined, not only by the quantity of labour
which the labourer directly bestows upon that commodity, but also by the labour contained in the means
of production. For instance, the value of a pair of boots depends not only on the cobbler's labour, but also
on the value of the leather, wax, thread, &c. Hence, a fall in the value of labour-power is also brought
about by an increase in the productiveness of labour, and by a corresponding cheapening of commodities
in those industries which supply the instruments of labour and the raw material, that form the material
elements of the constant capital required for producing the necessaries of life. But an increase in the
productiveness of labour in those branches of industry which supply neither the necessaries of life, nor
the means of production for such necessaries, leaves the value of labour-power undisturbed.

The cheapened commodity, of course, causes only a pro tanto fall in the value of labour-power, a fall
proportional to the extent of that commodity's employment in the reproduction of labour-power. Shirts,
for instance, are a necessary means of subsistence, but are only one out of many. The totality of the
necessaries of life consists, however, of various commodities, each the product of a distinct industry; and
the value of each of those commodities enters as a component part into the value of labour-power. This
latter value decreases with the decrease of the labour-time necessary for its reproduction; the total
decrease being the sum of all the different curtailments of labour-time effected in those various and
distinct industries. This general result is treated, here, as if it were the immediate result directly aimed at
in each individual case. Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, by increasing the
productiveness of labour he by no means necessarily aims at reducing the value of labour-power and
shortening, pro tanto<300> the necessary labour-time. But it is only in so far as he ultimately contributes
to this result, that he assists in raising the general rate of surplus- value. [3J The general and necessary
tendencies of capital must be distinguished from their forms of manifestation.

It is not our intention to consider, here, the way in which the laws, immanent in capitalist production,
manifest themselves in the movements of individual masses of capital, where they assert themselves as
coercive laws of competition, and are brought home to the mind and consciousness of the individual
capitalist as the directing motives of his operations. But this much is clear; a scientific analysis of
competition is not possible, before we have a conception of the inner nature of capital, just as the
apparent motions of the heavenly bodies are not intelligible to any but him, who is acquainted with their
real motions, motions which are not directly perceptible by the senses. Nevertheless, for the better
comprehension of the production of relative surplus-value, we may add the following remarks, in which
we assume nothing more than the results we have already obtained.

If one hour's labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six shillings will be produced in a working-day
of 12 hours. Suppose, that with the prevailing productiveness of labour, 12 articles are produced in these
12 hours. Let the value of the means of production used up in each article be sixpence. Under these
circumstances, each article costs one shilling: sixpence for the value of the means of production, and
sixpence for the value newly added in working with those means. Now let some one capitalist contrive to
double the productiveness of labour, and to produce in the working-day of 12 hours, 24 instead of 12

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

such articles. The value of the means of production remaining the same, the value of each article will fall
to ninepence, made up of sixpence for the value of the means of production and threepence for the value
newly added by the labour. Despite the doubled productiveness of labour, the day's labour creates, as
before, a new value of six shillings and no more, which, however, is now spread over twice as many
articles. Of this value each article now has embodied in it l/24th, instead of l/12th, threepence instead of
sixpence; or, what amounts to the same thing, only half an hour's instead of a whole hour's labour-time, is
now added to the means of production while they are being transformed into each article. The individual
value of these articles is now below their social value; in other words, they have cost less labour-time
than the great bulk of the same article produced under the average social conditions. Each article costs,
on an average, one shilling, and represents 2 hours of social labour; but under the altered mode of
production it costs only ninepence, or contains only IV2 hours' labour. The real value of a commodity is,
however, not its individual value, but its social value; that is to say, the real value is not measured by the
labour-time that the article in each individual case costs the producer, but by the labour-time socially
required for its production. If therefore, the capitalist who applies the new method, sells his commodity
at its social value of one shilling, he sells it for threepence above its individual value, and thus realises an
extra surplus-value of threepence. On the other hand, the working-day of 12 hours is, as regards him,
now represented by 24 articles instead of 12. Hence, in order to get rid of the product of one
working-day, the demand must be double what it was, i.e., the market must become twice as extensive.
Other things being equal, his commodities can command a more extended market only by a diminution
of their prices. He will therefore sell them above their individual but under their social value, say at
tenpence each. By this means he still squeezes an extra surplus-value of one penny out of each. This
augmentation of surplus-value is pocketed by him, whether his commodities belong or not to the class of
necessary means of subsistence that participate in determining the general value of labour-power. Hence,
independently of this latter circumstance, there is a motive for each individual capitalist to cheapen his
commodities, by increasing the productiveness of labour.

Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of surplus-value arises from the curtailment of
the necessary labour-time, and from the corresponding prolongation of the surplus-labour. [4J Let the

necessary labour-time amount to 10 hours, the value of a day's labour-power to five shillings, the surplus
labour-time to 2 hours, and the daily surplus-value to one shilling. But the capitalist now produces 24
articles, which he sells at tenpence a-piece, making twenty shillings in all. Since the value of the means
of production is twelve shillings, 14 2/5 of these articles merely replace the constant capital advanced.
The labour of the 12 hours' working-day is represented by the remaining 9 3/5 articles. Since the price of
the labour-power is five shillings, 6 articles represent the necessary labour-time, and 3 3/5 articles the
surplus-labour. The ratio of the necessary labour to the surplus-labour, which under average social
conditions was 5: 1, is now only 5:3. The same result may be arrived at in the following way. The value
of the product of the working-day of 12 hours is twenty shillings. Of this sum, twelve shillings belong to
the value of the means of production, a value that merely re-appears. There remain eight shillings, which
are the expression in money, of the value newly created during the working-day. This sum is greater than
the sum in which average social labour of the same kind is expressed: twelve hours of the latter labour
are expressed by six shillings only. The exceptionally productive labour operates as intensified labour; it
creates in equal periods of time greater values than average social labour of the same kind. (See Ch. I.
Sect 2. p. 44.) But our capitalist still continues to pay as before only five shillings as the value of a day's
labour-power. Hence, instead of 10 hours, the labourer need now work only IV2 hours, in order to
reproduce this value. His surplus-labour is, therefore, increased by 2Vi hours, and the surplus-value he
produces grows from one, into three shillings. Hence, the capitalist who applies the improved method of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

production, appropriates to surplus-labour a greater portion of the working-day, than the other capitalists
in the same trade. He does individually, what the whole body of capitalists engaged in producing relative
surplus-value, do collectively. On the other hand, however, this extra surplus-value vanishes, so soon as
the new method of production has become general, and has consequently caused the difference between
the individual value of the cheapened commodity and its social value to vanish. The law of the
determination of value by labour-time, a law which brings under its sway the individual capitalist who
applies the new method of production, by compelling him to sell his goods under their social value, this
same law, acting as a coercive law of competition, forces his competitors to adopt the new method. [5\
The general rate of surplus-value is, therefore, ultimately affected by the whole process, only when the
increase in the productiveness of labour, has seized upon those branches of production that are connected
with, and has cheapened those commodities that form part of, the necessary means of subsistence, and
are therefore elements of the value of labour-power.

The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the productiveness of labour. And so, too, is the value of
labour-power, because it depends on the values of commodities. Relative surplus-value is, on the
contrary, directly proportional to that productiveness. It rises with rising and falls with falling
productiveness. The value of money being assumed to be constant, an average social working-day of 12
hours always produces the same new value, six shillings, no matter how this sum may be apportioned
between surplus-value and wages. But if, in consequence of increased productiveness, the value of the
necessaries of life fall, and the value of a day's labour-power be thereby reduced from five shillings to
three, the surplus-value increases from one shilling to three. Ten hours were necessary for the
reproduction of the value of the labour-power; now only six are required. Four hours have been set free,
and can be annexed to the domain of surplus-labour. Hence there is immanent in capital an inclination
and constant tendency, to heighten the productiveness of labour, in order to cheapen commodities, and by
such cheapening to cheapen the labourer himself. £61

The value of a commodity is, in itself, of no interest to the capitalist. What alone interests him, is the
surplus-value that dwells in it, and is realisable by sale. Realisation of the surplus-value necessarily
carries with it the refunding of the value that was advanced. Now, since relative surplus-value increases
in direct proportion to the development of the productiveness of labour, while, on the other hand, the
value of commodities diminishes in the same proportion; since one and the same process cheapens
commodities, and augments the surplus-value contained in them; we have here the solution of the riddle:
why does the capitalist, whose sole concern is the production of exchange-value, continually strive to
depress the exchange-value of commodities? A riddle with which Quesnay, one of the founders of
Political Economy, tormented his opponents, and to which they could give him no answer. "You
acknowledge," he says, "that the more expenses and the cost of labour can, in the manufacture of
industrial products, be reduced without injury to production, the more advantageous is such reduction,
because it diminishes the price of the finished article. And yet, you believe that the production of wealth,
which arises from the labour of the workpeople, consists in the augmentation of the exchange- value of
their products." ]7]

The shortening of the working-day is, therefore, by no means what is aimed at, in capitalist production,
when labour is economised by increasing its productiveness. [8] It is only the shortening of the
labour-time, necessary for the production of a definite quantity of commodities, that is aimed at. The fact
that the workman, when the productiveness of his labour has been increased, produces, say 10 times as
many commodities as before, and thus spends one-tenth as much labour-time on each, by no means



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

prevents him from continuing to work 12 hours as before, nor from producing in those 12 hours 1,200
articles instead of 120. Nay, more, his working-day may be prolonged at the same time, so as to make
him produce, say 1,400 articles in 14 hours. In the treatises, therefore, of economists of the stamp of
MacCulloch, Ure, Senior, and tutti quanti, we may read upon one page, that the labourer owes a debt of
gratitude to capital for developing his productiveness, because the necessary labour-time is thereby
shortened, and on the next page, that he must prove his gratitude by working in future for 15 hours
instead of 10. The object of all development of the productiveness of labour, within the limits of
capitalist production, is to shorten that part of the working-day, during which the workman must labour
for his own benefit, and by that very shortening, to lengthen the other part of the day, during which he is
at liberty to work gratis for the capitalist. How far this result is also attainable, without cheapening
commodities, will appear from an examination of the particular modes of producing relative
surplus-value, to which examination we now proceed.



Footnotes

T 1 1 The value of his average daily wages is determined by what the labourer requires "so as to live,
labour, and generate." (Wm. Petty: "Political Anatomy of Ireland," 1672, p. 64.) "The price of Labour is
always constituted of the price of necessaries ... whenever ... the labouring man's wages will not, suitably
to his low rank and station, as a labouring man, support such a family as is often the lot of many of them
to have," he does not receive proper wages. (J. Vanderlint, 1. c, p. 15.) "Le simple ouvrier, qui n'a que ses
bras et son industries, n'a rien qu'autant qu'il parvient a vendre a d'autres sa peine... En tout genre de
travail il doit arriver, et il arrive en effet, que le salaire de l'ouvrier se borne a ce qui lui est necessaire
pour lui procurer sa subsistance." (Turgot, "Reflexions, &c," Oeuvres, ed. Daire 1. 1, p. 10.) "The price of
the necessaries of life is, in fact, the cost of producing labour." (Malthus, "Inquiry into, &c, Rent,"
London, 1815, p. 48, note.)

\2] "Quando si perfezionano le arti, che non e altro che la scoperta di nuove vie, onde si possa compiere
una manufattura con meno gente o (che e lo stesso) in minor tempo di prima." (Galiani, 1. c, p. 159.)
"L'economie sur les frais de production ne peu done etre autre chose que l'economie sur la quantite de
travail employe pour produire. " (Sismondi, "Etudes," 1. 1, p. 22.)

\3] "Let us suppose ... the products ... of the manufacturer are doubled by improvement in machinery ...
he will be able to clothe his workmen by means of a smaller proportion of the entire return ... and thus his
profit will be raised. But in no other way will it be influenced." (Ramsay, 1. c, pp. 168, 169.)

\4] "A man's profit does not depend upon his command of the produce of other men's labour, but upon
his command of labour itself. If he can sell his goods at a higher price, while his workmen's wages
remain unaltered, he is clearly benefited.... A smaller proportion of what he produces is sufficient to put
that labour into motion, and a larger proportion consequently remains for himself." ("Outlines of Pol.
Econ." London, 1832, pp. 49, 50.)

\5] "If my neighbour by doing much with little labour, can sell cheap, I must contrive to sell as cheap as
he. So that every art, trade, or engine, doing work with labour of fewer hands, and consequently cheaper,
begets in others a kind of necessity and emulation, either of using the same art, trade, or engine, or of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

inventing something like it, that every man may be upon the square, that no man may be able to undersell
his neighbour." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade to England", London, 1720, p. 67.)

\6] "In whatever proportion the expenses of a labourer are diminished, in the same proportion will his
wages be diminished, if the restraints upon industry are at the same time taken off." ("Considerations
Concerning Taking off the Bounty on Corn Exported," &c, London, 1753, p. 7.) "The interest of trade
requires, that corn and all provisions should be as cheap as possible; for whatever makes them dear, must
make labour dear also ... in all countries, where industry is not restrained, the price of provisions must
affect the price of labour. This will always be diminished when the necessaries of life grow cheaper." (I.
c, p. 3.) "Wages are decreased in the same proportion as the powers of production increase. Machinery,
it is true, cheapens the necessaries of life, but it also cheapens the labourer." ("A Prize Essay on the
Comparative Merits of Competition and Co-operation." London, 1834, p. 27.)

[71 "lis conviennent que plus on peut, sans prejudice, epargner de frais ou de travaux dispendieux dans la
fabrication des ouvrages des artisans, plus cette epargne est profitable par la diminution des prix de ces
ouvrages. Cependant ils croient que la production de richesse qui resulte des travaux des artisans consiste
dans l'augmentation de la valeur venale de leurs ouvrages." (Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les
Travaux des Artisans." pp. 188, 189.)

[81 "Ces speculateurs si economes du travail des ouvriers qu'il faudrait qu'ils payassent." (J. N. Bidaut:
"Du Monopole qui s'etablit dans les arts industriels et le commerce." Paris, 1828, p. 13.) "The employer
will be always on the stretch to economise time and labour." (Dugald Stewart: Works ed. by Sir W.
Hamilton, Edinburgh, v., viii., 1855. "Lectures on Polit. Econ.," p. 318.) "Their (the capitalists') interest
is that the productive powers of the labourers they employ should be the greatest possible. On promoting
that power their attention is fixed and almost exclusively fixed." (R. Jones: 1. c, Lecture III.)



Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirteen: Co-operation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part IV:

Production of Relative Surplus Value



CHAPTER THIRTEEN:
CO-OPERATION



Capitalist production only then really begins, as we have already seen, when each individual capital
employs simultaneously a comparatively large number of labourers; when consequently the
labour-process is carried on on an extensive scale and yields, relatively, large quantities of products. A
greater number of labourers working together, at the same time, in one place (or, if you will, in the same
field of labour), in order to produce the same sort of commodity under the mastership of one capitalist,
constitutes, both historically and logically, the starting-point of capitalist production. With regard to the
mode of production itself, manufacture, in its strict meaning, is hardly to be distinguished, in its earliest
stages, from the handicraft trades of the guilds, otherwise than by the greater number of workmen
simultaneously employed by one and the same individual capital. The workshop of the medieval master
handicraftsman is simply enlarged.

At first, therefore, the difference is purely quantitative. We have shown that the surplus-value produced
by a given capital is equal to the surplus-value produced by each workman multiplied by the number of
workmen simultaneously employed. The number of workmen in itself does nor affect, either the rate of
surplus-value, or the degree of exploitation of labour-power. If a working-day of 12 hours be embodied
in six shillings, 1,200 such days will be embodied in 1,200 times 6 shillings. In one case 12 x 1,200
working-hours, and in the other 12 such hours are incorporated in the product. In the production of value
a number of workmen rank merely as so many individual workmen; and it therefore makes no difference
in the value produced whether the 1,200 men work separately, or united under the control of one
capitalist.

Nevertheless, within certain limits, a modification takes place. The labour realised in value, is labour of
an average social quality; is consequently the expenditure of average labour-power. Any average
magnitude, however, is merely the average of a number of separate magnitudes all of one kind, but
differing as to quantity. In every industry, each individual labourer, be he Peter or Paul, differs from the
average labourer. These individual differences, or "errors" as they are called in mathematics, compensate
one another, and vanish, whenever a certain minimum number of workmen are employed together. The
celebrated sophist and sycophant, Edmund Burke, goes so far as to make the following assertion, based
on his practical observations as a farmer; viz., that "in so small a platoon" as that of five farm labourers,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (1 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

all individual differences in the labour vanish, and that consequently any given five adult farm labourers
taken together, will in the same time do as much work as any other five. JJJ But, however that may be, it
is clear, that the collective working-day of a large number of workmen simultaneously employed, divided
by the number of these workmen, gives one day of average social labour. For example, let the
working-day of each individual be 12 hours. Then the collective working-day of 12 men simultaneously
employed, consists of 144 hours; and although the labour of each of the dozen men may deviate more or
less from average social labour, each of them requiring a different time for the same operation, yet since
the working-day of each is one-twelfth of the collective working-day of 144 hours, it possesses the
qualities of an average social working-day. From the point of view, however, of the capitalist who
employs these 12 men, the working-day is that of the whole dozen. Each individual man's day is an
aliquot part of the collective working-day, no matter whether the 12 men assist one another in their work,
or whether the connexion between their operations consists merely in the fact, that the men are all
working for the same capitalist. But if the 12 men are employed in six pairs, by as many different small
masters, it will be quite a matter of chance, whether each of these masters produces the same value, and
consequently whether he realises the general rate of surplus-value. Deviations would occur in individual
cases. If one workman required considerably more time for the production of a commodity than is
socially necessary, the duration of the necessary labour-time would, in his case, sensibly deviate from the
labour-time socially necessary on an average; and consequently his labour would not count as average
labour, nor his labour-power as average labour-power. It would either be not saleable at all, or only at
something below the average value of labour-power. A fixed minimum of efficiency in all labour is
therefore assumed, and we shall see, later on, that capitalist production provides the means of fixing this
minimum. Nevertheless, this minimum deviates from the average, although on the other hand the
capitalist has to pay the average value of labour-power. Of the six small masters, one would therefore
squeeze out more than the average rate of surplus-value, another less. The inequalities would be
compensated for the society at large, but not for the individual masters. Thus the laws of the production
of value are only fully realised for the individual producer, when he produces as a capitalist, and employs
a number of workmen together, whose labour, by its collective nature, is at once stamped as average
social labour. [2J

Even without an alteration in the system of working, the simultaneous employment of a large number of
labourers effects a revolution in the material conditions of the labour-process. The buildings in which
they work, the store-houses for the raw material, the implements and utensils used simultaneously or in
turns by the workmen; in short, a portion of the means of production, are now consumed in common. On
the one hand, the exchange-value of these means of production is not increased; for the exchange-value
of a commodity is not raised by its use- value being consumed more thoroughly and to greater advantage.
On the other hand, they are used in common, and therefore on a larger scale than before. A room where
twenty weavers work at twenty looms must be larger than the room of a single weaver with two
assistants. But it costs less labour to build one workshop for twenty persons than to build ten to
accommodate two weavers each; thus the value of the means of production that are concentrated for use
in common on a large scale does not increase in direct proportion to the expansion and to the increased
useful effect of those means. When consumed in common, they give up a smaller part of their value to
each single product; partly because the total value they part with is spread over a greater quantity of
products, and partly because their value, though absolutely greater, is, having regard to their sphere of
action in the process, relatively less than the value of isolated means of production. Owing to this, the
value of a part of the constant capital falls, and in proportion to the magnitude of the fall, the total value
of the commodity also falls. The effect is the same as if the means of production had cost less. The

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (2 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

economy in their application is entirely owing to their being consumed in common by a large number of
workmen. Moreover, this character of being necessary conditions of social labour, a character that
distinguishes them from the dispersed and relatively more costly means of production of isolated,
independent labourers, or small masters, is acquired even when the numerous workmen assembled
together do not assist one another, but merely work side by side. A portion of the instruments of labour
acquires this social character before the labour-process itself does so.

Economy in the use of the means of production has to be considered under two aspects. First, as
cheapening commodities, and thereby bringing about a fall in the value of labour-power. Secondly, as
altering the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital advanced, i.e., to the sum of the values of the
constant and variable capital. The latter aspect will not be considered until we come to the third book, to
which, with the object of treating them in their proper connexion, we also relegate many other points that
relate to the present question. The march of our analysis compels this splitting up of the subject-matter, a
splitting up that is quite in keeping with the spirit of capitalist production. For since, in this mode of
production, the workman finds the instruments of labour existing independently of him as another man's
property, economy in their use appears, with regard to him, to be a distinct operation, one that does not
concern him, and which, therefore, has no connexion with the methods by which his own personal
productiveness is increased.

When numerous labourers work together side by side, whether in one and the same process, or in
different but connected processes, they are said to co-operate, or to work in co-operation. £31

Just as the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry, or the defensive power of a regiment of infantry is
essentially different from the sum of the offensive or defensive powers of the individual cavalry or
infantry soldiers taken separately, so the sum total of the mechanical forces exerted by isolated workmen
differs from the social force that is developed, when many hands take part simultaneously in one and the
same undivided operation, such as raising a heavy weight, turning a winch, or removing an obstacle. £4]
In such cases the effect of the combined labour could either not be produced at all by isolated individual
labour, or it could only be produced by a great expenditure of time, or on a very dwarfed scale. Not only
have we here an increase in the productive power of the individual, by means of co-operation, but the
creation of a new power, namely, the collective power of masses. £5£

Apart from the new power that arises from the fusion of many forces into one single force, mere social
contact begets in most industries an emulation and a stimulation of the animal spirits that heighten the
efficiency of each individual workman. Hence it is that a dozen persons working together will, in their
collective working-day of 144 hours, produce far more than twelve isolated men each working 12 hours,
or than one man who works twelve days in succession. £6] The reason of this is that man is, if not as
Aristotle contends, a political, £7£ at all events a social animal.

Although a number of men may be occupied together at the same time on the same, or the same kind of
work, yet the labour of each, as a part of the collective labour, may correspond to a distinct phase of the
labour-process, through all whose phases, in consequence of co-operation, the subject of their labour
passes with greater speed. For instance, if a dozen masons place themselves in a row, so as to pass stones
from the foot of a ladder to its summit, each of them does the same thing; nevertheless, their separate acts
form connected parts of one total operation; they are particular phases, which must be gone through by
each stone; and the stones are thus carried up quicker by the 24 hands of the row of men than they could
be if each man went separately up and down the ladder with his burden. £8£ The object is carried over the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (3 of 1 1 ) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

same distance in a shorter time. Again, a combination of labour occurs whenever a building, for instance,
is taken in hand on different sides simultaneously; although here also the co-operating masons are doing
the same, or the same kind of work. The 12 masons, in their collective working-day of 144 hours, make
much more progress with the building than one mason could make working for 12 days, or 144 hours.
The reason is, that a body of men working in concert has hands and eyes both before and behind, and is,
to a certain degree, omnipresent. The various parts of the work progress simultaneously.

In the above instances we have laid stress upon the point that the men do the same, or the same kind of
work, because this, the most simple form of labour in common, plays a great part in co-operation, even in
its most fully developed stage. If the work be complicated, then the mere number of the men who
co-operate allows of the various operations being apportioned to different hands, and, consequently, of
being carried on simultaneously. The time necessary for the completion of the whole work is thereby
shortened. [91

In many industries, there are critical periods, determined by the nature of the process, during which
certain definite results must be obtained. For instance, if a flock of sheep has to be shorn, or a field of
wheat to be cut and harvested, the quantity and quality of the product depends on the work being begun
and ended within a certain time. In these cases, the time that ought to be taken by the process is
prescribed, just as it is in herring fishing. A single person cannot carve a working-day of more than, say
12 hours, out of the natural day, but 100 men co-operating extend the working-day to 1,200 hours. The
shortness of the time allowed for the work is compensated for by the large mass of labour thrown upon
the field of production at the decisive moment. The completion of the task within the proper time
depends on the simultaneous application of numerous combined working-days; the amount of useful
effect depends on the number of labourers; this number, however, is always smaller than the number of
isolated labourers required to do the same amount of work in the same period. flOl It is owing to the
absence of this kind ofco-operation that, in the western part of the United States, quantities of corn, and
in those parts of East India where English rule has destroyed the old communities, quantities of cotton,
are yearly wasted, fill

On the one hand, co-operation allows of the work being carried on over an extended space; it is
consequently imperatively called for in certain undertakings, such as draining, constructing dykes,
irrigation works, and the making of canals, roads and railways. On the other hand, while extending the
scale of production, it renders possible a relative contraction of the arena. This contraction of arena
simultaneous with, and arising from, extension of scale, whereby a number of useless expenses are cut
down, is owing to the conglomeration of labourers, to the aggregation of various processes, and to the
concentration of the means of production. f!21

The combined working-day produces, relatively to an equal sum of isolated working-days, a greater
quantity of use-values, and, consequently, diminishes the labour-time necessary for the production of a
given useful effect. Whether the combined working-day, in a given case, acquires this increased
productive power, because it heightens the mechanical force of labour, or extends its sphere of action
over a greater space, or contracts the field of production relatively to the scale of production, or at the
critical moment sets large masses of labour to work, or excites emulation between individuals and raises
their animal spirits, or impresses on the similar operations carried on by a number of men the stamp of
continuity and many-sidedness, or performs simultaneously different operations, or economises the
means of production by use in common, or lends to individual labour the character of average social
labour whichever of these be the cause of the increase, the special productive power of the combined

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (4 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

working-day is, under all circumstances, the social productive power of labour, or the productive power
of social labour. This power is due to co-operation itself. When the labourer co-operates systematically
with others, he strips off the fetters of his individuality, and develops the capabilities of his species, f 131

As a general rule, labourers cannot co-operate without being brought together: their assemblage in one
place is a necessary condition of their co-operation. Hence wage-labourers cannot co-operate, unless they
are employed simultaneously by the same capital, the same capitalist, and unless therefore their
labour-powers are bought simultaneously by him. The total value of these labour-powers, or the amount
of the wages of these labourers for a day, or a week, as the case may be, must be ready in the pocket of
the capitalist, before the workmen are assembled for the process of production. The payment of 300
workmen at once, though only for one day, requires a greater outlay of capital, than does the payment of
a smaller number of men, week by week, during a whole year. Hence the number of the labourers that
co-operate, or the scale of co-operation, depends, in the first instance, on the amount of capital that the
individual capitalist can spare for the purchase of labour-power; in other words, on the extent to which a
single capitalist has command over the means of subsistence of a number of labourers.

And as with the variable, so it is with the constant capital. For example, the outlay on raw material is 30
times as great, for the capitalist who employs 300 men, as it is for each of the 30 capitalists who employ
10 men. The value and quantity of the instruments of labour used in common do not, it is true, increase at
the same rate as the number of workmen, but they do increase very considerably. Hence, concentration of
large masses of the means of production in the hands of individual capitalists, is a material condition for
the co-operation of wage-labourers, and the extent of the co-operation or the scale of production, depends
on the extent of this concentration.

We saw in a former chapter, that a certain minimum amount of capital was necessary, in order that the
number of labourers simultaneously employed, and, consequently, the amount of surplus-value produced,
might suffice to liberate the employer himself from manual labour, to convert him from a small master
into a capitalist, and thus formally to establish capitalist production. We now see that a certain minimum
amount is a necessary condition for the conversion of numerous isolated and independent processes into
one combined social process.

We also saw that at first, the subjection of labour to capital was only a formal result of the fact, that the
labourer, instead of working for himself, works for and consequently under the capitalist. By the
co-operation of numerous wage-labourers, the sway of capital develops into a requisite for carrying on
the labour-process itself, into a real requisite of production. That a capitalist should command on the field
of production, is now as indispensable as that a general should command on the field of battle.

All combined labour on a large scale requires, more or less, a directing authority, in order to secure the
harmonious working of the individual activities, and to perform the general functions that have their
origin in the action of the combined organism, as distinguished from the action of its separate organs. A
single violin player is his own conductor; an orchestra requires a separate one. The work of directing,
superintending, and adjusting, becomes one of the functions of capital, from the moment that the labour
under the control of capital, becomes co-operative. Once a function of capital, it acquires special
characteristics.

The directing motive, the end and aim of capitalist production, is to extract the greatest possible amount
of surplus-value, f!41 and consequently to exploit labour-power to the greatest possible extent. As the
number of the co-operating labourers increases, so too does their resistance to the domination of capital,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (5 of 1 1 ) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

and with it, the necessity for capital to overcome this resistance by counterpressure. The control
exercised by the capitalist is not only a special function, due to the nature of the social labour-process,
and peculiar to that process, but it is, at the same time, a function of the exploitation of a social
labour-process, and is consequently rooted in the unavoidable antagonism between the exploiter and the
living and labouring raw material he exploits.

Again, in proportion to the increasing mass of the means of production, now no longer the property of the
labourer, but of the capitalist, the necessity increases for some effective control over the proper
application of those means, f 1-51 Moreover, the co-operation of wage-labourers is entirely brought about
by the capital that employs them. Their union into one single productive body and the establishment of a
connexion between their individual functions, are matters foreign and external to them, are not their own
act, but the act of the capital that brings and keeps them together. Hence the connexion existing between
their various labours appears to them, ideally, in the shape of a preconceived plan of the capitalist, and
practically in the shape of the authority of the same capitalist, in the shape of the powerful will of
another, who subjects their activity to his aims. If, then, the control of the capitalist is in substance
two-fold by reason of the two-fold nature of the process of production itself, which, on the one hand, is a
social process for producing use-values, on the other, a process for creating surplus-value in form that
control is despotic. As co-operation extends its scale, this despotism takes forms peculiar to itself. Just as
at first the capitalist is relieved from actual labour so soon as his capital has reached that minimum
amount with which capitalist production, as such, begins, so now, he hands over the work of direct and
constant supervision of the individual workmen, and groups of workmen, to a special kind of
wage-labourer. An industrial army of workmen, under the command of a capitalist, requires, like a real
army, officers (managers), and sergeants (foremen, overlookers), who, while the work is being done,
command in the name of the capitalist. The work of supervision becomes their established and exclusive
function. When comparing the mode of production of isolated peasants and artisans with production by
slave-labour, the political economist counts this labour of superintendence among the faux j rais of
production. fl61 But, when considering the capitalist mode of production, he, on the contrary, treats the
work of control made necessary by the co-operative character of the labour-process as identical with the
different work of control, necessitated by the capitalist character of that process and the antagonism of
interests between capitalist and labourer. fl71 It is not because he is a leader of industry that a man is a
capitalist; on the contrary, he is a leader of industry because he is a capitalist. The leadership of industry
is an attribute of capital, just as in feudal times the functions of general and judge, were attributes of
landed property, fl 81

The labourer is the owner of his labour-power until he has done bargaining for its sale with the capitalist;
and he can sell no more than what he has i.e., his individual, isolated labour-power. This state of things is
in no way altered by the fact that the capitalist, instead of buying the labour-power of one man, buys that
of 100, and enters into separate contracts with 100 unconnected men instead of with one. He is at liberty
to set the 100 men to work, without letting them co-operate. He pays them the value of 100 independent
labour-powers, but he does not pay for the combined labour-power of the hundred. Being independent of
each other, the labourers are isolated persons, who enter into relations with the capitalist, but not with
one another. This co-operation begins only with the labour-process, but they have then ceased to belong
to themselves. On entering that process, they become incorporated with capital. As co-operators, as
members of a working organism, they are but special modes of existence of capital. Hence, the
productive power developed by the labourer when working in co-operation, is the productive power of
capital. This power is developed gratuitously, whenever the workmen are placed under given conditions,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (6 of 1 1 ) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

and it is capital that places them under such conditions. Because this power costs capital nothing, and
because, on the other hand, the labourer himself does not develop it before his labour belongs to capital,
it appears as a power with which capital is endowed by Nature a productive power that is immanent in
capital.

The colossal effects of simple co-operation are to be seen in the gigantic structures of the ancient
Asiatics, Egyptians, Etruscans, &c. "It has happened in times past that these Oriental States, after
supplying the expenses of their civil and military establishments, have found themselves in possession of
a surplus which they could apply to works of magnificence or utility and in the construction of these their
command over the hands and arms of almost the entire non-agricultural population has produced
stupendous monuments which still indicate their power. The teeming valley of the Nile ... produced food
for a swarming non-agricultural population, and this food, belonging to the monarch and the priesthood,
afforded the means of erecting the mighty monuments which filled the land.... In moving the colossal
statues and vast masses of which the transport creates wonder, human labour almost alone, was
prodigally used.... The number of the labourers and the concentration of their efforts sufficed. We see
mighty coral reefs rising from the depths of the ocean into islands and firm land, yet each individual
depositor is puny, weak, and contemptible. The non-agricultural labourers of an Asiatic monarchy have
little but their individual bodily exertions to bring to the task, but their number is their strength, and the
power of directing these masses gave rise to the palaces and temples, the pyramids, and the armies of
gigantic statues of which the remains astonish and perplex us. It is that confinement of the revenues
which feed them, to one or a few hands, which makes such undertakings possible." f!91 This power of
Asiatic and Egyptian kings, Etruscan theocrats, &c, has in modern society been transferred to the
capitalist, whether he be an isolated, or as in joint-stock companies, a collective capitalist.

Co-operation, such as we find it at the dawn of human development, among races who live by the chase,
r201 or, say, in the agriculture of Indian communities, is based, on the one hand, on ownership in
common of the means of production, and on the other hand, on the fact, that in those cases, each
individual has no more torn himself off from the navel-string of his tribe or community, than each bee
has freed itself from connexion with the hive. Such co-operation is distinguished from capitalistic
co-operation by both of the above characteristics. The sporadic application of co-operation on a large
scale in ancient times, in the middle ages, and in modern colonies, reposes on relations of dominion and
servitude, principally on slavery. The capitalistic form, on the contrary, pre-supposes from first to last,
the free wage-labourer, who sells his labour-power to capital. Historically, however, this form is
developed in opposition to peasant agriculture and to the carrying on of independent handicrafts whether
in guilds or not. f211 From the standpoint of these, capitalistic co-operation does not manifest itself as a
particular historical form of co-operation, but co-operation itself appears to be a historical form peculiar
to, and specifically distinguishing, the capitalist process of production.

Just as the social productive power of labour that is developed by co-operation, appears to be the
productive power of capital, so co-operation itself, contrasted with the process of production carried on
by isolated independent labourers, or even by small employers, appears to be a specific form of the
capitalist process of production. It is the first change experienced by the actual labour-process, when
subjected to capital. This change takes place spontaneously. The simultaneous employment of a large
number of wage-labourers, in one and the same process, which is a necessary condition of this change,
also forms the starting-point of capitalist production. This point coincides with the birth of capital itself.
If then, on the one hand, the capitalist mode of production presents itself to us historically, as a necessary



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (7 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

condition to the transformation of the labour-process into a social process, so, on the other hand, this
social form of the labour-process presents itself, as a method employed by capital for the more profitable
exploitation of labour, by increasing that labour's productiveness.

In the elementary form, under which we have hitherto viewed it, co-operation is a necessary concomitant
of all production on a large scale, but it does not, in itself, represent a fixed form characteristic of a
particular epoch in the development of the capitalist mode of production. At the most it appears to do so,
and that only approximately, in the handicraft-like beginnings of manufacture, f22] and in that kind of
agriculture on a large scale, which corresponds to the epoch of manufacture, and is distinguished from
peasant agriculture, mainly by the number of the labourers simultaneously employed, and by the mass of
the means of production concentrated for their use. Simple co-operation is always the prevailing form, in
those branches of production in which capital operates on a large scale, and division of labour and
machinery play but a subordinate part.

Co-operation ever constitutes the fundamental form of the capitalist mode of production, nevertheless the
elementary form of co-operation continues to subsist as a particular form of capitalist production side by
side with the more developed forms of that mode of production.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "Unquestionably, there is a good deal of difference between the value of one man's labour and that of
another from strength, dexterity, and honest application. But I am quite sure, from my best observation,
that any given five men will, in their total, afford a proportion of labour equal to any other five within the
periods of life I have stated; that is, that among such five men there will be one possessing all the
qualifications of a good workman, one bad, and the other three middling, and approximating to the first,
and the last. So that in so small a platoon as that of even five, you will find the full complement of all
that five men can earn." (E. Burke, 1. c, pp. 15, 16.) Compare Quetelet on the average individual.

\2] Professor Roscher claims to have discovered that one needlewoman employed by Mrs. Roscher
during two days, does more work than two needlewomen employed together during one day. The learned
professor should not study the capitalist process of production in the nursery, nor under circumstances
where the principal personage, the capitalist, is wanting.

£3} "Concours de forces." (Destutt de Tracy, 1. c, p. 80.)

\4] There are numerous operations of so simple a kind as not to admit a division into parts, which cannot
be performed without the co-operation of many pairs of hands. I would instance the lifting of a large tree
on to a wain .., everything, in short, which cannot be done unless a great many pairs of hands help each
other in the same undivided employment and at the same time." (E. G. Wakefield: "A View of the Art of
Colonisation." London, 1849, p. 168.)

[5] "As one man cannot, and ten men must strain to lift a ton of weight, yet 100 men can do it only by the
strength of a finger of each of them." (John Betters: "Proposals for Raising a Colledge of Industry."
London, 1696, p. 21.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (8 of 1 1 ) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

\6] "There is also" (when the same number of men are employed by one farmer on 300 acres, instead of
by ten farmers with 30 acres a piece) "an advantage in the proportion of servants, which will not so easily
be understood but by practical men; for it is natural to say, as 1 is to 4, so are 3 to 12; but this will not
hold good in practice; for in harvest time and many other operations which require that kind of despatch
by the throwing many hands together, the work is better and more expeditiously done: f i. in harvest, 2
drivers, 2 loaders, 2 pitchers, 2 rakers, and the rest at the rick, or in the barn, will despatch double the
work that the same number of hands would do if divided into different gangs on different farms." ("An
Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and the Size of Farms." By a Farmer.
London, 1773, pp. 7, 8.)

\1] Strictly, Aristotle's definition is that man is by nature a town-citizen. This is quite as characteristic of
ancient classical society as Franklin's definition of man, as a tool-making animal, is characteristic of
Yankeedom.

[8] "On doit encore remarquer que cette division partielle de travail peut se faire quand meme les
ouvriers sont occupes d'une meme besogne. Des macons par exemple, occupes a faire passer de mains en
mains des briques a un echafaudage superieur, font tous la meme besogne, et pourtant il existe parmi eux
une espece de division de travail, qui consiste en ce que chacun d'eux fait passer la brique par un espace
donne, et que tous ensemble la font parvenir beaucoup plus promptement a l'endroit marque qu'ils ne le
feraient si chacun d'eux portait sa brique separement jusqu'a l'echafaudage superieur." (F. Skarbek:
"Theorie des richesses sociales." Paris, 1839, 1. 1, pp. 97, 98.)

\9] "Est-il question d'executer un travail complique, plusieurs choses doivent etre faites simultanement.
L'un en fait une pendant que l'autre en fait une autre, et tous contribuent a l'effet qu'un sent homme
n'aurait pu produire. L'un rame pendant que l'autre tient le gouvernail, et qu'un troisieme jette le filet on
harponne le poisson, et la peche a un succes impossible sans ce concours." (Destutt de Tracy, 1. c.)

f 101 "The doing of it (agricultural work) at the critical juncture is of so much the greater consequence."
("An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price," &c, p. 9.) "In agriculture, there is no more
important factor than that of time." (Liebig: "Ueber Theorie und Praxis in der Landwirtschaft. " 1856, p.

23.)

fill "The next evil is one which one would scarcely expect to find in a country which exports more
labour than any other in the world, with the exception, perhaps, of China and England the impossibility
of procuring a sufficient number of hands to clean the cotton. The consequence of this is that large
quantities of the crop are left unpicked, while another portion is gathered from the ground when it has
fallen, and is of course discoloured and partially rotted, so that for want of labour at the proper season the
cultivator is actually forced to submit to the loss of a large part of that crop for which England is so
anxiously looking." ("Bengal Hurkaru." Bi-Monthly Overland Summary of News, 22nd July, 1861.)

fl21 In the progress of culture "all, and perhaps more than all, the capital and labour which once loosely
occupied 500 acres, are now concentrated for the more complete tillage of 100." Although "relatively to
the amount of capital and labour employed, space is concentrated, it is an enlarged sphere of production,
as compared to the sphere of production formerly occupied or worked upon by one single independent
agent of production." (R. Jones: "An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth," part I. On Rent. London,
1831. p. 191.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (9 of 1 1 ) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

f 131 "La forza di ciascuno uomo e minima, ma la riunione delle minime forze forma una forza totale
maggiore anche della somma delle forze medesime fino a che le forze per essere riunite possono
diminuere il tempo ed accrescere lo spazio della loro azione." (G. R. Carli, Note to P. Verri, 1. c, t. xv., p.
196.)

£141 "Profits ... is the sole end of trade." (J. Vanderlint, 1. c., p. 11.)

f 151 That Philistine paper, the Spectator, states that after the introduction of a sort of partnership between
capitalist and workmen in the "Wirework Company of Manchester," "the first result was a sudden
decrease in waste, the men not seeing why they should waste their own property any more than any other
master's, and waste is, perhaps, next to bad debts, the greatest source of manufacturing loss." The same
paper finds that the main defect in the Rochdale co-operative experiments is this: "They showed that
associations of workmen could manage shops, mills, and almost all forms of industry with success, and
they immediately improved the condition of the men; but then they did not leave a clear place for
masters." Quelle horreur!

f 161 Professor Cairnes, after stating that the superintendence of labour is a leading feature of production
by slaves in the Southern States of North America, continues: "The peasant proprietor (of the North),
appropriating the whole produce of his toil, needs no other stimulus to exertion. Superintendence is here
completely dispensed with." (Cairnes, 1. c, pp. 48, 49.)

f 171 Sir James Steuart, a writer altogether remarkable for his quick eye for the characteristic social
distinctions between different modes of production, says: "Why do large undertakings in the
manufacturing way ruin private industry, but by coming nearer to the simplicity of slaves?" ("Prin. of
Pol. Econ.," London, 1767, v. I., pp. 167, 168.)

f 181 Auguste Comte and his school might therefore have shown that feudal lords are an eternal necessity
in the same way that they have done in the case of the lords of capital.

f 191 R. Jones. "Textbook of Lectures," &c, pp. 77, 78. The ancient Assyrian, Egyptian, and other
collections in London, and in other European capitals, make us eye-witnesses of the modes of carrying
on that co-operative labour.

r201 Linguet is improbably right, when in his "Theorie des Lois Civiles," he declares hunting to be the
first form of co-operation, and man-hunting (war) one of the earliest forms of hunting.

f211 Peasant agriculture on a small scale, and the carrying on of independent handicrafts, which together
form the basis of the feudal mode of production, and after the dissolution of that system, continue side by
side with the capitalist mode, also form the economic foundation of the classical communities at their
best, after the primitive form of ownership of land in common had disappeared, and before slavery had
seized on production in earnest.

f221 "Whether the united skill, industry, and emulation of many together on the same work be not the
way to advance it? And whether it had been otherwise possible for England, to have carried on her
Woollen Manufacture to so great a perfection?" (Berkeley. "The Querist." London, 1751, p. 56, par.
521.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (10 of 1 1 ) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirteen

Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls
Html Markup by Stephen Baird



Next: Chapter Fourteen: Division of Labour and Manufacture
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm (11 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:16:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part IV:

Division of Labour and Manufacture



CHAPTER FOURTEEN:

DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE



Contents

Section 1 - Two-fold Origin of Manufacture

Section 2 - The Detail Labourer and his Implements

Section 3 - The Two Fundamental Forms of Manufacture: Heterogeneous Manufacture, Serial

Manufacture

Section 4 - Division of Labour in Manufacture, and Division of Labour in Society

Section 5 - The Capitalistic Character of Manufacture

SECTION 1

TWO-FOLD ORIGIN OF MANUFACTURE



That co-operation which is based on division of labour, assumes its typical form in manufacture, and is
the prevalent characteristic form of the capitalist process of production throughout the manufacturing
period properly so called. That period, roughly speaking, extends from the middle of the 16th to the last
third of the 18th century.

Manufacture takes its rise in two ways:

(1.) By the assemblage, in one workshop under the control of a single capitalist, of labourers belonging to
various independent handicrafts, but through whose hands a given article must pass on its way to
completion. A carriage, for example, was formerly the product of the labour of a great number of
independent artificers, such as wheelwrigths, harness-makers, tailors, locksmiths, upholsterers, turners,
fringe-makers, glaziers, painters, polishers, gilders, &c. In the manufacture of carriages, however, all
these different artificers are assembled in one building where they work into one another's hands. It is
true that a carriage cannot be gilt before it has been made. But if a number of carriages are being made

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (1 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

simultaneously, some may be in the hands of the gilders while others are going through an earlier
process. So far, we are still in the domain of simple co-operation, which finds its materials ready to hand
in the shape of men and things. But very soon an important change takes place. The tailor, the locksmith,
and the other artificers, being now exclusively occupied in carriage-making, each gradually loses,
through want of practice, the ability to carry on, to its full extent, his old handicraft. But, on the other
hand, his activity now confined in one groove, assumes the form best adapted to the narrowed sphere of
action. At first, carriage manufacture is a combination of various independent handicrafts. By degrees, it
becomes the splitting up of carriage-making into its various detail processes, each of which crystallises
into the exclusive function of a particular workman, the manufacture, as a whole, being carried on by the
men in conjunction. In the same way, cloth manufacture, as also a whole series of other manufactures,
arose by combining different handicrafts together under the control of a single capitalist. £1}

(2.) Manufacture also arises in a way exactly the reverse of this namely, by one capitalist employing
simultaneously in one workshop a number of artificers, who all do the same, or the same kind of work,
such as making paper, type, or needles. This is co-operation in its most elementary form. Each of these
artificers (with the help, perhaps, of one or two apprentices), makes the entire commodity, and he
consequently performs in succession all the operations necessary for its production. He still works in his
old handicraft-like way. But very soon external circumstances cause a different use to be made of the
concentration of the workmen on one spot, and of the simultaneousness of their work. An increased
quantity of the article has perhaps to be delivered within a given time. The work is therefore
re-distributed. Instead of each man being allowed to perform all the various operations in succession,
these operations are changed into disconnected, isolated ones, carried on side by side; each is assigned to
a different artificer, and the whole of them together are performed simultaneously by the co-operating
workmen. This accidental repartition gets repeated, develops advantages of its own, and gradually
ossifies into a systematic division of labour. The commodity, from being the individual product of an
independent artificer, becomes the social product of a union of artificers, each of whom performs one,
and only one, of the constituent partial operations. The same operations which, in the case of a
papermaker belonging to a German Guild, merged one into the other as the successive acts of one
artificer, became in the Dutch paper manufacture so many partial operations carried on side by side by
numerous co-operating labourers. The needlemaker of the Nuremberg Guild was the cornerstone on
which the English needle manufacture was raised. But while in Nuremberg that single artificer performed
a series of perhaps 20 operations one after another, in England it was not long before there were 20
needlemakers side by side, each performing one alone of those 20 operations, and in consequence of
further experience, each of those 20 operations was again split up, isolated, and made the exclusive
function of a separate workman.

The mode in which manufacture arises, its growth out of handicrafts, is therefore two-fold. On the one
hand, it arises from the union of various independent handicrafts, which become stripped of their
independence and specialised to such an extent as to be reduced to mere supplementary partial processes
in the production of one particular commodity. On the other hand, it arises from the co-operation of
artificers of one handicraft; it splits up that particular handicraft into its various detail operations,
isolating, and making these operations independent of one another up to the point where each becomes
the exclusive function of a particular labourer. On the one hand, therefore, manufacture either introduces
diversion of labour into a process of production, or further develops that division; on the other hand, it
unites together handicrafts that were formerly separate. But whatever may have been its particular
starting-point, its final form is invariably the same a productive mechanism whose parts are human



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (2 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

beings.

For a proper understanding of the division of labour in manufacture, it is essential that the following
points be firmly grasped. First, the decomposition of a process of production into its various successive
steps coincides, here, strictly with the resolution of a handicraft into its successive manual operations.
Whether complex or simple, each operation has to be done by hand, retains the character of a handicraft,
and is therefore dependent on the strength, skill, quickness, and sureness, of the individual workman in
handling his tools. The handicraft continues to be the basis. This narrow technical basis excludes a really
scientific analysis of any definite process of industrial production, since it is still a condition that each
detail process gone through by the product must be capable of being done by hand and of forming, in its
way, a separate handicraft. It is just because handicraft skill continues, in this way, to be the foundation
of the process of production, that each workman becomes exclusively assigned to a partial function, and
that for the rest of his life, his labour-power is turned into the organ of this detail function.

Secondly, this division of labour is a particular sort of co-operation, and many of its disadvantages
spring from the general character of co-operation, and not from this particular form of it.



SECTION 2

THE DETAIL LABOURER AND HIS IMPLEMENTS



If we now go more into detail, it is, in the first place, clear that a labourer who all his life performs one
and the same simple operation, converts his whole body into the automatic, specialised implement of that
operation. Consequently, he takes less time in doing it, than the artificer who performs a whole series of
operations in succession. But the collective labourer, who constitutes the living mechanism of
manufacture, is made up solely of such specialised detail labourers. Hence, in comparison with the
independent handicraft, more is produced in a given time, or the productive power of labour is increased.
\2] Moreover, when once this fractional work is established as the exclusive function of one person, the
methods it employs become perfected. The workman's continued repetition of the same simple act, and
the concentration of his attention on it, teach him by experience how to attain the desired effect with the
minimum of exertion. But since there are always several generations of labourers living at one time, and
working together at the manufacture of a given article, the technical skill, the tricks of the trade thus
acquired, become established, and are accumulated and handed down. [3]

Manufacture, in fact, produces the skill of the detail labourer, by reproducing, and systematically driving
to an extreme within the workshop, the naturally developed differentiation of trades which it found ready
to hand in society at large. On the other hand, the conversion of fractional work into the life-calling of
one man, corresponds to the tendency shown by earlier societies, to make trades hereditary; either to
petrify them into castes, or whenever definite historical conditions beget in the individual a tendency to
vary in a manner incompatible with the nature of castes, to ossify them into guilds. Castes and guilds
arise from the action of the same natural law, that regulates the differentiation of plants and animals into



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (3 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

species and varieties, except that, when a certain degree of development has been reached, the heredity of
castes and the exclusiveness of guilds are ordained as a law of society. \4]

"The muslins of Dakka in fineness, the calicoes and other piece goods of Coromandel in brilliant and
durable colours, have never been surpassed. Yet they are produced without capital, machinery, division
of labour, or any of those means which give such facilities to the manufacturing interest of Europe. The
weaver is merely a detached individual, working a web when ordered of a customer, and with a loom of
the rudest construction, consisting sometimes of a few branches or bars of wood, put roughly together.
There is even no expedient for rolling up the warp; the loom must therefore be kept stretched to its full
length, and becomes so inconveniently large, that it cannot be contained within the hut of the
manufacturer, who is therefore compelled to ply his trade in the open air, where it is interrupted by every
vicissitude of the weather. " [5] It is only the special skill accumulated from generation to generation, and
transmitted from father to son, that gives to the Hindu, as it does to the spider, this proficiency. And yet
the work of such a Hindu weaver is very complicated, compared with that of a manufacturing labourer.

An artificer, who performs one after another the various fractional operations in the production of a
finished article, must at one time change his place, at another his tools. The transition from one operation
to another interrupts the flow of his labour, and creates, so to say, gaps in his working-day. These gaps
close up so soon as he is tied to one and the same operation all day long; they vanish in proportion as the
changes in his work diminish. The resulting increased productive power is owing either to an increased
expenditure of labour-power in a given time i.e., to increased intensity of labour or to a decrease in the
amount of labour-power unproductively consumed. The extra expenditure of power, demanded by every
transition from rest to motion, is made up for by prolonging the duration of the normal velocity when
once acquired. On the other hand, constant labour of one uniform kind disturbs the intensity and flow of
a man's animal spirits, which find recreation and delight in mere change of activity.

The productiveness of labour depends not only on the proficiency of the workman, but on the perfection
of his tools. Tools of the same kind, such as knives, drills, gimlets, hammers, &c, may be employed in
different processes; and the same tool may serve various purposes in a single process. But so soon as the
different operations of a labour-process are disconnected the one from the other, and each fractional
operation acquires in the hands of the detail labourer a suitable and peculiar form, alterations become
necessary in the implements that previously served more than one purpose. The direction taken by this
change is determined by the difficulties experienced in consequence of the unchanged form of the
implement. Manufacture is characterised by the differentiation of the instruments of labour a
differentiation whereby implements of a given sort acquire fixed shapes, adapted to each particular
application, and by the specialisation of those instruments, giving to each special implement its full play
only in the hands of a specific detail labourer. In Birmingham alone 500 varieties of hammers are
produced, and not only is each adapted to one particular process, but several varieties often serve
exclusively for the different operations in one and the same process. The manufacturing period
simplifies, improves, and multiplies the implements of labour, by adapting them to the exclusively
special functions of each detail labourer. £61 It thus creates at the same time one of the material
conditions for the existence of machinery, which consists of a combination of simple instruments.

The detail labourer and his implements are the simplest elements of manufacture. Let us now turn to its
aspect as a whole.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (4 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen



SECTION 3

THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL FORMS OF MANUFACTURE: HETEROGENEOUS
MANUFACTURE, SERIAL MANUFACTURE



The organisation of manufacture has two fundamental forms which, in spite of occasional blending, are
essentially different in kind, and, moreover, play very distinct parts in the subsequent transformation of
manufacture into modern industry carried on by machinery. This double character arises from the nature
of the article produced. This article either results from the mere mechanical fitting together of partial
products made independently, or owes its completed shape to a series of connected processes and
manipulations.

A locomotive, for instance, consists of more than 5,000 independent parts. It cannot, however, serve as
an example of the first kind of genuine manufacture, for it is a structure produced by modern mechanical
industry. But a watch can; and William Petty used it to illustrate the division of labour in manufacture.
Formerly the individual work of a Nuremberg artificer, the watch has been transformed into the social
product of an immense number of detail labourers, such as mainspring makers, dial makers, spiral spring
makers, jewelled hole makers, ruby lever makers, hand makers, case makers, screw makers, gilders, with
numerous subdivisions, such as wheel makers (brass and steel separate), pin makers, movement makers,
acheveur de pignon (fixes the wheels on the axles, polishes the facets, &c), pivot makers, planteur de
finissage (puts the wheels and springs in the works), finisseur de barillet (cuts teeth in the wheels, makes
the holes of the right size, &c), escapement makers, cylinder makers for cylinder escapements,
escapement wheel makers, balance wheel makers, raquette makers (apparatus for regulating the watch),
the planteur d'echappement (escapement maker proper); then the repasseur de barillet (finishes the box
for the spring, &c), steel polishers, wheel polishers, screw polishers, figure painters, dial enamellers
(melt the enamel on the copper), fabricant de pendants (makes the ring by which the case is hung),
finisseur de charniere (puts the brass hinge in the cover, &c), faiseur de secret (puts in the springs that
open the case), graveur, ciseleur, polisseur de boite, &c, &c, and last of all the repasseur, who fits
together the whole watch and hands it over in a going state. Only a few parts of the watch pass through
several hands; and all these membra disjecta come together for the first time in the hand that binds them
into one mechanical whole. This external relation between the finished product, and its various and
diverse elements makes it, as well in this case as in the case of all similar finished articles, a matter of
chance whether the detail labourers are brought together in one workshop or not. The detail operations
may further be carried on like so many independent handicrafts, as they are in the Cantons of Vaud and
Neufchatel; while in Geneva there exist large watch manufactories where the detail labourers directly
co-operate under the control of a single capitalist. And even in the latter case the dial, the springs, and the
case, are seldom made in the factory itself. To carry on the trade as a manufacture, with concentration of
workmen, is, in the watch trade, profitable only under exceptional conditions, because competition is
greater between the labourers who desire to work at home, and because the splitting up of the work into a
number of heterogeneous processes, permits but little use of the instruments of labour in common, and
the capitalist, by scattering the work, saves the outlay on workshops, &c. ]T[ Nevertheless the position of
this detail labourer who, though he works at home, does so for a capitalist (manufacturer, etablisseur), is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (5 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

very different from that of the independent artificer, who works for his own customers. \S]

The second kind of manufacture, its perfected form, produces articles that go through connected phases
of development, through a series of processes step by step, like the wire in the manufacture of needles,
which passes through the hands of 72 and sometimes even 92 different detail workmen.

In so far as such a manufacture, when first started, combines scattered handicrafts, it lessens the space by
which the various phases of production are separated from each other. The time taken in passing from
one stage to another is shortened, so is the labour that effectuates this passage. £9] In comparison with a
handicraft, productive power is gained, and this gain is owing to the general co-operative character of
manufacture. On the other hand, division of labour, which is the distinguishing principle of manufacture,
requires the isolation of the various stages of production and their independence of each other. The
establishment and maintenance of a connexion between the isolated functions necessitates the incessant
transport of the article from one hand to another, and from one process to another. From the standpoint of
modern mechanical industry, this necessity stands forth as a characteristic and costly disadvantage, and
one that is immanent in the principle of manufacture, f 101

If we confine our attention to some particular lot of raw materials, of rags, for instance, in paper
manufacture, or of wire in needle manufacture, we perceive that it passes in succession through a series
of stages in the hands of the various detail workmen until completion. On the other hand, if we look at
the workshop as a whole, we see the raw material in all the stages of its production at the same time. The
collective labourer, with one set of his many hands armed with one kind of tools, draws the wire, with
another set, armed with different tools, he, at the same time, straightens it, with another, he cuts it, with
another, points it, and so on. The different detail processes, which were successive in time, have become
simultaneous, go on side by side in space. Hence, production of a greater quantum of finished
commodities in a given time, fill This simultaneity, it is true, is due to the general co-operative form of
the process as a whole; but Manufacture not only finds the conditions for co-operation ready to hand, it
also, to some extent, creates them by the sub-division of handicraft labour. On the other hand, it
accomplishes this social organisation of the labour-process only by riveting each labourer to a single
fractional detail.

Since the fractional product of each detail labourer is, at the same time, only a particular stage in the
development of one and the same finished article, each labourer, or each group of labourers, prepares the
raw material for another labourer or group. The result of the labour of the one is the starting-point for the
labour of the other. The one workman therefore gives occupation directly to the other. The labour-time
necessary in each partial process, for attaining the desired effect, is learnt by experience; and the
mechanism of Manufacture, as a whole, is based on the assumption that a given result will be obtained in
a given time. It is only on this assumption that the various supplementary labour-processes can proceed
uninterruptedly, simultaneously, and side by side. It is clear that this direct dependence of the operations,
and therefore of the labourers, on each other, compels each one of them to spend on his work no more
than the necessary time, and thus a continuity, uniformity, regularity, order, f!21 and even intensity of
labour, of quite a different kind, is begotten than is to be found in an independent handicraft or even in
simple co-operation. The rule, that the labour-time expended on a commodity should not exceed that
which is socially necessary for its production, appears, in the production of commodities generally, to be
established by the mere effect of competition; since, to express ourselves superficially, each single
producer is obliged to sell his commodity at its market-price. In Manufacture, on the contrary, the turning



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (6 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

out of a given quantum of product in a given time is a technical law of the process of production itself.
£131

Different operations take, however, unequal periods, and yield therefore, in equal times unequal
quantities of fractional products. If, therefore, the same labourer has, day after day, to perform the same
operation, there must be a different number of labourers for each operation; for instance, in type
manufacture, there are four founders and two breakers to one rubber: the founder casts 2,000 type an
hour, the breaker breaks up 4,000, and the rubber polishes 8,000. Here we have again the principle of
co-operation in its simplest form, the simultaneous employment of many doing the same thing; only now,
this principle is the expression of an organic relation. The division of labour, as carried out in
Manufacture, not only simplifies and multiplies the qualitatively different parts of the social collective
labourer, but also creates a fixed mathematical relation or ratio which regulates the quantitative extent of
those parts i.e., the relative number of labourers, or the relative size of the group of labourers, for each
detail operation. It develops, along with the qualitative sub-division of the social labour-process, a
quantitative rule and proportionality for that process.

When once the most fitting proportion has been experimentally established for the numbers of the detail
labourers in the various groups when producing on a given scale, that scale can be extended only by
employing a multiple of each particular group. |T41 There is this to boot, that the same individual can do
certain kinds of work just as well on a large as on a small scale; for instance, the labour of
superintendence, the carriage of the fractional product from one stage to the next, &c. The isolation of
such functions, their allotment to a particular labourer, does not become advantageous till after an
increase in the number of labourers employed; but this increase must affect every group proportionally.

The isolated group of labourers to whom any particular detail function is assigned, is made up of
homogeneous elements, and is one of the constituent parts of the total mechanism. In many
manufactures, however, the group itself is an organised body of labour, the total mechanism being a
repetition or multiplication of these elementary organisms. Take, for instance, the manufacture of glass
bottles. It may be resolved into three essentially different stages. First, the preliminary stage, consisting
of the preparation of the components of the glass, mixing the sand and lime, &c, and melting them into a
fluid mass of glass. |T51 Various detail labourers are employed in this first stage, as also in the final one
of removing the bottles from the drying furnace, sorting and packing them, &c. In the middle, between
these two stages, comes the glass melting proper, the manipulation of the fluid mass. At each mouth of
the furnace, there works a group, called "the hole," consisting of one bottlemaker or finisher, one blower,
one gatherer, one putter-up or whetter-off, and one taker-in. These five detail workers are so many
special organs of a single working organism that acts only as a whole, and therefore can operate only by
the direct co-operation of the whole five. The whole body is paralysed if but one of its members be
wanting. But a glass furnace has several openings (in England from 4 to 6), each of which contains an
earthenware melting-pot full of molten glass, and employs a similar five-membered group of workers.
The organisation of each group is based on division of labour, but the bond between the different groups
is simple co-operation, which, by using in common one of the means of production, the furnace, causes it
to be more economically consumed. Such a furnace, with its 4-6 groups, constitutes a glass house; and a
glass manufactory comprises a number of such glass houses, together with the apparatus and workmen
requisite for the preparatory and final stages.

Finally, just as Manufacture arises in part from the combination of various handicrafts, so, too, it
develops into a combination of various manufactures. The larger English glass manufacturers, for

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (7 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

instance, make their own earthenware melting-pots, because, on the quality of these depends, to a great
extent, the success or failure of the process. The manufacture of one of the means of production is here
united with that of the product. On the other hand, the manufacture of the product may be united with
other manufactures, of which that product is the raw material, or with the products of which it is itself
subsequently mixed. Thus, we find the manufacture of flint glass combined with that of glass cutting and
brass founding; the latter for the metal settings of various articles of glass. The various manufactures so
combined form more or less separate departments of a larger manufacture, but are at the same time
independent processes, each with its own division of labour. In spite of the many advantages offered by
this combination of manufactures, it never grows into a complete technical system on its own foundation.
That happens only on its transformation into an industry carried on by machinery.

Early in the manufacturing period, the principle of lessening the necessary labour-time in the production
of commodities, |161 was accepted and formulated: and the use of machines, especially for certain simple
first processes that have to be conducted on a very large scale, and with the application of great force,
sprang up here and there. Thus, at an early period in paper manufacture, the tearing up of the rags was
done by paper-mills; and in metal works, the pounding of the ores was effected by stamping mills. \ll]
The Roman Empire had handed down the elementary form of all machinery in the water-wheel. fl81

The handicraft period bequeathed to us the great inventions of the compass, of gunpowder, of
type-printing, and of the automatic clock. But, on the whole, machinery played that subordinate part
which Adam Smith assigns to it in comparison with division of labour. fl91 The sporadic use of
machinery in the 17th century was of the greatest importance, because it supplied the great
mathematicians of that time with a practical basis and stimulant to the creation of the science of
mechanics.

The collective labourer, formed by the combination of a number of detail labourers, is the machinery
specially characteristic of the manufacturing period. The various operations that are performed in turns
by the producer of a commodity, and coalesce one with another during the progress of production, lay
claim to him in various ways. In one operation he must exert more strength, in another more skill, in
another more attention; and the same individual does not possess all these qualities in an equal degree.
After Manufacture has once separated, made independent, and isolated the various operations, the
labourers are divided, classified, and grouped according to their predominating qualities. If their natural
endowments are, on the one hand, the foundation on which the division of labour is built up, on the other
hand, Manufacture, once introduced, develops in them new powers that are by nature fitted only for
limited and special functions. The collective labourer now possesses, in an equal degree of excellence, all
the qualities requisite for production, and expends them in the most economical manner, by exclusively
employing all his organs, consisting of particular labourers, or groups of labourers, in performing their
special functions. r201 The one-sidedness and the deficiencies of the detail labourer become perfections
when he is a part of the collective labourer. f211 The habit of doing only one thing converts him into a
never failing instrument, while his connexion with the whole mechanism compels him to work with the
regularity of the parts of a machine. f221

Since the collective labourer has functions, both simple and complex, both high and low, his members,
the individual labour-powers, require different degrees of training, and must therefore have different
values. Manufacture, therefore, develops a hierarchy of labour-powers, to which there corresponds a
scale of wages. If, on the one hand, the individual labourers are appropriated and annexed for life by a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (8 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

limited function; on the other hand, the various operations of the hierarchy are parcelled out among the
labourers according to both their natural and their acquired capabilities. f231 Every process of
production, however, requires certain simple manipulations, which every man is capable of doing. They
too are now severed from their connexion with the more pregnant moments of activity, and ossified into
exclusive functions of specially appointed labourers. Hence, Manufacture begets, in every handicraft that
it seizes upon, a class of so-called unskilled labourers, a class which handicraft industry strictly excluded.
If it develops a one-sided speciality into a perfection, at the expense of the whole of a man's working
capacity, it also begins to make a speciality of the absence of all development. Alongside of the
hierarchic gradation there steps the simple separation of the labourers into skilled and unskilled. For the
latter, the cost of apprenticeship vanishes; for the former, it diminishes, compared with that of artificers,
in consequence of the functions being simplified. In both cases the value of labour-power falls. f241 An
exception to this law holds good whenever the decomposition of the labour-process begets new and
comprehensive functions, that either had no place at all, or only a very modest one, in handicrafts. The
fall in the value of labour-power, caused by the disappearance or diminution of the expenses of
apprenticeship, implies a direct increase of surplus-value for the benefit of capital; for everything that
shortens the necessary labour-time required for the reproduction of labour-power, extends the domain of
surplus-labour.



SECTION 4

DIVISION OF LABOUR IN MANUFACTURE, AND DIVISION OF LABOUR IN SOCIETY



We first considered the origin of Manufacture, then its simple elements, then the detail labourer and his
implements, and finally, the totality of the mechanism. We shall now lightly touch upon the relation
between the division of labour in manufacture, and the social division of labour, which forms the
foundation of all production of commodities.

If we keep labour alone in view, we may designate the separation of social production into its main
divisions or genera — viz., agriculture, industries, &c, as division of labour in general, and the splitting
up of these families into species and sub-species, as division of labour in particular, and the division of
labour within the workshop as division of labour in singular or in detail. f251

Division of labour in a society, and the corresponding tying down of individuals to a particular calling,
develops itself, just as does the division of labour in manufacture, from opposite starting-points. Within a
family, \26\ and after further development within a tribe, there springs up naturally a division of labour,
caused by differences of sex and age, a division that is consequently based on a purely physiological
foundation, which division enlarges its materials by the expansion of the community, by the increase of
population, and more especially, by the conflicts between different tribes, and the subjugation of one
tribe by another. On the other hand, as I have before remarked, the exchange of products springs up at the
points where different families, tribes, communities, come in contact; for, in the beginning of civilisation,
it is not private individuals but families, tribes, &c, that meet on an independent footing. Different

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (9 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

communities find different means of production, and different means of subsistence in their natural
environment. Hence, their modes of production, and of living, and their products are different. It is this
spontaneously developed difference which, when different communities come in contact, calls forth the
mutual exchange of products, and the consequent gradual conversion of those products into commodities.
Exchange does not create the differences between the spheres of production, but brings what are already
different into relation, and thus converts them into more or less inter-dependent branches of the collective
production of an enlarged society. In the latter case, the social division of labour arises from the
exchange between spheres of production, that are originally distinct and independent of one another. In
the former, where the physiological division of labour is the starting-point, the particular organs of a
compact whole grow loose, and break off, principally owing to the exchange of commodities with
foreign communities, and then isolate themselves so far, that the sole bond, still connecting the various
kinds of work, is the exchange of the products as commodities. In the one case, it is the making
dependent what was before independent; in the other case, the making independent what was before
dependent.

The foundation of every division of labour that is well developed, and brought about by the exchange of
commodities, is the separation between town and country. \27] It may be said, that the whole economic
history of society is summed up in the movement of this antithesis. We pass it over, however, for the
present.

Just as a certain number of simultaneously employed labourers are the material pre-requisites for division
of labour in manufacture, so are the number and density of the population, which here correspond to the
agglomeration in one workshop, a necessary condition for the division of labour in society. \2S]

Nevertheless, this density is more or less relative. A relatively thinly populated country, with
well-developed means of communication, has a denser population than a more numerously populated
country, with badly-developed means of communication; and in this sense the Northern States of the
American Union, for instance, are more thickly populated than India. f291

Since the production and the circulation of commodities are the general pre-requisites of the capitalist
mode of production, division of labour in manufacture demands, that division of labour in society at large
should previously have attained a certain degree of development. Inversely, the former division reacts
upon and develops and multiplies the latter. Simultaneously, with the differentiation of the instruments of
labour, the industries that produce these instruments, become more and more differentiated. T301 If the
manufacturing system seize upon an industry, which, previously, was carried on in connexion with
others, either as a chief or as a subordinate industry, and by one producer, these industries immediately
separate their connexion, and become independent. If it seize upon a particular stage in the production of
a commodity, the other stages of its production become converted into so many independent industries. It
has already been stated, that where the finished article consists merely of a number of parts fitted
together, the detail operations may re-establish themselves as genuine and separate handicrafts. In order
to carry out more perfectly the division of labour in manufacture, a single branch of production is,
according to the varieties of its raw material, or the various forms that one and the same raw material
may assume, split up into numerous, and to some extent, entirely new manufactures. Accordingly, in
France alone, in the first half of the 18th century, over 100 different kinds of silk stuffs were woven, and,
in Avignon, it was law, that "every apprentice should devote himself to only one sort of fabrication, and
should not learn the preparation of several kinds of stuff at once." The territorial division of labour,
which confines special branches of production to special districts of a country, acquires fresh stimulus



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (10 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

from the manufacturing system, which exploits every special advantage. f311 The Colonial system and
the opening out of the markets of the world, both of which are included in the general conditions of
existence of the manufacturing period, furnish rich material for developing the division of labour in
society. It is not the place, here, to go on to show how division of labour seizes upon, not only the
economic, but every other sphere of society, and everywhere lays the foundation of that all engrossing
system of specialising and sorting men, that development in a man of one single faculty at the expense of
all other faculties, which caused A. Ferguson, the master of Adam Smith, to exclaim: "We make a nation
of Helots, and have no free citizens." f32]

But, in spite of the numerous analogies and links connecting them, division of labour in the interior of a
society, and that in the interior of a workshop, differ not only in degree, but also in kind. The analogy
appears most indisputable where there is an invisible bond uniting the various branches of trade. For
instance the cattle-breeder produces hides, the tanner makes the hides into leather, and the shoemaker,
the leather into boots. Here the thing produced by each of them is but a step towards the final form,
which is the product of all their labours combined. There are, besides, all the various industries that
supply the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker with the means of production. Now it is quite
possible to imagine, with Adam Smith, that the difference between the above social division of labour,
and the division in manufacture, is merely subjective, exists merely for the observer, who, in a
manufacture, can see with one glance, all the numerous operations being performed on one spot, while in
the instance given above, the spreading out of the work over great areas, and the great number of people
employed in each branch of labour, obscure the connexion. f331 But what is it that forms the bond
between the independent labours of the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker? It is the fact that
their respective products are commodities. What, on the other hand, characterises division of labour in
manufactures? The fact that the detail labourer produces no commodities. f341 It is only the common
product of all the detail labourers that becomes a commodity. f351 Division of labour in society is
brought about by the purchase and sale of the products of different branches of industry, while the
connexion between the detail operations in a workshop, is due to the sale of the labour-power of several
workmen to one capitalist, who applies it as combined labour-power. The division of labour in the
workshop implies concentration of the means of production in the hands of one capitalist; the division of
labour in society implies their dispersion among many independent producers of commodities. While
within the workshop, the iron law of proportionality subjects definite numbers of workmen to definite
functions, in the society outside the workshop, chance and caprice have full play in distributing the
producers and their means of production among the various branches of industry. The different spheres
of production, it is true, constantly tend to an equilibrium: for, on the one hand, while each producer of a
commodity is bound to produce a use-value, to satisfy a particular social want, and while the extent of
these wants differs quantitatively, still there exists an inner relation which settles their proportions into a
regular system, and that system one of spontaneous growth; and, on the other hand, the law of the value
of commodities ultimately determines how much of its disposable working-time society can expend on
each particular class of commodities. But this constant tendency to equilibrium, of the various spheres of
production, is exercised, only in the shape of a reaction against the constant upsetting of this equilibrium.
The a priori system on which the division of labour, within the workshop, is regularly carried out,
becomes in the division of labour within the society, an a posteriori, nature-imposed necessity,
controlling the lawless caprice of the producers, and perceptible in the barometrical fluctuations of the
market-prices. Division of labour within the workshop implies the undisputed authority of the capitalist
over men, that are but parts of a mechanism that belongs to him. The division of labour within the society



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (11 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

brings into contact independent commodity-producers, who acknowledge no other authority but that of
competition, of the coercion exerted by the pressure of their mutual interests; just as in the animal
kingdom, the bellum omnium contra omnes more or less preserves the conditions of existence of every
species. The same bourgeois mind which praises division of labour in the workshop, life-long annexation
of the labourer to a partial operation, and his complete subjection to capital, as being an organisation of
labour that increases its productiveness that same bourgeois mind denounces with equal vigour every
conscious attempt to socially control and regulate the process of production, as an inroad upon such
sacred things as the rights of property, freedom and unrestricted play for the bent of the individual
capitalist. It is very characteristic that the enthusiastic apologists of the factory system have nothing more
damning to urge against a general organisation of the labour of society, than that it would turn all society
into one immense factory.

If, in a society with capitalist production, anarchy in the social division of labour and despotism in that of
the workshop are mutual conditions the one of the other, we find, on the contrary, in those earlier forms
of society in which the separation of trades has been spontaneously developed, then crystallised, and
finally made permanent by law, on the one hand, a specimen of the organisation of the labour of society,
in accordance with an approved and authoritative plan, and on the other, the entire exclusion of division
of labour in the workshop, or at all events a mere dwarflike or sporadic and accidental development of
the same. f361

Those small and extremely ancient Indian communities, some of which have continued down to this day,
are based on possession in common of the land, on the blending of agriculture and handicrafts, and on an
unalterable division of labour, which serves, whenever a new community is started, as a plan and scheme
ready cut and dried. Occupying areas of from 100 up to several thousand acres, each forms a compact
whole producing all it requires. The chief part of the products is destined for direct use by the community
itself, and does not take the form of a commodity. Hence, production here is independent of that division
of labour brought about, in Indian society as a whole, by means of the exchange of commodities. It is the
surplus alone that becomes a commodity, and a portion of even that, not until it has reached the hands of
the State, into whose hands from time immemorial a certain quantity of these products has found its way
in the shape of rent in kind. The constitution of these communities varies in different parts of India. In
those of the simplest form, the land is tilled in common, and the produce divided among the members. At
the same time, spinning and weaving are carried on in each family as subsidiary industries. Side by side
with the masses thus occupied with one and the same work, we find the "chief inhabitant," who is judge,
police, and tax-gatherer in one; the book-keeper, who keeps the accounts of the tillage and registers
everything relating thereto; another official, who prosecutes criminals, protects strangers travelling
through and escorts them to the next village; the boundary man, who guards the boundaries against
neighbouring communities; the water-overseer, who distributes the water from the common tanks for
irrigation; the Brahmin, who conducts the religious services; the schoolmaster, who on the sand teaches
the children reading and writing; the calendar-Brahmin, or astrologer, who makes known the lucky or
unlucky days for seed-time and harvest, and for every other kind of agricultural work; a smith and a
carpenter, who make and repair all the agricultural implements; the potter, who makes all the pottery of
the village; the barber, the washerman, who washes clothes, the silversmith, here and there the poet, who
in some communities replaces the silversmith, in others the schoolmaster. This dozen of individuals is
maintained at the expense of the whole community. If the population increases, a new community is
founded, on the pattern of the old one, on unoccupied land. The whole mechanism discloses a systematic
division of labour; but a division like that in manufactures is impossible, since the smith and the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (12 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

carpenter, &c, find an unchanging market, and at the most there occur, according to the sizes of the
villages, two or three of each, instead of one. \37] The law that regulates the division of labour in the
community acts with the irresistible authority of a law of Nature, at the same time that each individual
artificer, the smith, the carpenter, and so on, conducts in his workshop all the operations of his handicraft
in the traditional way, but independently, and without recognising any authority over him. The simplicity
of the organisation for production in these self-sufficing communities that constantly reproduce
themselves in the same form, and when accidentally destroyed, spring up again on the spot and with the
same name \3S] this simplicity supplies the key to the secret of the unchangeableness of Asiatic societies,
an unchangeableness in such striking contrast with the constant dissolution and refounding of Asiatic
States, and the never-ceasing changes of dynasty. The structure of the economic elements of society
remains untouched by the storm-clouds of the political sky.

The rules of the guilds, as I have said before, by limiting most strictly the number of apprentices and
journeymen that a single master could employ, prevented him from becoming a capitalist. Moreover, he
could not employ his journeymen in many other handicrafts than the one in which he was a master. The
guilds zealously repelled every encroachment by the capital of merchants, the only form of free capital
with which they came in contact. A merchant could buy every kind of commodity, but labour as a
commodity he could not buy. He existed only on sufferance, as a dealer in the products of the
handicrafts. If circumstances called for a further division of labour, the existing guilds split themselves
up into varieties, or founded new guilds by the side of the old ones; all this, however, without
concentrating various handicrafts in a single workshop. Hence, the guild organisation, however much it
may have contributed by separating, isolating, and perfecting the handicrafts, to create the material
conditions for the existence of manufacture, excluded division of labour in the workshop. On the whole,
the labourer and his means of production remained closely united, like the snail with its shell, and thus
there was wanting the principal basis of manufacture, the separation of the labourer from his means of
production, and the conversion of these means into capital.

While division of labour in society at large, whether such division be brought about or not by exchange
of commodities, is common to economic formations of society the most diverse, division of labour in the
workshop, as practised by manufacture, is a special creation of the capitalist mode of production alone.



SECTION 5

THE CAPITALISTIC CHARACTER OF MANUFACTURE



An increased number of labourers under the control of one capitalist is the natural starting-point, as well
of co-operation generally, as of manufacture in particular. But the division of labour in manufacture
makes this increase in the number of workmen a technical necessity. The minimum number that any
given capitalist is bound to employ is here prescribed by the previously established division of labour.
On the other hand, the advantages of further division are obtainable only by adding to the number of
workmen, and this can be done only by adding multiples of the various detail groups. But an increase in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (13 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

the variable component of the capital employed necessitates an increase in its constant component, too,
in the workshops, implements, &c, and, in particular, in the raw material, the call for which grows
quicker than the number of workmen. The quantity of it consumed in a given time, by a given amount of
labour, increases in the same ratio as does the productive power of that labour in consequence of its
division. Hence, it is a law, based on the very nature of manufacture, that the minimum amount of
capital, which is bound to be in the hands of each capitalist, must keep increasing; in other words, that
the transformation into capital of the social means of production and subsistence must keep extending.
[391

In manufacture, as well as in simple co-operation, the collective working organism is a form of existence
of capital. The mechanism that is made up of numerous individual detail labourers belongs to the
capitalist. Hence, the productive power resulting from a combination of labours appears to be the
productive power of capital. Manufacture proper not only subjects the previously independent workman
to the discipline and command of capital, but, in addition, creates a hierarchic gradation of the workmen
themselves. While simple co-operation leaves the mode of working by the individual for the most part
unchanged, manufacture thoroughly revolutionises it, and seizes labour-power by its very roots. It
converts the labourer into a crippled monstrosity, by forcing his detail dexterity at the expense of a world
of productive capabilities and instincts; just as in the States of La Plata they butcher a whole beast for the
sake of his hide or his tallow. Not only is the detail work distributed to the different individuals, but the
individual himself is made the automatic motor of a fractional operation, [401 and the absurd fable of
Menenius Agrippa, which makes man a mere fragment of his own body, becomes realised. f411 If, at
first, the workman sells his labour-power to capital, because the material means of producing a
commodity fail him, now his very labour-power refuses its services unless it has been sold to capital. Its
functions can be exercised only in an environment that exists in the workshop of the capitalist after the
sale. By nature unfitted to make anything independently, the manufacturing labourer develops productive
activity as a mere appendage of the capitalist's workshop. \A2\ As the chosen people bore in their features
the sign manual of Jehovah, so division of labour brands the manufacturing workman as the property of
capital.

The knowledge, the judgement, and the will, which, though in ever so small a degree, are practised by
the independent peasant or handicraftsman, in the same way as the savage makes the whole art of war
consist in the exercise of his personal cunning these faculties are now required only for the workshop as a
whole. Intelligence in production expands in one direction, because it vanishes in many others. What is
lost by the detail labourers, is concentrated in the capital that employs them. f431 It is a result of the
division of labour in manufactures, that the labourer is brought face to face with the intellectual potencies
of the material process of production, as the property of another, and as a ruling power. This separation
begins in simple co-operation, where the capitalist represents to the single workman, the oneness and the
will of the associated labour. It is developed in manufacture which cuts down the labourer into a detail
labourer. It is completed in modern industry, which makes science a productive force distinct from
labour and presses it into the service of capital. K41

In manufacture, in order to make the collective labourer, and through him capital, rich in social
productive power, each labourer must be made poor in individual productive powers. "Ignorance is the
mother of industry as well as of superstition. Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of
moving the hand or the foot is independent of either. Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most where the
mind is least consulted, and where the workshop may ... be considered as an engine, the parts of which

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (14 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

are men." f451 As a matter of fact, some few manufacturers in the middle of the 18th century preferred,
for certain operations that were trade secrets, to employ half-idiotic persons. K61

"The understandings of the greater part of men," says Adam Smith, "are necessarily formed by their
ordinary employments. The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple operations ... has
no occasion to exert his understanding... He generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for
a human creature to become." After describing the stupidity of the detail labourer he goes on: "The
uniformity of his stationary life naturally corrupts the courage of his mind... It corrupts even the activity
of his body and renders him incapable of exerting his strength with vigour and perseverance in any other
employments than that to which he has been bred. His dexterity at his own particular trade seems in this
manner to be acquired at the expense of his intellectual, social, and martial virtues. But in every
improved and civilised society, this is the state into which the labouring poor, that is, the great body of
the people, must necessarily fall." [471 For preventing the complete deterioration of the great mass of the
people by division of labour, A. Smith recommends education of the people by the State, but prudently,
and in homeopathic doses. G. Gamier, his French translator and commentator, who, under the first
French Empire, quite naturally developed into a senator, quite as naturally opposes him on this point.
Education of the masses, he urges, violates the first law of the division of labour, and with it "our whole
social system would be proscribed." "Like all other divisions of labour," he says, "that between hand
labour and head labour f481 is more pronounced and decided in proportion as society (he rightly uses this
word, for capital, landed property and their State) becomes richer. This division of labour, like every
other, is an effect of past, and a cause of future progress... ought the government then to work in
opposition to this division of labour, and to hinder its natural course? Ought it to expend a part of the
public money in the attempt to confound and blend together two classes of labour, which are striving
after division and separation?" f491

Some crippling of body and mind is inseparable even from division of labour in society as a whole.
Since, however, manufacture carries this social separation of branches of labour much further, and also,
by its peculiar division, attacks the individual at the very roots of his life, it is the first to afford the
materials for, and to give a start to, industrial pathology. r501

"To subdivide a man is to execute him, if he deserves the sentence, to assassinate him if he does not...
The subdivision of labour is the assassination of a people." f511

Co-operation based on division of labour, in other words, manufacture, commences as a spontaneous
formation. So soon as it attains some consistence and extension, it becomes the recognised methodical
and systematic form of capitalist production. History shows how the division of labour peculiar to
manufacture, strictly so called, acquires the best adapted form at first by experience, as it were behind the
backs of the actors, and then, like the guild handicrafts, strives to hold fast that form when once found,
and here and there succeeds in keeping it for centuries. Any alteration in this form, except in trivial
matters, is solely owing to a revolution in the instruments of labour. Modern manufacture wherever it
arises I do not here allude to modern industry based on machinery either finds the disjecta membra
poetae ready to hand, and only waiting to be collected together, as is the case in the manufacture of
clothes in large towns, or it can easily apply the principle of division, simply by exclusively assigning the
various operations of a handicraft (such as book-binding) to particular men. In such cases, a week's
experience is enough to determine the proportion between the numbers of the hands necessary for the
various functions. f521



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (15 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

By decomposition of handicrafts, by specialisation of the instruments of labour, by the formation of
detail labourers, and by grouping and combining the latter into a single mechanism, division of labour in
manufacture creates a qualitative gradation, and a quantitative proportion in the social process of
production; it consequently creates a definite organisation of the labour of society, and thereby develops
at the same time new productive forces in the society. In its specific capitalist form and under the given
conditions, it could take no other form than a capitalistic one manufacture is but a particular method of
begetting relative surplus-value, or of augmenting at the expense of the labourer the self-expansion of
capital usually called social wealth, "Wealth of Nations," &c. It increases the social productive power of
labour, not only for the benefit of the capitalist instead of for that of the labourer, but it does this by
crippling the individual labourers. It creates new conditions for the lordship of capital over labour. If,
therefore, on the one hand, it presents itself historically as a progress and as a necessary phase in the
economic development of society, on the other hand, it is a refined and civilised method of exploitation.

Political Economy, which as an independent science, first sprang into being during the period of
manufacture, views the social division of labour only from the standpoint of manufacture, f531 and sees
in it only the means of producing more commodities with a given quantity of labour, and, consequently,
of cheapening commodities and hurrying on the accumulation of capital. In most striking contrast with
this accentuation of quantity and exchange-value, is the attitude of the writers of classical antiquity, who
hold exclusively by quality and use-value. f541 In consequence of the separation of the social branches of
production, commodities are better made, the various bents and talents of men select a suitable field, f551
and without some restraint no important results can be obtained anywhere. f561 Hence both product and
producer are improved by division of labour. If the growth of the quantity produced is occasionally
mentioned, this is only done with reference to the greater abundance of use- values. There is not a word
alluding to exchange-value or to the cheapening of commodities. This aspect, from the standpoint of
use-value alone, is taken as well by Plato, \57] who treats division of labour as the foundation on which
the division of society into classes is based, as by Xenophon, f581 who with characteristic bourgeois
instinct, approaches more nearly to division of labour within the workshop. Plato's Republic, in so far as
division of labour is treated in it, as the formative principle of the State, is merely the Athenian
idealisation of the Egyptian system of castes, Egypt having served as the model of an industrial country
to many of his contemporaries also, amongst others to Isocrates, f591 and it continued to have this
importance to the Greeks of the Roman Empire. f601

During the manufacturing period proper, i.e., the period during which manufacture is the predominant
form taken by capitalist production, many obstacles are opposed to the full development of the peculiar
tendencies of manufacture. Although manufacture creates, as we have already seen, a simple separation
of the labourers into skilled and unskilled, simultaneously with their hierarchic arrangement in classes,
yet the number of the unskilled labourers, owing to the preponderating influence of the skilled, remains
very limited. Although it adapts the detail operations to the various degrees of maturity, strength, and
development of the living instruments of labour, thus conducing to exploitation of women and children,
yet this tendency as a whole is wrecked on the habits and the resistance of the male labourers. Although
the splitting up of handicrafts lowers the cost of forming the workman, and thereby lowers his value, yet
for the more difficult detail work, a longer apprenticeship is necessary, and, even where it would be
superfluous, is jealously insisted upon by the workmen. In England, for instance, we find the laws of
apprenticeship, with their seven years' probation, in full force down to the end of the manufacturing
period; and they are not thrown on one side till the advent of Modern Industry. Since handicraft skill is



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (16 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

the foundation of manufacture, and since the mechanism of manufacture as a whole possesses no
framework, apart from the labourers themselves, capital is constantly compelled to wrestle with the
insubordination of the workmen. "By the infirmity of human nature," says friend Ure, "it happens that the
more skilful the workman, the more self-willed and intractable he is apt to become, and of course the less
fit a component of a mechanical system in which ... he may do great damage to the whole." f611 Hence
throughout the whole manufacturing period there runs the complaint of want of discipline among the
workmen. f621 And had we not the testimony of contemporary writers, the simple facts, that during the
period between the 16th century and the epoch of Modern Industry, capital failed to become the master
of the whole disposable working-time of the manufacturing labourers, that manufactures are short-lived,
and change their locality from one country to another with the emigrating or immigrating workmen, these
facts would speak volumes. "Order must in one way or another be established," exclaims in 1770 the
oft-cited author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce." "Order," re-echoes Dr. Andrew Ure 66 years
later, "Order" was wanting in manufacture based on "the scholastic dogma of division of labour," and
"Arkwright created order."

At the same time manufacture was unable, either to seize upon the production of society to its full extent,
or to revolutionise that production to its very core. It towered up as an economic work of art, on the
broad foundation of the town handicrafts, and of the rural domestic industries. At a given stage in its
development, the narrow technical basis on which manufacture rested, came into conflict with
requirements of production that were created by manufacture itself.

One of its most finished creations was the workshop for the production of the instruments of labour
themselves, including especially the complicated mechanical apparatus then already employed. A
machine-factory, says Ure, "displayed the division of labour in manifold gradations the file, the drill, the
lathe, having each its different workman in the order of skill." (P. 21.) This workshop, the product of the
division of labour in manufacture, produced in its turn machines. It is they that sweep away the
handicraftsman's work as the regulating principle of social production. Thus, on the one hand, the
technical reason for the life-long annexation of the workman to a detail function is removed. On the other
hand, the fetters that this same principle laid on the dominion of capital, fall away.



Footnotes

£11 To give a more modern instance: The silk spinning and weaving of Lyon and Nimes "est toute
patriarcale; elle emploie beaucoup de femmes et d'enfants, mais sans les epuiser ni les corrompre; elle les
laisse dans leur belles valises de la Drome, du Var, de I'lsere, de Vaucluse, pour y elever des vers et
devider leurs cocons; jamais elle n'entre dans une veritable fabrique. Pour etre aussi bien observe ... le
principe de la division du travail s'y revet d'un caractere special. II y a bien des devideuses, des
moulineurs, des teinturiers, des encolleurs, puis des tisserands; mais ils ne sont pas reunis dans un meme
etablissement, ne dependent pas d'un meme maitre, tous ils sont independants" (A. Blanqui: "Cours,
d'Econ. Industrielle." Recueilli par A. Blaise. Paris, 1838-39, p. 79.) Since Blanqui wrote this, the various
independent labourers have, to some extent, been united in factories. [And since Marx wrote the above,
the power-loom has invaded these factories, and is now 1886 rapidly superseding the hand-loom. (Added
in the 4th German edition. The Krefeld silk industry also has its tale to tell anent this subject.) F. E.]



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (17 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

\2] The more any manufacture of much variety shall be distributed and assigned to different artists, the
same must needs be better done and with greater expedition, with less loss of time and labour." ("The
Advantages of the East India Trade," Lond., 1720, p. 71.)

[31 "Easy labour is transmitted skill." (Th. Hodgskin, "Popular Political Economy," p. 48.)

[4J "The arts also have ... in Egypt reached the requisite degree of perfection. For it is the only country
where artificers may not in any way meddle with the affairs of another class of citizens, but must follow
that calling alone which by law is hereditary in their clan.... In other countries it is found that tradesmen
divide their attention between too many objects. At one time they try agriculture, at another they take to
commerce, at another they busy themselves with two or three occupations at once. In free countries, they
mostly frequent the assemblies of the people.... In Egypt, on the contrary, every artificer is severely
punished if he meddles with affairs of State, or carries on several trades at once. Thus there is nothing to
disturb their application to their calling.... Moreover, since, they inherit from their forefathers numerous
rules, they are eager to discover fresh advantages" (Diodorus Siculus: Bibl. Hist. I. 1. c, 74.)

[51 "Historical and descriptive account of Brit. India, &c," by Hugh Murray and James Wilson, &c,
Edinburgh 1832, v. II., p. 449. The Indian loom is upright, i.e., the warp is stretched vertically.

[61 Darwin in his epoch-making work on the origin of species, remarks, with reference to the natural
organs of plants and animals: "So long as one and the same organ has different kinds of work to perform,
a ground for its changeability may possibly be found in this, that natural selection preserves or
suppresses each small variation of form less carefully than if that organ were destined for one special
purpose alone. Thus, knives that are adapted to cut all sorts of things, may, on the whole, be of one
shape; but an implement destined to be used exclusively in one way must have a different shape for every
different use."

[71 In the year 1854 Geneva produced 80,000 watches, which is not one-fifth of the production in the
Canton of Neufchatel. La Chaux-de-Fond alone, which we may look upon as a huge watch manufactory,
produces yearly twice as many as Geneva. From 1850-61 Geneva produced 720,000 watches. See
"Report from Geneva on the Watch Trade" in "Reports by H. M.'s Secretaries of Embassy and Legation
on the Manufactures, Commerce, &c, No. 6, 1863." The want of connexion alone, between the processes
into which the production of articles that merely consist of parts fitted together is split up, makes it very
difficult to convert such a manufacture into a branch of modem industry carried on by machinery; but in
the case of a watch there are two other impediments in addition, the minuteness and delicacy of its parts,
and its character as an article of luxury. Hence their variety, which is such, that in the best London
houses scarcely a dozen watches are made alike in the course of a year. The watch manufactory of
Messrs. Vacheron & Constantin, in which machinery has been employed with success, produces at the
most three or four different varieties of size and form.

[81 In watchmaking, that classical example of heterogeneous manufacture, we may study with great
accuracy the above-mentioned differentiation and specialisation of the instruments of labour caused by
the sub-division of handicrafts.

[9J "In so close a cohabitation of the people, the carriage must needs be less." ("The Advantages of the
East India Trade," p. 106.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (18 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

f 101 "The isolation of the different stages of manufacture, consequent upon the employment of manual
labour, adds immensely to the cost of production, the loss mainly arising from the mere removals from
one process to another." ("The Industry of Nations." Lond., 1855, Part II, p. 200.)

fill "It (the division of labour) produces also an economy of time by separating the work into its
different branches, all of which may be carried on into execution at the same moment.... By carrying on
all the different processes at once, which an individual must have executed separately, it becomes
possible to produce a multitude of pins completely finished in the same time as a single pin might have
been either cut or pointed." (Dugald Stewart, 1. c, p. 319.)

fl21 "The more variety of artists to every manufacture... the greater the order and regularity of every
work, the same must needs be done in less time, the labour must be less.' ("The Advantages," &c, p. 68.)

f 131 Nevertheless, the manufacturing system, in many branches of industry, attains this result but very
imperfectly, because it knows not how to control with certainty the general chemical and physical
conditions of the process of production.

f 141 "When (from the peculiar nature of the produce of each manufactory), the number of processes into
which it is most advantageous to divide it is ascertained, as well as the number of individuals to be
employed, then all other manufactories which do not employ a direct multiple of this number will
produce the article at a greater cost.... Hence arises one of the causes of the great size of manufacturing
establishments." (C. Babbage. 'On the Economy of Machinery," 1st ed. London. 1832. Ch. xxi, pp.
172-73.)

f 151 In England, the melting-furnace is distinct from the glass-furnace in which the glass is manipulated.
In Belgium, one and the same furnace serves for both processes.

f 161 This can be seen from W. Petty, John Bellers, Andrew Yarranton, "The Advantages of the East India
Trade," and J. Vanderlint, not to mention others.

f 171 Towards the end of the 16th century, mortars and sieves were still used in France for pounding and
washing ores.

f 181 The whole history of the development of machinery can be traced in the history of the corn mill. The
factory in England is still a "mill". In German technological works of the first decade of this century, the
term "Muhle" is still found in use, not only for all machinery driven by the forces of Nature, but also for
all manufactures where apparatus in the nature of machinery is applied.

f 191 As will be seen more in detail in the fourth book of this work, Adam Smith has not established a
single new proposition relating to division of labour. What, however, characterises him as the political
economist par excellence of the period of Manufacture, is the stress he lays on division of labour. The
subordinate part which he assigns to machinery gave occasion in the early days of modern mechanical
industry to the polemic of Lauderdale, and, at a later period, to that of Ure. A. Smith also confounds
differentiation of the instruments of labour, in which the detail labourers themselves took an active part,
with the invention of machinery; in this latter, it is not the workmen in manufactories, but learned men,
handicraftsman, and even peasants (Brindley), who play a part.

f2Q1 "The master manufacturer, by dividing the work to be executed into different processes, each



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (19 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

requiring different degrees of skill or of force, can purchase exactly that precise quantity of both which is
necessary for each process; whereas, if the whole work were executed by one workman, that person must
possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult, and sufficient strength to execute the most laborious
of the operations into which the article is divided." (Ch. Babbage, 1. c, ch. xix.)

f211 For instance, abnormal development of some muscles, curvature of bones, &c.

f221 The question put by one of the Inquiry Commissioners, How the young persons are kept steadily to
their work, is very correctly answered by Mr. Wm. Marshall, the general manager of a glass
manufactory: "They cannot well neglect their work; when they once begin, they must go on; they are just
the same as parts of a machine." ("Children's Empl. Comm.," 4th Rep., 1865, p. 247.)

f231 Dr. Ure, in his apotheosis of Modern Mechanical Industry, brings out the peculiar character of
manufacture more sharply than previous economists, who had not his polemical interest in the matter,
and more sharply even than his contemporaries Babbage, e.g., who, though much his superior as a
mathematician and mechanician, treated mechanical industry from the standpoint of manufacture alone.
Ure says, "This appropriation ... to each, a workman of appropriate value and cost was naturally
assigned, forms the very essence of division of labour." On the other hand, he describes this division as
"adaptation of labour to the different talents of men," and lastly, characterises the whole manufacturing
system as "a system for the division or gradation of labour," as "the division of labour into degrees of
skill," &c. (Ure, 1. c, pp. 19-23 passim.)

f241 "Each handicraftsman being ... enabled to perfect himself by practice in one point, became ... a
cheaper workman." (Ure, 1. c, p. 19.)

f251 "Division of labour proceeds from the separation of professions the most widely different to that
division, where several labourers divide between them the preparation of one and the same product, as in
manufacture." (Storch: "Cours d'Econ. Pol.," Paris Edn. 1. 1., p. 173.) "Nous rencontrons chez les peuples
parvenus a un certain degre de civilisation trois genres de divisions d'industrie: la premiere, que nous
nommerons generate, amene la distinction des producteurs en agriculteurs, manufacturiers et
commercants, elle se rapporte aux trois principales branches d'industrie nationale; la seconder qu'on
pourrait appeler speciale, est la division de chaque genre d'industrie en especes ... la troisieme division
d'industrie, celle enfin qu'on devrait qualifier de division de la besogne on de travail proprement dit, est
celle qui s'etablit dans les arts et les metiers separes ... qui s'etablit dans la plupart des manufactures et
des ateliers." (Skarbek, 1. c, pp. 84, 85.)

f261 Note to the third edition. Subsequent very searching study of the primitive condition of man, led the
author to the conclusion, that it was not the family that originally developed into the tribe, but that, on the
contrary, the tribe was the primitive and spontaneously developed form of human association, on the
basis of blood relationship, and that out of the first incipient loosening of the tribal bonds, the many and
various forms of the family were afterwards developed. F. E.

f271 Sir James Steuart is the economist who has handled this subject best. How little his book, which
appeared ten years before the "Wealth of Nations," is known, even at the present time, may be judged
from the fact that the admirers of Malthus do not even know that the first edition of the latter's work on
population contains, except in the purely declamatory part, very little but extracts from Steuart, and in a
less degree, from Wallace and Townsend.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (20 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

\2S] "There is a certain density of population which is convenient, both for social intercourse, and for
that combination of powers by which the produce of labour is increased." (James Mill, 1. c, p. 50.) "As
the number of labourers increases, the productive power of society augments in the compound ratio of
that increase, multiplied by the effects of the division of labour." (Th. Hodgskin, 1. c, pp. 125, 126.)

f291 In consequence of the great demand for cotton after 1861, the production of cotton, in some thickly
populated districts of India, was extended at the expense of rice cultivation. In consequence there arose
local famines, the defective means of communication not permitting the failure of rice in one district to
be compensated by importation from another.

r301 Thus the fabrication of shuttles formed as early as the 17th century, a special branch of industry in
Holland.

f3 11 Whether the woollen manufacture of England is not divided into several parts or branches
appropriated to particular places, where they are only or principally manufactured; fine cloths in
Somersetshire, coarse in Yorkshire, long ells at Exeter, soies at Sudbury, crapes at Norwich, linseys at
Kendal, blankets at Whitney, and so forth." (Berkeley: "The Querist," 1751, § 520.)

f321 A. Ferguson: "History of Civil Society." Edinburgh, 1767; Part iv, sect, ii., p. 285.

f331 In manufacture proper, he says, the division of labour appears to be greater, because "those
employed in every different branch of the work can often be collected into the same workhouse, and
placed at once under the view of the spectator. In those great manufactures, (!) on the contrary, which are
destined to supply the great wants of the great body of the people, every different branch of the work
employs so great a number of workmen, that it is impossible to collect them all into the same workhouse
... the division is not near so obvious." (A. Smith: "Wealth of Nations," bk. i, ch. i.) The celebrated
passage in the same chapter that begins with the words, "Observe the accommodation of the most
common artificer or day-labourer in a civilised and thriving country," &c, and then proceeds to depict
what an enormous number and variety of industries contribute to the satisfaction of the wants of an
ordinary labourer, is copied almost word for word from B. de Mandeville's Remarks to his "Fable of the
Bees, or Private Vices, Publick Benefits." (First ed., without the remarks, 1706; with the remarks, 1714.)

f341 "There is no longer anything which we can call the natural reward of individual labour. Each
labourer produces only some part of a whole, and each part, having no value or utility in itself, there is
nothing on which the labourer can seize, and say: It is my product, this I will keep to myself." ("Labour
Defended against the Claims of Capital." Lond., 1825, p. 25.) The author of this admirable work is the
Th. Hodgskin I have already cited.

f351 This distinction between division of labour in society and in manufacture, was practically illustrated
to the Yankees. One of the new taxes devised at Washington during the civil war, was the duty of 6% "on
all industrial products." Question: What is an industrial product? Answer of the legislature: A thing is
produced "when it is made," and it is made when it is ready for sale. Now, for one example out of many.
The New York and Philadelphia manufacturers had previously been in the habit of "making" umbrellas
with all their belongings. But since an umbrella is a mixtum compositum of very heterogeneous parts, by
degrees these parts became the products of various separate industries, carried on independently in
different places. They entered as separate commodities into the umbrella manufactory, where they were
fitted together. The Yankees have given to articles thus fitted together, the name of "assembled articles,"



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (21 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

a name they deserve, for being an assemblage of taxes. Thus the umbrella "assembles," first, 6% on the
price of each of its elements, and a further 6% on its own total price.

f361 "On peut... etablir en regie generate, que moins l'autorite preside a la division du travail dans
l'interieur de la societe, plus la division du travail se developpe dans l'interieur de l'atelier, et plus elle y
est soumise a l'autorite d'un seul. Ainsi l'autorite dans l'atelier et celle dans la societe, par rapport a la
division du travail, sont en raison inverse l'une de I'autre." (Karl Marx, "Misere," &c, pp. 130-131.)

[371 Lieut.-Col. Mark Wilks: "Historical Sketches of the South of India." Lond., 1810-17, v. I., pp.
1 1 8-20. A good description of the various forms of the Indian communities is to be found in George
Campbell's "Modern India." Lond., 1852.

f381 "Under this simple form ... the inhabitants of the country have lived from time immemorial. The
boundaries of the villages have been but seldom altered; and though the villages themselves have been
sometimes injured, and even desolated by war, famine, and disease, the same name, the same limits, the
same interests, and even the same families, have continued for ages. The inhabitants give themselves no
trouble about the breaking up and division of kingdoms; while the village remains entire, they care not to
what power it is transferred, or to what sovereign it devolves; its Internal economy remains unchanged."
(Th. Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. Gov. of Java: "The History of Java." Lond., 1817, Vol. I., p. 285.)

f391 "It is not sufficient that the capital" (the writer should have said the necessary means of subsistence
and of production) "required for the subdivision of handicrafts should be in readiness in the society: it
must also be accumulated in the hands of the employers in sufficiently large quantities to enable them to
conduct their operations on a large scale.... The more the division increases, the more does the constant
employment of a given number of labourers require a greater outlay of capital in tools, raw material,
&c." (Storch: "Cours d'Econ. Polit." Paris Ed., 1. 1., pp. 250, 251.) "La concentration des instruments de
production et la division du travail sont aussi inseparables l'une de I'autre que le sont, dans le regime
politique, la concentration des pouvoirs publics et la division des interets prives." (Karl Marx, 1. c, p.
134.)

KOI Dugald Stewart calls manufacturing labourers "living automatons ... employed in the details of the
work." (I.e., p. 318.)

f411 In corals, each individual is, in fact, the stomach of the whole group; but it supplies the group with
nourishment, instead of, like the Roman patrician, withdrawing it.

f421 "L'ouvrier qui porte dans ses bras tout un metier, peut aller partout exercer son industrie et trouver
des moyens de subsister: I'autre (the manufacturing labourer) n'est qu'un accessoire qui, separe de ses
confreres, n'a plus ni capacite, ni independance, et qui se trouve force d'accepter la loi qu'on juge a
propos de lui imposer." (Storch, 1. c, Petersb. edit., 1815, 1. 1., p. 204.)

f431 A. Ferguson, 1. c, p. 281: "The former may have gained what the other has lost."

f441 "The man of knowledge and the productive labourer come to be widely divided from each other, and
knowledge, instead of remaining the handmaid of labour in the hand of the labourer to increase his
productive powers ... has almost everywhere arrayed itself against labour ... systematically deluding and
leading them (the labourers) astray in order to render their muscular powers entirely mechanical and
obedient." (W. Thompson: "An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth." London, 1824,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (22 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

p. 274.)

[451 A. Ferguson, 1. c, p. 280.

f461 J. D. Tuckett: "A History of the Past and Present State of the Labouring Population." Lond., 1846.

f471 A. Smith: "Wealth of Nations," Bk. v., ch. i, art. ii. Being a pupil of A. Ferguson who showed the
disadvantageous effects of division of labour, Adam Smith was perfectly clear on this point. In the
introduction to his work, where he ex professo praises division of labour, he indicates only in a cursory
manner that it is the source of social inequalities. It is not till the 5th Book, on the Revenue of the State,
that he reproduces Ferguson. In my "Misere de la Philosophic," I have sufficiently explained the
historical connexion between Ferguson, A. Smith, Lemontey, and Say, as regards their criticisms of
Division of Labour, and have shown, for the first time, that Division of Labour as practised in
manufactures, is a specific form of the capitalist mode of production.

f481 Ferguson had already said, 1. c, p. 281: "And thinking itself, in this age of separations, may become
a peculiar craft."

f491 G. Gamier, vol. V. of his translation of A. Smith, pp. 4-5.

[501 Ramazzini, professor of practical medicine at Padua, published in 1713 his work "De morbis
artificum," which was translated into French 1781, reprinted 1841 in the "Encyclopedic des Sciences
Medicales. 7me Dis. Auteurs Classiques." The period of Modern Mechanical Industry has, of course,
very much enlarged his catalogue of labour's diseases. See "Hygiene physique et morale de l'ouvrier dans
les grandes villes en general et dans la ville de Lyon en particulier. Par le Dr. A. L. Fonteret, Paris,
1858," and "Die Krankheiten, welche verschiednen Standen, Altern und Geschlechtern eigenthiimlich
sind. 6 Vols. Ulm, 1860," and others. In 1854 the Society of Arts appointed a Commission of Inquiry into
industrial pathology. The list of documents collected by this commission is to be seen in the catalogue of
the "Twickenham Economic Museum." Very important are the official "Reports on Public Health." See
also Eduard Reich, M. D. "Ueber die Entartung des Menschen," Erlangen, 1868.

f511 (D. Urquhart: "Familiar Words." Lond., 1855, p. 119.) Hegel held very heretical views on division
of labour. In his "Rechtsphilosophie" he says: "By well educated men we understand in the first instance,
those who can do everything that others do."

f521 The simple belief in the inventive genius exercised a priori by the individual capitalist in division of
labour, exists now-a-days only among German professors, of the stamp of Herr Roscher, who, to
recompense the capitalist from whose Jovian head division of labour sprang ready formed, dedicates to
him "various wages" (diverse Arbeitslohne). The more or less extensive application of division of labour
depends on length of purse, not on greatness of genius.

f531 The older writers, like Petty and the anonymous author of "Advantages of the East India Trade,"
bring out the capitalist character of division of labour as applied in manufacture more than A. Smith
does.

f541 Amongst the moderns may be excepted a few writers of the 18th century, like Beccaria and James
Harris, who with regard to division of labour almost entirely follow the ancients. Thus, Beccaria:
"Ciascuno prova coll'esperienza, che applicando la mano e l'ingegno sempre alio stesso genere di opere e



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (23 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

di produtte, egli piu facili, piu abbondanti e migliori ne traca risultati, di quello che se ciascuno
isolatamente le cose tutte a se necessarie soltanto facesse.... Dividendosi in tal maniera per la comune e
privata utilita gli uomini in varie classi e condizioni." (Cesare Beccaria: "Elementi di Econ: Pubblica,"
ed. Custodi, Parte Moderna, t. xi, p. 29.) James Harris, afterwards Earl of Malmesbury, celebrated for the
"Diaries" of his embassy at St. Petersburg, says in a note to his "Dialogue Concerning Happiness," Lond.,
1741, reprinted afterwards in "Three Treatises, 3 Ed., Lond., 1772: "The whole argument to prove society
natural (i.e., by division of employments) ... is taken from the second book of Plato's Republic."

[551 Thus, in the Odyssey xiv., 228, [Greek: "Alios gar t'alloisin aner epiterpetai ergois"] and
Archilochus in Sextus Empiricus, [greek: "alios alio ep' ergo kardien iainetai".]

[561 [Greek: "Poll' epistaio ergo, kakos d'epistano panta."] Every Athenian considered himself superior
as a producer of commodities to a Spartan; for the latter in time of war had men enough at his disposal
but could not command money, as Thucydides makes Pericles say in the speech inciting the Athenians to
the Peloponnesian war: [Greek: "somasite etoimoteroi oi autourgoi ton anthropon e kremasi polemein"]
(Thuc: 1, 1, c. 41.) Nevertheless, even with regard to material production, [Greek: autarkeia], as opposed
to division of labour remained their ideal, [Greek: "par' on gar to, eu, para touton kai to autarkes."] It
should be mentioned here that at the date of the fall of the 30 Tyrants there were still not 5,000 Athenians
without landed property.

[571 With Plato, division of labour within the community is a development from the multifarious
requirements, and the limited capacities of individuals. The main point with him is, that the labourer
must adapt himself to the work, not the work to the labourer; which latter is unavoidable, if he carries on
several trades at once, thus making one or the other of them subordinate. [Greek: "Ou gar ethelei to
prattomenon ten tou prattonios scholen perimenein, all' anagke ton prattonta to prattomeno epakoloothein
me en parergou merei. Anagke. Ek de touton pleio te ekasta gignetai kai kallion kai raon, otan eis en kaia
physin kai en kairo scholen ton allon agon, pratte."] (Rep. 1. 2. Ed. Baiter, Orelli, &c.) So in Thucydides,
1. c, c. 142: "Seafaring is an art like any other, and cannot, as circumstances require, be carried on as a
subsidiary occupation; nay, other subsidiary occupations cannot be carried on alongside of this one." If
the work, says Plato, has to wait for the labourer, the critical point in the process is missed and the article
spoiled, [Greek: "ergou kairon diollytai."] The same Platonic idea is found recurring in the protest of the
English bleachers against the clause in the Factory Act that provides fixed mealtimes for all operatives.
Their business cannot wait the convenience of the workmen, for "in the various operations of singeing,
washing, bleaching, mangling, calendering, and dyeing, none of them can be stopped at a given moment
without risk of damage ... to enforce the same dinner hour for all the workpeople might occasionally
subject valuable goods to the risk of danger by incomplete operations." Le platonisme ou va-t-il se
nicher!

[581 Xenophon says, it is not only an honour to receive food from the table of the King of Persia, but
such food is much more tasty than other food. "And there is nothing wonderful in this, for as the other
arts are brought to special perfection in the great towns, so the royal food is prepared in a special way.
For in the small towns the same man makes bedsteads, doors, ploughs, and tables: often, too, he builds
houses into the bargain, and is quite content if he finds custom sufficient for his sustenance. It is
altogether impossible for a man who does so many things to do them all well. But in the great towns,
where each can find many buyers, one trade is sufficient to maintain the man who carries it on. Nay,
there is often not even need of one complete trade, but one man makes shoes for men, another for
women. Here and there one man gets a living by sewing, another by cutting out shoes; one does nothing

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (24 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fourteen

but cut out clothes, another nothing but sew the pieces together. It follows necessarily then, that he who
does the simplest kind of work, undoubtedly does it better than anyone else. So it is with the art of
cooking." (Xen. Cyrop. I. viii., c. 2.) Xenophon here lays stress exclusively upon the excellence to be
attained in use-value, although he well knows that the gradations of the division of labour depend on the
extent of the market.

f591 He (Busiris) divided them all into special castes ... commanded that the same individuals should
always carry on the same trade, for he knew that they who change their occupations become skilled in
none; but that those who constantly stick to one occupation bring it to the highest perfection. In truth, we
shall also find that in relation to the arts and handicrafts, they have outstripped their rivals more than a
master does a bungler; and the contrivances for maintaining the monarchy and the other institutions of
their State are so admirable that the most celebrated philosophers who treat of this subject praise the
constitution of the Egyptian State above all others. (Isocrates, Busiris, c. 8.)

r601 Cf. Diodorus Siculus.

[61] Ure, 1. c, p. 20.

f621 This is more the case in England than in France, and more in France than in Holland.



Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Fifteen: Machinery and Modern Industry
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch14.htm (25 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:17:12]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part IV:

Production of Relative Surplus-Value



CHAPTER FIFTEEN:

MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY



Contents

Section 1 - The Development of Machinery

Section 2 - The Value Transferred by Machinery to the Product

Section 3 - The Proximate Effects of Machinery on the Workman

A. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-Power by Capital. The Employment of Women and Children

B. Prolongation of the Working-Day

C. Intensification of Labour

Section 4 - The Factory

Section 5 - The Strife Between Workman and Machine

Section 6 - The Theory of Compensation as Regards the Workpeople Displaced by Machinery

Section 7 - Repulsion and Attraction of Workpeople by the Factory System. Crises in the Cotton Trade

Section 8 - Revolution Effected in Manufacture, Handicrafts, and Domestic Industry by Modern Industry

A. Overthrow of Co-operation Based on Handicraft and on the Division of Labour

B. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries

C. Modern Manufacture

D. Modern Domestic Industry

E. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. The Hastening of this Revolution by the
Application of the Factory Acts to those Industries

Section 9 - The Factory Acts. Sanitary and Educational Clauses of the same. Their General Extension in England
Section 10 - Modern Industry and Agriculture

SECTION 1

THE DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINERY



John Stuart Mill says in his "Principles of Political Economy": "It is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the
day's toil of any human being." £11 That is, however, by no means the aim of the capitalistic application of machinery. Like every other increase
in the productiveness of labour, machinery is intended to cheapen commodities, and, by shortening that portion of the working-day, in which the
labourer works for himself, to lengthen the other portion that he gives, without an equivalent, to the capitalist. In short, it is a means for
producing surplus-value.

In manufacture, the revolution in the mode of production begins with the labour-power, in modern industry it begins with the instruments of
labour. Our first inquiry then is, how the instruments of labour are converted from tools into machines, or what is the difference between a
machine and the implements of a handicraft? We are only concerned here with striking and general characteristics; for epochs in the history of
society are no more separated from each other by hard and fast lines of demarcation, than are geological epochs.

Mathematicians and mechanicians, and in this they are followed by a few English economists, call a tool a simple machine, and a machine a
complex tool. They see no essential difference between them, and even give the name of machine to the simple mechanical powers, the lever, the
inclined plane, the screw, the wedge, &c. £21 As a matter of fact, every machine is a combination of those simple powers, no matter how

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (1 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

they may be disguised. From the economic standpoint this explanation is worth nothing, because the historical element is wanting. Another
explanation of the difference between tool and machine is that in the case of a tool, man is the motive power, while the motive power of a
machine is something different from man, as, for instance, an animal, water, wind, and so on.[3J According to this, a plough drawn by oxen,
which is a contrivance common to the most different epochs, would be a machine, while Claussen's circular loom, which, worked by a single
labourer, weaves 96,000 picks per minute, would be a mere tool. Nay, this very loom, though a tool when worked by hand, would, if worked by
steam, be a machine. And since the application of animal power is one of man's earliest inventions, production by machinery would have
preceded production by handicrafts. When in 1735, John Wyatt brought out his spinning machine, and began the industrial revolution of the 18th
century, not a word did he say about an ass driving it instead of a man, and yet this part fell to the ass. He described it as a machine "to spin
without fingers." [4]

All fully developed machinery consists of three essentially different parts, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechanism, and finally the
tool or working machine. The motor mechanism is that which puts the whole in motion. It either generates its own motive power, like the
steam-engine, the caloric engine, the electromagnetic machine, &c, or it receives its impulse from some already existing natural force, like the
water-wheel from a head of water, the wind-mill from wind, &c. The transmitting mechanism, composed of fly-wheels, shafting, toothed wheels,
pullies, straps, ropes, bands, pinions, and gearing of the most varied kinds, regulates the motion, changes its form, where necessary, as for
instance, from linear to circular, and divides and distributes it among the working machines. These two first parts of the whole mechanism are
there, solely for putting the working machines in motion, by means of which motion the subject of labour is seized upon and modified as desired.
The tool or working machine is that part of the machinery with which the industrial revolution of the 18th century started. And to this day it
constantly serves as such a starting-point, whenever a handicraft, or a manufacture, is turned into an industry carried on by machinery.

On a closer examination of the working machine proper, we find in it, as a general rule, though often, no doubt, under very altered forms, the
apparatus and tools used by the handicraftsman or manufacturing workman; with this difference, that instead of being human implements, they
are the implements of a mechanism, or mechanical implements. Either the entire machine is only a more or less altered mechanical edition of the
old handicraft tool, as, for instance, the power-loom,[5] or the working parts fitted in the frame of the machine are old acquaintances, as spindles
are in a mule, needles in a stocking-loom, saws in a sawing-machine, and knives in a chopping machine. The distinction between these tools and
the body proper of the machine, exists from their very birth; for they continue for the most part to be produced by handicraft, or by manufacture,
and are afterwards fitted into the body of the machine, which is the product of machinery. [6J The machine proper is therefore a mechanism that,
after being set in motion, performs with its tools the same operations that were formerly done by the workman with similar tools. Whether the
motive power is derived from man, or from some other machine, makes no difference in this respect. From the moment that the tool proper is
taken from m-an, and fitted into a mechanism, a machine takes the place of a mere implement. The difference strikes one at once, even in those
cases where man himself continues to be the prime mover. The number of implements that he himself can use simultaneously, is limited by the
number of his own natural instruments of production, by the number of his bodily organs. In Germany, they tried at first to make one spinner
work two spinning-wheels, that is, to work simultaneously with both hands and both feet. This was too difficult. Later, a treddle spinning-wheel
with two spindles was invented, but adepts in spinning, who could spin two threads at once, were almost as scarce as two-headed men. The
Jenny, on the other hand, even at its very birth, spun with 12-18 spindles, and the stocking-loom knits with many thousand needles at once. The
number of tools that a machine can bring into play simultaneously, is from the very first emancipated from the organic limits that hedge in the
tools of a handicraftsman.

In many manual implements the distinction between man as mere motive power, and man as the workman or operator properly so called, is
brought into striking contrast. For instance, the foot is merely the prime mover of the spinning-wheel, while the hand, working with the spindle,
and drawing and twisting, performs the real operation of spinning. It is this last part of the handicraftsman's implement that is first seized upon
by the industrial revolution, leaving to the workman, in addition to his new labour of watching the machine with his eyes and correcting its
mistakes with his hands, the merely mechanical part of being the moving power. On the other hand, implements, in regard to which man has
always acted as a simple motive power, as, for instance, by turning the crank of a mill, £71 by pumping, by moving up and down the arm of a
bellows, by pounding with a mortar, &c, such implements soon call for the application of animals, water [8} and wind as motive powers. Here
and there, long before the period of manufacture, and also, to some extent, during that period, these implements pass over into machines, but
without creating any revolution in the mode of production. It becomes evident, in the period of Modern Industry, that these implements, even
under their form of manual tools, are already machines. For instance, the pumps with which the Dutch, in 1836-7, emptied the Lake of Harlem,
were constructed on the principle of ordinary pumps; the only difference being, that their pistons were driven by cyclopean steam-engines,
instead of by men. The common and very imperfect bellows of the blacksmith is, in England, occasionally converted into a blowing-engine, by
connecting its arm with a steam-engine. The steam-engine itself, such as it was at its invention, during the manufacturing period at the close of
the 17th century, and such as it continued to be down to 1780, [9J did not give rise to any industrial revolution. It was, on the contrary, the
invention of machines that made a revolution in the form of steam-engines necessary. As soon as man, instead of working with an implement on
the subject of his labour, becomes merely the motive power of an implement-machine, it is a mere accident that motive power takes the disguise
of human muscle; and it may equally well take the form of wind, water or steam. Of course, this does not prevent such a change of form from
producing great technical alterations in the mechanism that was originally constructed to be driven by man alone. Now-a-days, all machines that
have their way to make, such as sewing-machines, bread-making machines, &c, are, unless from their very nature their use on a small scale is
excluded, constructed to be driven both by human and by purely mechanical motive power.

The machine, which is the starting-point of the industrial revolution, supersedes the workman, who handles a single tool, by a mechanism
operating with a number of similar tools, and set in motion by a single motive power, whatever the form of that power may be? [10] Here we
have the machine, but only as an elementary factor of production by machinery.

Increase in the size of the machine, and in the number of its working tools, calls for a more massive mechanism to drive it; and this mechanism
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (2 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

requires, in order to overcome its resistance, a mightier moving power than that of man, apart from the fact that man is a very imperfect
instrument for producing uniform continued motion. But assuming that he is acting simply as a motor, that a machine has taken the place of his
tool, it is evident that he can be replaced by natural forces. Of all the great motors handed down from the manufacturing period, horse-power is
the worst, partly because a horse has a head of his own, partly because he is costly, and the extent to which he is applicable in factories is very
restricted. [Ill Nevertheless the horse was extensively used during the infancy of Modern Industry. This is proved, as well by the complaints of
contemporary agriculturists, as by the term "horse-power," which has survived to this day as an expression for mechanical force.

Wind was too inconstant and uncontrollable, and besides, in England, the birthplace of Modern Industry, the use of water-power preponderated
even during the manufacturing period. In the 17th century attempts had already been made to turn two pairs of millstones with a single
water-wheel. But the increased size of the gearing was too much for the water-power, which had now become insufficient, and this was one of
the circumstances that led to a more accurate investigation of the laws of friction. In the same way the irregularity caused by the motive power in
mills that were put in motion by pushing and pulling a lever, led to the theory, and the application, of the fly-wheel, which afterwards plays so
important a part in Modern Industry. [121 In this way, during the manufacturing period, were developed the first scientific and technical elements
of Modern Mechanical Industry. Arkwright's throstle-spinning mill was from the very first turned by water. But for all that, the use of water, as
the predominant motive power, was beset with difficulties. It could not be increased at will, it failed at certain seasons of the year, and, above all,
it was essentially local. [131 Not till the invention of Watt's second and so-called double-acting steam-engine, was a prime mover found, that
begot its own force by the consumption of coal and water, whose power was entirely under man's control, that was mobile and a means of
locomotion, that was urban and not, like the waterwheel, rural, that permitted production to be concentrated in towns instead of, like the
water-wheels, being scattered up and down the country, [14] that was of universal technical application, and, relatively speaking, little affected in
its choice of residence by local circumstances. The greatness of Watt's genius showed itself in the specification of the patent that he took out in
April, 1784. In that specification his steam-engine is described, not as an invention for a specific purpose, but as an agent universally applicable
in Mechanical Industry. In it he points out applications, many of which, as for instance, the steam-hammer, were not introduced till half a
century later. Nevertheless he doubted the use of steam-engines in navigation. His successors, Boulton and Watt, sent to the exhibition of 1851
steam-engines of colossal size for ocean steamers.

As soon as tools had been converted from being manual implements of man into implements of a mechanical apparatus, of a machine, the motive
mechanism also acquired an independent form, entirely emancipated from the restraints of human strength. Thereupon the individual machine,
that we have hitherto been considering, sinks into a mere factor in production by machinery. One motive mechanism was now able to drive many
machines at once. The motive mechanism grows with the number of the machines that are turned simultaneously, and the transmitting
mechanism becomes a wide-spreading apparatus.

We now proceed to distinguish the co-operation of a number of machines of one kind from a complex system of machinery.

In the one case, the product is entirely made by a single machine, which performs all the various operations previously done by one
handicraftsman with his tool; as, for instance, by a weaver with his loom; or by several handicraftsman successively, either separately or as
members of a system of Manufacture. [151 For example, in the manufacture of envelopes, one man folded the paper with the folder, another laid
on the gum, a third turned the flap over, on which the device is impressed, a fourth embossed the device, and so on; and for each of these
operations the envelope had to change hands. One single envelope machine now performs all these operations at once, and makes more than
3,000 envelopes in an hour. In the London exhibition of 1862, there was an American machine for making paper cornets. It cut the paper, pasted,
folded, and finished 300 in a minute. Here, the whole process, which, when carried on as Manufacture, was split up into, and carried out by, a
series of operations, is completed by a single machine, working a combination of various tools. Now, whether such a machine be merely a
reproduction of a complicated manual implement, or a combination of various simple implements specialised by Manufacture, in either case, in
the factory, i.e., in the workshop in which machinery alone is used, we meet again with simple co-operation; and, leaving the workman out of
consideration for the moment, this co-operation presents itself to us, in the first instance, as the conglomeration in one place of similar and
simultaneously acting machines. Thus, a weaving factory is constituted of a number of power-looms, working side by side, and a sewing factory
of a number of sewing-machines all in the same building. But there is here a technical oneness in the whole system, owing to all the machines
receiving their impulse simultaneously, and in an equal degree, from the pulsations of the common prime mover, by the intermediary of the
transmitting mechanism; and this mechanism, to a certain extent, is also common to them all, since only particular ramifications of it branch off
to each machine. Just as a number of tools, then, form the organs of a machine, so a number of machines of one kind constitute the organs of the
motive mechanism.

A real machinery system, however, does not take the place of these independent machines, until the subject of labour goes through a connected
series of detail processes, that are carried out by a chain of machines of various kinds, the one supplementing the other. Here we have again the
co-operation by division of labour that characterises Manufacture; only now, it is a combination of detail machines. The special tools of the
various detail workmen, such as those of the beaters, cambers, spinners, &c, in the woollen manufacture, are now transformed into the tools of
specialised machines, each machine constituting a special organ, with a special function, in the system. In those branches of industry in which
the machinery system is first introduced, Manufacture itself furnishes, in a general way, the natural basis for the division, and consequent
organisation, of the process of production. [161 Nevertheless an essential difference at once manifests itself. In Manufacture it is the workmen
who, with their manual implements, must, either singly or in groups, carry on each particular detail process. If, on the one hand, the workman
becomes adapted to the process, on the other, the process was previously made suitable to the workman. This subjective principle of the division
of labour no longer exists in production by machinery. Here, the process as a whole is examined objectively, in itself, that is to say, without
regard to the question of its execution by human hands, it is analysed into its constituent phases; and the problem, how to execute each detail
process, and bind them all into a whole, is solved by the aid of machines, chemistry, &c. [171 But, of course, in this case also, theory must be
perfected by accumulated experience on a large scale. Each detail machine supplies raw material to the machine next in order; and since they are

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (3 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

all working at the same time, the product is always going through the various stages of its fabrication, and is also constantly in a state of
transition, from one phase to another. Just as in Manufacture, the direct co-operation of the detail labourers establishes a numerical proportion
between the special groups, so in an organised system of machinery, where one detail machine is constantly kept employed by another, a fixed
relation is established between their numbers, their size, and their speed. The collective machine, now an organised system of various kinds of
single machines, and of groups of single machines, becomes more and more perfect, the more the process as a whole becomes a continuous one,
i.e., the less the raw material is interrupted in its passage from its first phase to its last; in other words, the more its passage from one phase to
another is effected, not by the hand of man, but by the machinery itself. In Manufacture the isolation of each detail process is a condition
imposed by the nature of division of labour, but in the fully developed factory the continuity of those processes is, on the contrary, imperative.

A system of machinery, whether it reposes on the mere co-operation of similar machines, as in weaving, or on a combination of different
machines, as in spinning, constitutes in itself a huge automaton, whenever it is driven by a self-acting prime mover. But although the factory as a
whole be driven by its steam-engine, yet either some of the individual machines may require the aid of the workman for some of their
movements (such aid was necessary for the running in of the mule carriage, before the invention of the self-acting mule, and is still necessary in
fine-spinning mills); or, to enable a machine to do its work, certain parts of it may require to be handled by the workman like a manual tool; this
was the case in machine-makers' workshops, before the conversion of the slide rest into a self-actor. As soon as a machine executes, without
man's help, all the movements requisite to elaborate the raw material, needing only attendance from him, we have an automatic system of
machinery, and one that is susceptible of constant improvement in its details. Such improvements as the apparatus that stops a drawing frame,
whenever a sliver breaks, and the self-acting stop, that stops the power-loom so soon as the shuttle bobbin is emptied of weft, are quite modern
inventions. As an example, both of continuity of production, and of the carrying out of the automatic principle, we may take a modern paper
mill. In the paper industry generally, we may advantageously study in detail not only the distinctions between modes of production based on
different means of production, but also the connexion of the social conditions of production with those modes: for the old German paper-making
furnishes us with a sample of handicraft production; that of Holland in the 17th and of France in the 18th century with a sample of manufacturing
in the strict sense; and that of modern England with a sample of automatic fabrication of this article. Besides these, there still exist, in India and
China, two distinct antique Asiatic forms of the same industry.

An organised system of machines, to which motion is communicated by the transmitting mechanism from a central automaton, is the most
developed form of production by machinery. Here we have, in the place of the isolated machine, a mechanical monster whose body fills whole
factories, and whose demon power, at first veiled under the slow and measured motions of his giant limbs, at length breaks out into the fast and
furious whirl of his countless working organs.

There were mules and steam-engines before there were any labourers, whose exclusive occupation it was to make mules and steam-engines; just
as men wore clothes before there were such people as tailors. The inventions of Vaucanson, Arkwright, Watt, and others, were, however,
practicable, only because those inventors found, ready to hand, a considerable number of skilled mechanical workmen, placed at their disposal
by the manufacturing period. Some of these workmen were independent handicraftsman of various trades, others were grouped together in
manufactures, in which, as before-mentioned, division of labour was strictly carried out. As inventions increased in number, and the demand for
the newly discovered machines grew larger, the machine-making industry split up, more and more, into numerous independent branches, and
division of labour in these manufactures was more and more developed. Here, then, we see in Manufacture the immediate technical foundation
of Modem Industry. Manufacture produced the machinery, by means of which Modern Industry abolished the handicraft and manufacturing
systems in those spheres of production that it first seized upon. The factory system was therefore raised, in the natural course of things, on an
inadequate foundation. When the system attained to a certain degree of development, it had to root up this ready-made foundation, which in the
meantime had been elaborated on the old lines, and to build up for itself a basis that should correspond to its methods of production. Just as the
individual machine retains a dwarfish character, so long as it is worked by the power of man alone, and just as no system of machinery could be
properly developed before the steam-engine took the place of the earlier motive powers, animals, wind, and even water; so, too, Modern Industry
was crippled in its complete development, so long as its characteristic instrument of production, the machine, owed its existence to personal
strength and personal skill, and depended on the muscular development, the keenness of sight, and the cunning of hand, with which the detail
workmen in manufactures, arid the manual labourers in handicrafts, wielded their dwarfish implements' Thus, apart from the dearness of the
machines made in this way, a circumstance that is ever present to the mind of the capitalist, the expansion of industries carried on by means of
machinery, and the invasion by machinery of fresh branches of production, were dependent on the growth of a class of workmen, who, owing to
the almost artistic nature of their employment, could increase their numbers only gradually, and not by leaps and bounds. But besides this, at a
certain stage of its development, Modern Industry became technologically incompatible with the basis furnished for it by handicraft
and Manufacture. The increasing size of the prime movers, of the transmitting mechanism, and of the machines proper, the greater complication,
multiformity and regularity of the details of these machines, as they more and more departed from the model of those originally made by manual
labour, and acquired a form, untrammelled except by the conditions under which they worked, f 181 the perfecting of the automatic system, and
the use, every day more unavoidable, of a more refractory material, such as iron instead of wood-the solution of all these problems, which sprang
up by the force of circumstances, everywhere met with a stumbling-block in the personal restrictions, which even the collective labourer of
Manufacture could not break through, except to a limited extent. Such machines as the modern hydraulic press, the modern power-loom, and the
modern carding engine, could never have been furnished by Manufacture.

A radical change in the mode of production in one sphere of industry involves a similar change in other spheres. This happens at first in such
branches of industry as are connected together by being separate phases of a process, and yet are isolated by the social division of labour, in such
a way, that each of them produces an independent commodity. Thus spinning by machinery made weaving by machinery a necessity, and both
together made the mechanical and chemical revolution that took place in bleaching, printing, and dyeing, imperative. So too, on the other hand,
the revolution in cotton- spinning called forth the invention of the gin, for separating the seeds from the cotton fibre; it was only by means of this
invention, that the production of cotton became possible on the enormous scale at present required. [19] But more especially, the revolution in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (4 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

the modes of production of industry and agriculture made necessary a revolution in the general conditions of the social process of production,
i.e., in the means of communication and of transport. In a society whose pivot, to use an expression of Fourier, was agriculture on a small scale,
with its subsidiary domestic industries, and the urban handicrafts, the means of communication and transport were so utterly inadequate to the
productive requirements of the manufacturing period, with its extended division of social labour, its concentration of the instruments of labour,
and of the workmen, and its colonial markets, that they became in fact revolutionised. In the same way the means of communication and
transport handed down from the manufacturing period soon became unbearable trammels on Modern Industry, with its feverish haste of
production, its enormous extent, its constant flinging of capital and labour from one sphere of production into another, and its newly-created
connexions with the markets of the whole world. Hence, apart from the radical changes introduced in the construction of sailing vessels, the
means of communication and transport became gradually adapted to the modes of production of mechanical industry, by the creation of a system
of river steamers, railways, ocean steamers, and telegraphs. But the '.huge masses of iron that had now to be forged, to be welded, to be cut, to be
bored, and to be shaped, demanded, on their part, cyclopean machines, for the construction of which the methods of the manufacturing period
were utterly inadequate.

Modern Industry had therefore itself to take in hand the machine, its characteristic instrument of production, and to construct machines by
machines. It was not till it did this, that it built up for itself a fitting technical foundation, and stood on its own feet. Machinery, simultaneously
with the increasing use of it, in the first decades of this century, appropriated, by degrees, the fabrication of machines proper. But it was only
during the decade preceding 1866, that the construction of railways and ocean steamers on a stupendous scale called into existence the cyclopean
machines now employed in the construction of prime movers.

The most essential condition to the production of machines by machines was a prime mover capable of exerting any amount of force, and yet
under perfect control. Such a condition was already supplied by the steam-engine. But at the same time it was necessary to produce the
geometrically accurate straight lines, planes, circles, cylinders, cones, and spheres, required in the detail parts of the machines. This problem
Henry Maudsley solved in the first decade of this century by the invention of the slide rest, a tool that was soon made automatic, and in a
modified form was applied to other constructive machines besides the lathe, for which it was originally intended. This mechanical appliance
replaces, not some particular tool, but the hand itself, which produces a given form by holding and guiding the cutting tool along the iron or
other material operated upon. Thus it became possible to produce the forms of the individual parts of machinery "with a degree of ease,
accuracy, and speed, that no accumulated experience of the hand of the most skilled workman could give." [20]



If we now fix our attention on that portion of the machinery employed in the construction of machines, which constitutes the operating tool, we
find the manual implements re-appearing, but on a cyclopean scale. The operating part of the boring machine is an immense drill driven by a
steam-engine; without this machine, on the other hand, the cylinders of large steam-engines and of hydraulic presses could not be made. The
mechanical lathe is only a cyclopean reproduction of the ordinary foot-lathe; the planing machine, an iron carpenter, that works on iron with the
same tools that the human carpenter employs on wood; the instrument that, on the London wharves, cuts the veneers, is a gigantic razor; the tool
of the shearing machine, which shears iron as easily as a tailor's scissors cut cloth, is a monster pair of scissors; and the steam-hammer works
with an ordinary hammer head, but of such a weight that not Thor himself could wield it. [211 These steam-hammers are an invention of
Nasmyth, and there is one that weighs over 6 tons and strikes with a vertical fall of 7 feet, on an anvil weighing 36 tons. It is mere child's-play
for it to crush a block of granite into powder, yet it is no less capable of driving, with a succession of light taps, a nail into a piece of soft wood.
T221



The implements of labour, in the form of machinery, necessitate the substitution of natural forces for human force, and the conscious application
of science, instead of rule of thumb. In Manufacture, the organisation of the social labour-process is purely subjective; it is a combination of
detail labourers; in its machinery system, Modern Industry has a productive organism that is purely objective, in which the labourer becomes a
mere appendage to an already existing material condition of production. In simple co-operation, and even in that founded on division of labour,
the suppression of the isolated, by the collective, workman still appears to be more or less accidental. Machinery, with a few exceptions to be
mentioned later, operates only by means of associated labour, or labour in common. Hence the co-operative character of the labour-process is, in
the latter case, a technical necessity dictated by the instrument of labour itself.



SECTION 2

THE VALUE TRANSFERRED BY MACHINERY TO THE PRODUCT



We saw that the productive forces resulting from co-operation and division of labour cost capital nothing. They are natural forces of social
labour. So also physical forces, like steam, water, &c, when appropriated to productive processes, cost nothing. But just as a man requires lungs
to breathe with, so he requires something that is work of man's hand, in order to consume physical forces productively. A water-wheel is
necessary to exploit the force of water, and a steam-engine to exploit the elasticity of steam. Once discovered, the law of the deviation of the
magnetic needle in the field of an electric current, or the law of the magnetisation of iron, around which an electric current circulates, cost never
a penny. [231 But the exploitation of these laws for the purposesm of telegraphy, &c, necessitates a costly and extensive apparatus. The tool, as
we have seen, is not exterminated by the machine. From being a dwarf implement of the human organism, it expands and multiplies into the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (5 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

implement of a mechanism created by man. Capital now sets the labourer to work, not with a manual tool, but with a machine which itself
handles the tools. Although, therefore, it is clear at the first glance that, by incorporating both stupendous physical forces, and the natural
sciences, with the process of production, Modern Industry raises the productiveness of labour to an extraordinary degree, it is by no means
equally clear, that this increased productive force is not, on the other hand, purchased by an increased expenditure of labour. Machinery, like
every other component of constant capital, creates no new value, but yields up its own value to the product that it serves to beget. In so far as the
machine has value, and, in consequence, parts with value to the product, it forms an element in the value of that product. Instead of being
cheapened, the product is made dearer in proportion to the value of the machine. And it is clear as noon-day, that machines and systems of
machinery, the characteristic instruments of labour of Modem Industry, are incomparably more loaded with value than the implements used in
handicrafts and manufactures.

In the first place, it must be observed that the machinery, while always entering as a whole into the labour-process, enters into the
value-begetting process only by bits. It never adds more value than it loses, on an average, by wear and tear. Hence there is a great difference
between the value of a machine, and the value transferred in a given time by that machine to the product. The longer the life of the machine in
the labour-process, the greater is that difference. It is true, no doubt, as we have already seen, that every instrument of labour enters as a whole
into the labour-process, and only piece-meal, proportionally to its average daily loss by wear and tear, into the value-begetting process. But this
difference between the instrument as a whole and its daily wear and tear, is much greater in a machine than in a tool, because the machine, being
made from more durable material, has a longer life; because its employment, being regulated by strictly scientific laws, allows of greater
economy in the wear and tear of its parts, and in the materials it consumes; and lastly, because its field of production is incomparably larger than
that of a tool. After making allowance, both in the case of the machine and of the tool, for their average daily cost, that is for the value they
transmit to the product by their average daily wear and tear, and for their consumption of auxiliary substance, such as oil, coal, and so on, they
each do their work gratuitously, just like the forces furnished by Nature without the help of man. The greater the productive power of the
machinery compared with that of the tool, the greater is the extent of its gratuitous service compared with that of the tool. In Modern Industry
man succeeded for the first time in making the product of his past labour work on a large scale gratuitously, like the forces of Nature. [241



In treating of Co-operation and Manufacture, it was shown that certain general factors of production, such as buildings, are, in comparison with
the scattered means of production of the isolated workman, economised by being consumed in common, and that they therefore make the
product cheaper. In a system of machinery, not only is the framework of the machine consumed in common by its numerous operating
implements, but the prime mover, together with a part of the transmitting mechanism, is consumed in common by the numerous operative
machines.

Given the difference between the value of the machinery, and the value transferred by it in a day to the product, the extent to which this latter
value makes the product dearer, depends in the first instance, upon the size of the product; so to say, upon its area. Mr. Baynes, of Blackburn, in
a lecture published in 1858, estimates that "each real mechanical horse-power [251 will drive 450 self-acting mule spindles, with preparation, or
200 throstle spindles, or 15 looms for 40 inch cloth with the appliances for warping, sizing, &c." In the first case, it is the day's produce of 450
mule spindles, in the second, of 200 throstle spindles, in the third, of 15 power-looms, over which the daily cost of one horse-power, and the
wear and tear of the machinery set in motion by that power, are spread; so that only a very minute value is transferred by such wear and tear to a
pound of yarn or a yard of cloth. The same is the case with the steam-hammer mentioned above. Sin its daily wear and tear, its
coal-consumption, &c, are spread over the stupendous masses of iron hammered by it in a day, only a small value is added to a hundred weight
of iron; but that value would be very great, if the cyclopean instrument were employed in driving in nails.

Given a machine's capacity for work, that is, the number of its operating tools, or, where it is a question of force, their mass, the amount of its
product will depend on the velocity of its working parts, on the speed, for instance, of the spindles, or on the number of blows given by the
hammer in a minute. Many of these colossal hammers strike seventy times in a minute, and Ryder's patent machine for forging spindles with
small hammers gives as many as 700 strokes per minute.

Given the rate at which machinery transfers its value to the product, the amount of value so transferred depends on the total value of the
machinery. [261 The less labour it contains, the less value it imparts to the product. The less value it gives up, so much the more productive it is,
and so much the more its services approximate to those of natural forces. But the production of machinery by machinery lessens its value
relatively to its extension and efficacy.

An analysis and comparison of the prices of commodities produced by handicrafts or manufactures, and of the prices of the same commodities
produced by machinery, shows generally, that, in the product of machinery, the value due to the instruments of labour increases relatively, but
decreases absolutely. In other words, its absolute amount decreases, but its amount, relatively to the total value of the product, of a pound of
yarn, for instance, increases. [271

It is evident that whenever it costs as much labour to produce a machine as is saved by the employment of that machine, there is nothing but a
transposition of labour; consequently the total labour required to produce a commodity is not lessened or the productiveness of labour is not
increased. It is clear, however, that the difference between the labour a machine costs, and the labour it saves, in other words, that the degree of
its productiveness does not depend on the difference between its own value and the value of the implement it replaces. As long as the labour
spent on a machine, and consequently the portion of its value added to the product, remains smaller than the value added by the workman to the
product with his tool, there is always a difference of labour saved in favour of the machine. The productiveness of a machine is therefore
measured by the human labour-power it replaces. According to Mr. Baynes, 2 operatives are required for the 450 mule spindles, inclusive of
preparation machinery, [281 that are driven by one-horse power; each self-acting mule spindle, working ten hours, produces 13 ounces of yam
(average number of thickness); consequently 2 1/2 operatives spin weekly 365 5/8 lbs. of yarn. Hence, leaving waste on one side, 366 lbs. of
cotton absorb, during their conversion into yarn, only 150 hours' labour, or fifteen days' labour of ten hours each. But with a spinning-wheel,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (6 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

supposing the hand-spinner to produce thirteen ounces of yarn in sixty hours, the same weight of cotton would absorb 2,700 days' labour of ten
hours each, or 27,000 hours' labour. [291 Where blockprinting, the old method of printing calico by hand, has been superseded by machine
printing, a single machine prints, with the aid of one man or boy, as much calico of four colones in one hour, as it formerly took 200 men to do.
[301 Before Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin in 1793, the separation of the seed from a pound of cotton cost an average day's labour. By
means of his invention one negress was enabled to clean 100 lbs. daily; and since then, the efficacy of the gin has been considerably increased. A
pound of cotton wool, previously costing 50 cents to produce, included after that invention more unpaid labour, and was consequently sold with
greater profit, at 10 cents. In India they employ for separating the wool from the seed, an instrument, half machine, half tool, called a churka;
with this one man and a woman can clean 28 lbs. daily. With the churka invented some years ago by Dr. Forbes, one man and a boy produce 250
lbs. daily. If oxen, steam, or water, be used for driving it, only a few boys and girls as feeders are required. Sixteen of these machines driven by
oxen do as much work in a day as formerly 750 people did on an average. [311



As already stated, a steam-plough does as much work in one hour at a cost of three-pence, as 66 men at a cost of 15 shillings. I return to this
example in order to clear up an erroneous notion. The 15 shillings are by no means the expression in money of all the labour expended in one
hour by the 66 men. If the ratio of surplus-labour to necessary labour were 100%, these 66 men would produce in one hour a value of 30
shillings, although their wages, 15 shillings, represent only their labour for half an hour. Suppose, then, a machine cost as much as the wages for
a year of the 150 men it displaces, say £3,000; this £3,000 is by no means the expression in money of the labour added to the object produced by
these 150 men before the introduction of the machine, but only of that portion of their year's labour which was expended for themselves and
represented by their wages. On the other hand, the £3,000, the money-value of the machine, expresses all the labour expended on its production,
no matter in what proportion this labour constitutes wages for the workman, and surplus-value for the capitalist. Therefore, though a machine
cost as much as the labour-power displaced by it costs, yet the labour materialised in it is even then much less than the living labour it replaces.
T321



The use of machinery for the exclusive purpose of cheapening the product, is limited in this way, that less labour must be expended in producing
the machinery than is displaced by the employment of that machinery, For the capitalist, however, this use is still more limited. Instead of paying
for the labour, he only pays the value of the labour-power employed; therefore, the limit to his using a machine is fixed by the difference
between the value of the machine and the value of the labour-power replaced by it. Since the division of the day's work into necessary and
surplus-labour differs in different countries, and even in the same country at different periods, or in different branches of industry; and further,
since the actual wage of the labourer at one time sinks below the value of his labour-power, at another rises above it, it is possible for the
difference between the price of the machinery and the price of the labour-power replaced by that machinery to vary very much, although the
difference between the quantity of labour requisite to produce the machine and the total quantity replaced by it, remain constant. [331 But it is the
former difference alone that determines the cost, to the capitalist, of producing a commodity, and, through the pressure of competition,
influences his action. Hence the invention now-a-days of machines in England that are employed only in North America; just as in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, machines were invented in Germany to be used only in Holland, and just as many a French invention of the eighteenth
century was exploited in England alone. In the older countries, machinery, when employed in some branches of industry, creates such a
redundancy of labour in other branches that in these latter the fall of wages below the value of labour-power impedes the use of machinery, and,
from the standpoint of the capitalist, whose profit comes, not from a diminution of the labour employed, but of the labour paid for, renders that
use superfluous and often impossible. In some branches of the woollen manufacture in England the employment of children has during recent
years been considerably diminished, and in some cases has been entirely abolished. Why? Because the Factory Acts made two sets of children
necessary, one working six hours, the other four, or each working five hours. But the parents refused to sell the "half-timers" cheaper than the
"full-timers." Hence the substitution of machinery for the "half-timers." [341 Before the labour of women and of children under 10 years of age
was forbidden in mines, capitalists considered the employment of naked women and girls, often in company with men, so far sanctioned by their
moral code, and especially by their ledgers, that it was only after the passing of the Act that they had recourse to machinery. The Yankees have
invented a stone-breaking machine. The English do not make use of it, because the "wretch" [351 who does this work gets paid for such a small
portion of his labour, that machinery would increase the cost of production to the capitalist. [361 In England women are still occasionally used
instead of horses for hauling canal boats, [371 because the labour required to produce horses and machines is an accurately known quantity,
while that required to maintain the women of the surplus-population is below all calculation. Hence nowhere do we find a more shameful
squandering of human labour-power for the most despicable purposes than in England, the land of machinery.



SECTION 3

THE PROXIMATE EFFECTS OF MACHINERY ON THE WORKMAN



The starting-point of Modern Industry is, as we have shown, the revolution in the instruments of labour, and this revolution attains its most
highly developed form in the organised system of machinery in a factory. Before we inquire how human material is incorporated with this
objective organism, let us consider some general effects of this revolution on the labourer himself.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (7 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
A. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-power by Capital. The Employment of Women and Children

In so far as machinery dispenses with muscular power, it becomes a means of employing labourers of slight muscular strength, and those whose
bodily development is incomplete, but whose limbs are all the more supple. The labour of women and children was, therefore, the first thing
sought for by capitalists who used machinery. That mighty substitute for labour and labourers was forthwith changed into a means for increasing
the number of wage-labourers by enrolling, under the direct sway of capital, every member of the workman's family, without distinction of age
or sex. Compulsory work for the capitalist usurped the place, not only of the children's play, but also of free labour at home within moderate
limits for the support of the family. [38]



The value of labour-power was determined, not only by the labour-time necessary to maintain the individual adult labourer, but also by that
necessary to maintain his family. Machinery, by throwing every member of that family on to the labour-market, spreads the value of the man's
labour-power over his whole family. It thus depreciates his labour-power. To purchase the labour-power of a family of four workers may,
perhaps, cost more than it formerly did to purchase the labour-power of the head of the family, but, in return, four days' labour takes the place of
one, and their price falls in proportion to the excess of the surplus-labour of four over the surplus-labour of one. In order that the family may live,
four people must now, not only labour, but expend surplus-labour for the capitalist. Thus we see, that machinery, while augmenting the human
material that forms the principal object of capital's exploiting power, [391 at the same time raises the degree of exploitation.

Machinery also revolutionises out and out the contract between the labourer and the capitalist, which formally fixes their mutual relations.
Taking the exchange of commodities as our basis, our first assumption was that capitalist and labourer met as free persons, as independent
owners of commodities; the one possessing money and means of production, the other labour- power. But now the capitalist buys children and
young persons under age. Previously, the workman sold his own labour-power, which he disposed of nominally as a free agent. Now he sells
wife and child. He has become a slave-dealer. [40] The demand for children's labour often resembles in form the inquiries for negro slaves, such
as were formerly to be read among the advertisements in American journals. "My attention," says an English factory inspector, "was drawn to an
advertisement in the local paper of one of the most important manufacturing towns of my district, of which the following is a copy: Wanted, 12
to 20 young persons, not younger than what can pass for 13 years. Wages, 4 shillings a week. Apply &c." [411 The phrase "what can pass for 13
years," has reference to the fact, that by the Factory Act, children under 13 years may work only 6 hours. A surgeon officially appointed must
certify their age. The manufacturer, therefore, asks for children who look as if they we're already 13 years old. The decrease, often by leaps and
bounds in the number of children under 13 years employed in factories, a decrease that is shown in an astonishing manner by the English
statistics of the last 20 years, was for the most part, according to the evidence of the factory inspectors themselves, the work of the certifying
surgeons, who overstated the age of the children, agreeably to the capitalist's greed for exploitation, and the sordid trafficking needs of the
parents. In the notorious district of Bethnal Green, a public market is held every Monday and Tuesday morning, where children of both sexes
from 9 years of age upwards, hire themselves out to the silk manufacturers. "The usual terms are Is. 8d. a week (this belongs to the parents) and
'2d. for myself and tea.' The contract is binding only for the week. The scene and language while this market is going on are quite disgraceful."
[421 It has also occurred in England, that women have taken "children from the workhouse and let any one have them out for 2s. 6d. a week."
[431 In spite of legislation, the number of boys sold in Great Britain by their parents to act as live chimney-sweeping machines (although there
exist plenty of machines to replace them) exceeds 2,000. [441 The revolution effected by machinery in the juridical relations between the buyer
and the seller of tabour-power, causing the transaction as a whole to lose the appearance of a contract between free persons, afforded the English
Parliament an excuse, founded on juridical principles, for the interference of the state with factories. Whenever the law limits the labour of
children to 6 hours in industries not before interfered with, the complaints of the manufacturers are always renewed. They allege that numbers of
the parents withdraw their children from the industry brought under the Act, in order to sell them where "freedom of labour" still rules, i.e.,
where children under 13 years are compelled to work like grown-up people, and therefore can be got rid of at a higher price. But since capital is
by nature a leveller, since it exacts in every sphere of production equality in the conditions of the exploitation of labour, the limitation by law of
children's labour, in one branch of industry, becomes the cause of its limitation in others.

We have already alluded to the physical deterioration as well of the children and young-persons as of the women, whom machinery, first directly
in the factories that shoot up on its basis, and then indirectly in all the remaining branches of industry, subjects to the exploitation of capital. In
this place, therefore, we dwell only on one point, the enormous mortality, during the first few years of their life, of the children of the operatives.
In sixteen of the registration districts into which England is divided, there are, for every 100,000 children alive under the age of one year, only
9,000 deaths in a year on an average (in one district only 7,047); in 24 districts the deaths are over 10,000, but under 1 1,000; in 39 districts, over
11,000, but under 12,000; in 48 districts over 12,000, but under 13,000; in 22 districts over 20,000; in 25 districts over 21,000; in 17 over
22,000; in 1 1 over 23,000; in Hoo, Wolverhampton, Ashton-under-Lyne, and Preston, over 24,000; in Nottingham, Stockport, and Bradford,
over 25,000; in Wisbeach, 16,000; and in Manchester, 26,125. [451 As was shown by an official medical inquiry in the year 1861, the high
death-rates are, apart from local causes, principally due to the employment of the mothers away from their homes, and to the neglect and
maltreatment, consequent on her absence, such as, amongst others, insufficient nourishment, unsuitable food, and dosing with opiates; besides
this, there arises an unnatural estrangement between mother and child, and as a consequence intentional starving and poisoning of the children.
[461 In those agricultural districts, "where a minimum in the employment of women exists, the death-rate is on the other hand very low." [471
The Inquiry Commission of 1861 led, however, to the unexpected result, that in some purely agricultural districts bordering on the North Sea, the
death-rate of children under one year old almost equalled that of the worst factory districts. Dr. Julian Hunter was therefore commissioned to
investigate this phenomenon on the spot. His report is incorporated with the "Sixth Report on Public Health." [481 Up to that time it was
supposed, that the children were decimated by malaria, and other diseases peculiar to low-lying and marshy districts. But the inquiry showed the
very opposite, namely, that the same cause which drove away malaria, the conversion of the land, from a morass in winter and a scanty pasture
in summer, into fruitful corn land, created the exceptional death-rate of the infants. [491 The 70 medical men, whom Dr. Hunter examined in that
district, were "wonderfully in accord" on this point. In fact, the revolution in the mode of cultivation had led to the introduction of the industrial

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (8 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

system. Married women, who work in gangs along with boys and girls, are, for a stipulated sum of money, placed at the disposal of the farmer,
by a man called the "undertaker," who contracts for the whole gang. "These gangs will sometimes travel many miles from their own village; they
are to be met morning and evening on the roads, dressed in short petticoats, with suitable coats and boots, and sometimes trousers, looking
wonderfully strong and healthy, but tainted with a customary immorality and heedless of the fatal results which their love of this busy and
independent life is bringing on their unfortunate offspring who are pining at home." [501 Every phenomenon of the factory districts is here
reproduced, including, but to a greater extent, ill-disguised infanticide, and dosing children with opiates. f5 11 "My knowledge of such evils,"
says Dr. Simon, the medical officer of the Privy Council and editor in chief of the Reports on Public Health, "may excuse the profound
misgiving with which I regard any large industrial employment of adult women." [521 "Happy indeed," exclaims Mr. Baker, the factory
inspector, in his official report, "happy indeed will it be for the manufacturing districts of England, when every married woman having a family
is prohibited from working in any textile works at all." [531



The moral degradation caused by the capitalistic exploitation of women and children has been so exhaustively depicted by F. Engels in his "Lage
der Arbeitenden Klasse Englands," and other writers, that I need only mention the subject in this place. But the intellectual desolation artificially
produced by converting immature human beings into mere machines for the fabrication of surplus-value, a state of mind clearly distinguishable
from that natural ignorance which keeps the mind fallow without destroying its capacity for development, its natural fertility, this desolation
finally compelled even the English Parliament to make elementary education a compulsory condition to the "productive" employment of children
under 14 years, in every industry subject to the Factory Acts. The spirit of capitalist production stands out clearly in the ludicrous wording of the
so-called education clauses in the Factory Acts, in the absence of an administrative machinery, an absence that again makes the compulsion
illusory, in the opposition of the manufacturers themselves to these education clauses, and in the tricks and dodges they put in practice for
evading them. "For this the legislature is alone to blame, by having passed a delusive law, which, while it would seem to provide that the
children employed in factories shall be educated, contains no enactment by which that professed end can be secured. It provides nothing more
than that the children shall on certain days of the week, and for a certain number of hours (three) in each day, be inclosed within the four walls of
a place called a school, and that the employer of the child shall receive weekly a certificate to that effect signed by a person designated by the
subscriber as a schoolmaster or schoolmistress." [541 Previous to the passing of the amended Factory Act, 1844, it happened, not unfrequently,
that the certificates of attendance at school were signed by the schoolmaster or schoolmistress with a cross, as they themselves were unable to
write. "On one occasion, on visiting a place called a school, from which certificates of school attendance, had issued, I was so struck with the
ignorance of the master, that I said to him: 'Pray, sir, can you read?' His reply was: Aye, summat!' and as a justification of his tight to grant
certificates, he added: At any rate, I am before my scholars.' The inspectors, when the Bill of 1844 was in preparation, did not fail to represent
the disgraceful state of the places called schools, certificates from which they were obliged to admit as a compliance with the laws, but they were
successful only in obtaining thus much, that since the passing of the Act of 1844, the figures in the school certificate must be filled up in the
handwriting of the schoolmaster, who must also sign his Christian and surname in full." [551 Sir John Kincaid, factory inspector for Scotland,
relates experiences of the same kind. "The first school we visited was kept by a Mrs. Ann Killin. Upon asking her to spell her name, she
straightway made a mistake, by beginning with the letter C, but correcting herself immediately, she said her name began with a K. On looking at
her signature, however, in the school certificate books, I noticed that she spelt it in various ways, while her handwriting left no doubt as to her
unfitness to teach. She herself also acknowledged that she could not keep the registe ... In a second school I found the schoolroom 15 feet long,
and 10 feet wide, and counted in this space 75 children, who were gobbling something unintelligible" [561 But it is not only in the miserable
places above referred to that the children obtain certificates of school attendance without having received instruction of any value, for in many
schools where there is a competent teacher, his efforts are of little avail from the distracting crowd of children of all ages, from infants of 3 years
old and upwards; his livelihood, miserable at the best, depending on the pence received from the greatest number of children whom it is possible
to cram into the space. To this is to be added scanty school furniture, deficiency of books, and other materials for teaching, and the depressing
effect upon the poor children themselves of a close, noisome ' atmosphere. I have been in many such schools, where I have seen rows of children
doing absolutely nothing; and this is certified as school attendance, and, in statistical returns, such children are set down as being educated." [571
In Scotland the manufacturers try all they can to do without the children that are obliged to attend school. "It requires no further argument to
prove that the educational clauses of the Factory Act, being held in such disfavour among mill-owners, tend in a great measure to exclude that
class of children alike from the employment and the benefit of education contemplated by this Act." [581 Horribly grotesque does this appear in
print works, which are regulated by 'a special Act. By that Act, "every child, before being employed in a print work must have attended school
for at least 30 days, and not less than 150 hours, during the six months immediately preceding such first day of employment, and during the
continuance of its employment in the print works, it must attend for a like period of 30 days, and 150 hours during every successive period of six
months.... The attendance at school must be between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. No attendance of less than 2 1/2 hours, nor more than 5 hours on any one
day, shall be reckoned as part of the 150 hours. Under ordinary circumstances the children attend school morning and afternoon for 30 days, for
at least 5 hours each day, and upon the expiration of the 30 days, the statutory total of 1 50 hours having been attained, having, in their language,
made up their book, they return to the print work, where they continue until the six months have expired, when another instalment of school
attendance becomes due, and they again seek the school until the book is again made up.... Many boys having attended school for the required
number of hours, when they return to school after the expiration of their six months' work in the print work, are in the same condition as when
they first attended school as print-work boys, that they have lost all they gained by their previous school attendance.... In other print works the
children's attendance at school is made to depend altogether upon the exigencies of the work in the establishment. The requisite number of hours
is made up each six months, by instalments consisting of from 3 to 5 hours at a time, spreading over, perhaps, the whole six months.... For
instance, the attendance on one day might be from 8 to 11 a.m., on another day from I p.m. to 4 p.m., and the child might not appear at school
again for several days, when it would attend from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.; then it might attend for 3 or 4 days consecutively, or for a week, then it would
not appear in school for 3 weeks or a month, after that upon some odd days at some odd hours when the operative who employed it chose to
spare it; and thus the child was, as it were, buffeted from school to work, from work to school, until the tale of 150 hours was told." [591



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (9 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

By the excessive addition of women and children to the ranks of the workers, machinery at last breaks down the resistance which the male
operatives in the manufacturing period continued to oppose to the despotism of capital. [601



B. Prolongation of the Working-Day

If machinery be the most powerful means for increasing the productiveness of labour — i.e., for shortening the working-time required in the
production of a commodity, it becomes in the hands of capital the most powerful means, in those industries first invaded by it, for lengthening
the working-day beyond all bounds set by human nature. It creates, on the one hand, new conditions by which capital is enabled to give free
scope to this its constant tendency, and on the other hand, new motives with which to whet capital's appetite for the labour of others.

In the first place, in the form of machinery, the implements of labour become automatic, things moving and working independent of the
workman. They are thenceforth an industrial perpetuum mobile, that would go on producing forever, did it not meet with certain natural
obstructions in the weak bodies and the strong wills of its human attendants. The automaton, as capital, and because it is capital, is endowed, in
the person of the capitalist, with intelligence and will; it is therefore animated by the longing to reduce to a minimum the resistance offered by
that repellent yet elastic natural barrier, man. [611 This resistance is moreover lessened by the apparent lightness of machine work, and by the
more pliant and docile character of the women and children employed on it. [62]



The productiveness of machinery is, as we saw, inversely proportional to the value transferred by it to the product. The longer the life of the
machine, the greater is the mass of the products over which the value transmitted by the machine is spread, and the less is the portion of that
value added to each single commodity. The active lifetime of a machine is, however, clearly dependent on the length of the working-day, or on
the duration of the daily labour-process multiplied by the number of days for which the process is carried on.

The wear and tear of a machine is not exactly proportional to its working-time. And even if it were so, a machine working 16 hours daily for 7
1/2 years, covers as long a working period as, and transmits to the total product no more value than, the same machine would if it worked only 8
hours daily for 15 years. But in the first case the value of the machine would be reproduced twice as quickly as in the latter, and the capitalist
would, by this use of the machine, absorb in 7 1/2 years as much surplus-value as in the second case he would in 15.

The material wear and tear of a machine is of two kinds. The one arises from use, as coins wear away by circulating, the other from non-use, as a
sword rusts when left in its scabbard. The latter kind is due to the elements. The former is more or less directly proportional, the latter to a
certain extent inversely proportional, to the use of the machine. [631



But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine also undergoes, what we may call a moral depreciation. It loses exchange- value, either
by machines of the same sort being produced cheaper than it, or by better machines entering into competition with it. [641 In both cases, be the
machine ever so young and full of life, its value is no longer determined by the labour actually materialised in it, but by the labour-time requisite
to reproduce either it or the better machine. It has, therefore, lost value more or less. The shorter the period taken to reproduce its total value, the
less is the danger of moral depreciation; and the longer the working-day, the shorter is that period. When machinery is first introduced into an
industry, new methods of reproducing it more cheaply follow blow upon blow, [651 and so do improvements, that not only affect individual parts
and details of the machine, but its entire build. It is, therefore, in the early days of the life of machinery that this special incentive to the
prolongation of the working-day makes itself felt most acutely. [661



Given the length of the working-day, all other circumstances remaining the same, the exploitation of double the number of workmen demands,
not only a doubling of that part of constant capital which is invested in machinery and buildings, but also of that part which is laid out in raw
material and auxiliary substances. The lengthening of the working-day, on the other hand, allows of production on an extended scale without any
alteration in the amount of capital laid out on machinery and buildings. [671 Not only is there, therefore, an increase of surplus-value, but the
outlay necessary to obtain it diminishes. It is true that this takes place, more or less, with every lengthening of the working-day; but in the case
under consideration, the change is more marked, because the capital converted into the instruments of labour preponderates to a greater degree.
[681 The development of the factory system fixes a constantly increasing portion of the capital in a form, in which, on the one hand, its value is
capable of continual self-expansion, and in which, on the other hand, it loses both use-value and exchange-value whenever it loses contact with
living labour. "When a labourer," said Mr. Ashworth, a cotton magnate, to Professor Nassau W. Senior, "lays down his spade, he renders useless,
for that period, a capital worth eighteen-pence. When one of our people leaves the mill, he renders useless a capital that has cost £100,000." [691
Only fancy! making "useless" for a single moment, a capital that has cost £100,000! It is, in truth, monstrous, that a single one of our people
should ever leave the factory! The increased use of machinery, as Senior after the instruction he received from Ashworth clearly perceives,
makes a constantly increasing lengthening of the working-day "desirable." [701

Machinery produces relative surplus-value; not only by directly depreciating the value of labour-power, and by indirectly cheapening the same
through cheapening the commodities that enter into its reproduction, but also, when it is first introduced sporadically into an industry, by
converting the labour employed by the owner of that machinery, into labour of a higher degree and greater efficacy, by raising the social value of
the article produced above its individual value, and thus enabling the capitalist to replace the value of a day's labour-power by a smaller portion
of the value of a day's product. During this transition period, when the use of machinery is a sort of monopoly, the profits are therefore
exceptional, and the capitalist endeavours to exploit thoroughly "the sunny time of this his first love," by prolonging the working-day as much as
possible. The magnitude of the profit whets his appetite for more profit.

As the use of machinery becomes more general in a particular industry, the social value of the product sinks down to its individual value, and the
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (10 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

law that surplus-value does not arise from the labour-power that has been replaced by the machinery, but from the labour-power actually
employed in working with the machinery, asserts itself. Surplus- value arises from variable capital alone, and we saw that the amount of
surplus-value depends on two factors, viz., the rate of surplus-value and the number of the workmen simultaneously employed. Given the length
of the working-day, the rate of surplus-value is determined by the relative duration of the necessary labour and of the surplus-labour in a day.
The number of the labourers simultaneously employed depends, on its side, on the ratio of the variable to the constant capital. Now, however
much the use of machinery may increase the surplus-labour at the expense of the necessary labour by heightening the productiveness of labour, it
is clear that it attains this result, only by diminishing the number of workmen employed by a given amount of capital. It converts what was
formerly variable capital, invested in labour-power, into machinery which, being constant capital, does not produce surplus-value. It is
impossible, for instance, to squeeze as much surplus- value out of 2 as out of 24 labourers. If each of these 24 men gives only one hour of
surplus-labour in 12, the 24 men give together 24 hours of surplus-labour, while 24 hours is the total labour of the two men. Hence, the
application of machinery to the production of surplus-value implies a contradiction which is immanent in it, since of the two factors of the
surplus-value created by a given amount of capital, one, the rate of surplus-value, cannot be increased, except by diminishing the other, the
number of workmen. This contradiction comes to light, as soon as by the general employment of machinery in a given industry, the value of the
machine-produced commodity regulates the value of all commodities of the same sort; and it is this contradiction, that in its turn, drives the
capitalist, without his being conscious of the fact, [711 to excessive lengthening of the working-day, in order that he may compensate the
decrease in the relative number of labourers exploited, by an increase not only of the relative, but of the absolute surplus-labour.

If, then, the capitalistic employment of machinery, on the one hand, supplies new and powerful motives to an excessive lengthening of the
working-day, and radically changes, as well the methods of labour, as also the character of the social working organism, in such a manner as to
break down all opposition to this tendency, on the other hand it produces, partly by opening out to the capitalist new strata of the working-class,
previously inaccessible to him, partly by setting free the labourers it supplants, a surplus working population, [721 which is compelled to submit
to the dictation of capital. Hence that remarkable phenomenon in the history of Modern Industry, that machinery sweeps away every moral and
natural restriction on the length of the working-day. Hence, too, the economic paradox, that the most powerful instrument for shortening
labour-time, becomes the most unfailing means for placing every moment of the labourer's time and that of his family, at the disposal of the
capitalist for the purpose of expanding the value of his capital. "If," dreamed Aristotle, the greatest thinker of antiquity, "if every tool, when
summoned, or even of its own accord, could do the work that befits it, just as the creations of Daedalus moved of themselves, or the tripods of
Hephaestos went of their own accord to their sacred work, if the weavers' shuttles were to weave of themselves, then there would be no need
either of apprentices for the master workers, or of slaves for the lords." [731 And Antipatros, a Greek poet of the time of Cicero, hailed the
invention of the water-wheel for grinding corn, an invention that is the elementary form of all machinery, as the giver of freedom to female
slaves, and the bringer back of the golden age. [741 Oh! those heathens! They understood, as the learned Bastiat, and before him the still wiser
MacCulloch have discovered, nothing of Political Economy and Christianity. They did not, for example, comprehend that machinery is the surest
means of lengthening the working-day. They perhaps excused the slavery of one on the ground that it was a means to the full development of
another. But to preach slavery of the masses, in order that a few crude and half-educated parvenus, might become "eminent spinners," "extensive
sausage-makers," and "influential shoe-black dealers," to do this, they lacked the bump of Christianity.

C. Intensification of Labour

The immoderate lengthening of the working-day, produced by machinery in the hands of capital, leads to a reaction on the part of society, the
very sources of whose life are menaced; and, thence, to a normal working-day whose length is fixed by law. Thenceforth a phenomenon, that we
have already met with, namely, the intensification of labour, develops into great importance. Our analysis of absolute surplus-value had
reference primarily to the extension or duration of the labour, its intensity being assumed as given. We now proceed to consider the substitution
of a more intensified labour for labour of more extensive duration, and the- degree of the former.

It is self-evident, that in proportion as the use of machinery spreads, and the experience of a special class of workmen habituated to machinery
accumulates, the rapidity and intensity of labour increase as a natural consequence. Thus in England, during half a century, lengthening of the
working-day went hand in hand with increasing intensity of factory labour. Nevertheless the reader will clearly see, that where we have labour,
not carried on by fits and starts, but repeated day after day with unvarying uniformity, a point must inevitably be reached, where extension of the
working-day and intensity of the labour mutually exclude one another, in such a way that lengthening of the working-day becomes compatible
only with a lower degree of intensity, and a higher degree of intensity, only with a shortening of the working-day. So soon as the gradually
surging revolt of the working-class compelled Parliament to shorten compulsorily the hours of labour, and to begin by imposing a normal
working-day on factories proper, so soon consequently as an increased production of surplus-value by the prolongation of the working-day was
once for all put a stop to, from that moment capital threw itself with all its might into the production of relative surplus- value, by hastening on
the further improvement of machinery. At the same time a change took place in the nature of relative surplus-value. Generally speaking, the
mode of producing relative surplus-value consists in raising the productive power of the workman, so as to enable him to produce more in a
given time with the same expenditure of labour. Labour-time continues to transmit as before the same value to the total product, but this
unchanged amount of exchange-value is spread over more use-value; hence the value of each single commodity sinks. Otherwise, however, so
soon as the compulsory shortening of the hours of labour takes place. The immense impetus it gives the development of productive power, and to
economy in the means of production, imposes on the workman increased expenditure of labour in a given time, heightened tension of
labour-power, and closer filling up of the pores of the working-day, or condensation of labour to a degree that is attainable only within the limits
of the shortened working-day. This condensation of a greater mass of labour into a given period thenceforward counts for what it really is, a
greater quantity of labour. In addition to a measure of its extension, i.e., duration, labour now acquires a measure of its intensity or of the degree
of its condensation or density. [751 The denser hour of the ten hours' working-day contains more labour, i.e., expended labour-power, than the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (11 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

more porous hour of the twelve hours' working-day. The product therefore of one of the former hours has as much or more value than has the
product of 1 1/5 of the latter hours. Apart from the increased yield of relative surplus- value through the heightened productiveness of labour, the
same mass of value is now produced for the capitalist say by 3 1/3 hours of surplus-labour, and 6 2/3 hours of necessary labour, as was
previously produced by four hours of surplus-labour and eight hours of necessary labour.

We now come to the question: How is the labour intensified?

The first effect of shortening the working-day results from the self-evident law, that the efficiency of labour-power is in an inverse ratio to the
duration of its expenditure. Hence, within certain limits what is lost by shortening the duration is gained by the increasing tension of
labour-power. That the workman moreover really does expend more labour-power, is ensured by the mode in which the capitalist pays him. [76]
In those industries, such as potteries, where machinery plays little or no part, the introduction of the Factory Acts has strikingly shown that the
mere shortening of the working-day increases to a wonderful degree the regularity, uniformity, order, continuity, and energy of the labour. [771 It
seemed, however, doubtful whether this effect was produced in the factory proper, where the dependence of the workman on the continuous and
uniform motion of the machinery had already created the strictest discipline. Hence, when in 1844 the reduction of the working-day to less than
twelve hours was being debated, the masters almost unanimously declared "that their overlookers in the different rooms took good care that the
hands lost no time," that "the extent of vigilance and attention on the part of the workmen was hardly capable of being increased," and, therefore,
that the speed of the machinery and other conditions remaining unaltered, "to expect in a well-managed factory any important result from
increased attention of the workmen was an absurdity." [781 This assertion was contradicted by experiments. Mr. Robert Gardner reduced the
hours of labour in his two large factories at Preston, on and after the 20th April, 1844, from twelve to eleven hours a day. The result of about a
year's working was that "the same amount of product for the same cost was received, and the workpeople as a whole earned in eleven hours as
much wages as they did before in twelve." [791 1 pass over the experiments made in the spinning and carding rooms, because they were
accompanied by an increase of 2% in the speed of the machines. But in the weaving department, where, moreover, many sorts of figured fancy
articles were woven, there was not the slightest alteration in the conditions of the work. The result was: "From 6th January to 20th April, 1844,
with a twelve hours' day, average weekly wages of each hand 10s. 1 l/2d., from 20th April to 29th June, 1844, with day of eleven hours, average
weekly wages 10s. 3 l/2d." [801 Here we have more produced in eleven hours than previously in twelve, and entirely in consequence of more
steady application and economy of time by the workpeople. While they got the same wages and gained one hour of spare time, the capitalist got
the same amount produced and saved the cost of coal, gas, and other such items, for one hour. Similar experiments, and with the like success,
were carried out in the mills of Messrs. Horrocks and Jacson. [811

The shortening of the hours of labour creates, to begin with, the subjective conditions for the condensation of labour, by enabling the workman
to exert more strength in a given time. So soon as that shortening becomes compulsory, machinery becomes in the hands of capital the objective
means, systematically employed for squeezing out more labour in a given time. This is effected in two ways: by increasing the speed of the
machinery, and by giving the workman more machinery to tent. Improved construction of the machinery is necessary, partly because without it
greater pressure cannot be put on the workman, and partly because the shortened hours of labour force the capitalist to exercise the strictest
watch over the cost of production. The improvements in the steam-engine have increased the piston speed, and at the same time have made it
possible, by means of a greater economy of power, to drive with the same or even a smaller consumption of coal more machinery with the same
engine. The improvements in the transmitting mechanism have lessened friction, and, what so strikingly distinguishes modern from the older
machinery, have reduced the diameter and weight of the shafting to a constantly decreasing minimum. Finally, the improvements in the operative
machines have, while reducing their size, increased their speed and efficiency, as in the modern power-loom; or, while increasing the size of
their framework, have also increased the extent and number of their working parts, as in spinning-mules, or have added to the speed of these
working parts by imperceptible alterations of detail, such as those which ten years ago increased the speed of the spindles in self-acting mules by
one-fifth.

The reduction of the working-day to 12 hours dates in England from 1832. In 1836 a manufacturer stated: "The labour now undergone in the
factories is much greater than it used to be ... compared with thirty or forty years ago ... owing to the greater attention and activity required by the
greatly increased speed which is given to the machinery." [821 In the year 1844, Lord Ashley, now Lord Shaftesbury, made in the House of
Commons the following statements, supported by documentary evidence:

"The labour performed by those engaged in the processes of manufacture, is three times as great as in the beginning of such operations.
Machinery has executed, no doubt, the work that would demand the sinews of millions of men; but it has also prodigiously multiplied the labour
of those, who are governed by its fearful movements.... In 1815, the labour of following a pair of mules spinning cotton of No. 40 — reckoning
12 hours to the working-day — involved a necessity of walking 8 miles. In 1832, the distance travelled in following a pair of mules, spinning
cotton yarn of the same number, was 20 miles, and frequently more. In 1835" (query — 1815 or 1825?) "the spinner put up daily, on each of
these mules, 820 stretches, making a total of 1,640 stretches in the course of the day. In 1832, the spinner put up on each mule 2,200 stretches,
making a total of 4,400. In 1844, 2,400 stretches, making a total of 4,800; and in some cases the amount of labour required is even still greater....
I have another document sent to me in 1842, stating that the labour is progressively increasing-increasing not only because the distance to be
travelled is greater, but because the quantity of goods produced is multiplied, while the hands are fewer in proportion than before; and,
moreover, because an inferior species of cotton is now often spun, which it is more difficult to work.... In the carding-room there has also been a
great increase of labour. One person there does the work formerly divided between two. In the weaving-room, where a vast number of persons
are employed, and principally females ... the labour has increased within the last few years fully 10 per cent., owing to the increased speed of the
machinery in spinning. In 1838, the number of hanks spun per week was 18,000, in 1843 it amounted to 21,000. In 1819, the number of picks in
power-loom-weaving per minute was 60 — in 1842 it was 140, showing a vast increase of labour." [831

In the face of this remarkable intensity of labour which had already been reached in 1844 under the Twelve Hours' Act, there appeared to be a
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (12 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

justification for the assertion made at that time by the English manufacturers, that any further progress in that direction was impossible, and
therefore that every further reduction of the hours of labour meant a lessened production. The apparent correctness of their reasons will be best
shown by the following contemporary statement by Leonard Horner, the factory inspector, their ever watchful censor.

"Now, as the quantity produced must, in the main, be regulated by the speed of the machinery, it must be the interest of the mill-owner to drive it
at the utmost rate of speed consistent with these following conditions, viz., the preservation of the machinery from too rapid deterioration; the
preservation of the quality of the article manufactured; and the capability of the workman to follow the motion without a greater exertion than he
can sustain for a constancy. One of the most important problems, therefore, which the owner of a factory has to solve is to find out the maximum
speed at which he can run, with a due regard to the above conditions. It frequently happens that he finds he has gone too fast, that breakages and
bad work more than counterbalance the increased speed, and that he is obliged to slacken his pace. I therefore concluded, that as an active and
intelligent mill-owner would find out the safe maximum, it would not be possible to produce as much in eleven hours as in twelve. I further
assumed that the operative paid by piecework, would exert himself to the utmost consistent with the power of continuing at the same rate. " [84]
Horner, therefore, came to the conclusion that a reduction of the working-hours below twelve would necessarily diminish production? [851 He
himself, ten years later, cites his opinion of 1845 in proof of how much he under-estimated in that year the elasticity of machinery, and of man's
labour-power, both of which are simultaneously stretched to an extreme by the compulsory shortening of the working-day.

We now come to the period that follows the introduction of the Ten Hours' Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, silk, and flax mills.

"The speed of the spindles has increased upon throstles 500, and upon mules 1,000 revolutions a minute, i.e., the speed of the throstle spindle,
which in 1839 was 4,500 times a minute, is now (1862) 5,000; and of the mule spindle, that was 5,000, is now 6,000 times a minute, amounting
in the former case to one-tenth, and in the second case to one-fifth additional increase." [861 James Nasmyth, the eminent civil engineer of
Patricroft, near Manchester, explained in a letter to Leonard Horner, written in 1852, the nature of the improvements in the steam-engine that had
been made between the years 1848 and 1852. After remarking that the horse-power of steam-engines, being always estimated in the official
returns according to the power of similar engines in 1828, [871 is only nominal, and can serve only as an index of their real power, he goes on to
say: "I am confident that from the same weight of steam-engine machinery, we are now obtaining at least 50 per cent, more duty or work
performed on the average, and that in many cases the identical steam-engines which in the days of the restricted speed of 220 feet per minute,
yielded 50 horsepower, are now yielding upwards of 100..." "The modern steam-engine of 100 horse-power is capable of being driven at a much
greater force than formerly, arising from improvements in its construction, the capacity and construction of the boilers, &c..." "Although the
same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the
machinery." [881 "In the year 1850, the factories of the United Kingdom employed 134,217 nominal horse-power to give motion to 25,638,716
spindles and 301,445 looms. The number of spindles and looms in 1856 was respectively 33,503,580 of the former, and 369,205 of the latter,
which, reckoning the force of the nominal horse-power required to be the same as in 1850, would require a force equal to 175,000 horses, but the
actual power given in the return for 1856 is 161,435, less by above 10,000 horses than, calculating upon the basis of the return of 1850, the
factories ought to have required in 1856." [891 "The facts thus brought out by the Return (of 1856) appear to be that the factory system is
increasing rapidly; that although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer
hands employed in proportion to the machinery; that the steam-engine is enabled to drive an increased weight of machinery by economy of force
and other methods, and that an increased quantity of work can be turned off by improvements in machinery, and in methods of manufacture, by
increase of speed of the machinery, and by a variety of other causes." [901



"The great improvements made in machines of every kind have raised their productive power very much. Without any doubt, the shortening of
the hours of labour... gave the impulse to these improvements. The latter, combined with the more intense strain on the workman, have had the
effect, that at least as much is produced in the shortened (by two hours or one-sixth) working-day as was previously produced during the longer
one." 191]

One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the manufacturers increased along with the more intense exploitation of labour-power.
From 1838 to 1850, the average proportional increase in English cotton and other factories was 32%, while from 1850 to 1856 it amounted to

86%.

But however great the progress of English industry had been during the 8 years from 1848 to 1856 under the influence of a working-day of 10
hours, it wag far surpassed during the next period of 6 years from 1856 to 1862. In silk factories, for instance, there were in 1856, spindles
1,093,799; in 1862, 1,388,544; in 1856, looms 9,260; in 1862, 10,709. But the number of operatives was, in 1856, 56,131; in 1862, 52,429. The
increase in the spindles was therefore 26.9% and in the looms 15.6%, while the number of the operatives decreased 7%. In the year 1850 there
were employed in worsted mills 875,830 spindles; in 1856, 1,324,549 (increase 51.2%), and in 1862, 1,289,172 (decrease 2.7%). But if we
deduct the doubling spindles that figure in the numbers for 1856, but not in those for 1862, it will be found that after 1856 the number of spindles
remained nearly stationary. On the other hand, after 1850, the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases doubled. The number of
power-looms in worsted mills was, in 1850, 32,617; in 1856, 38,956; in 1862, 43,048. The number of the operatives was, in 1850, 79,737; in
1856, 87,794; in 1862, 86,063; included in these, however, the children under 14 years of age were, in 1850, 9,956; in 1856, 11,228; in 1862,
13,178. In spite, therefore, of the greatly increased number of looms in 1862, compared with 1856, the total number of the workpeople employed
decreased, and that of the children exploited increased. [921



On the 27th April, 1863, Mr. Ferrand said in the House of Commons: "I have been informed by delegates from 16 districts of Lancashire and
Cheshire, in whose behalf I speak, that the work in the factories is, in consequence of the improvements in machinery, constantly on the increase.
Instead of as formerly one person with two helps tenting two looms, one person now tents three looms without helps, and it is no uncommon
thing for one person to tent four. Twelve hours' work, as is evident from the facts adduced, is now compressed into less than 10 hours. It is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (13 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
therefore self-evident, to what an enormous extent the toil of the factory operative has increased during the last 10 years." £93



Although, therefore, the Factory Inspectors unceasingly and with justice, commend the results of the Acts of 1844 and 1850, yet they admit that
the shortening of the hours of labour has already called forth such an intensification of the labour as is injurious to the health of the workman and
to his capacity for work. "In most of the cotton, worsted, and silk mills, an exhausting state of excitement necessary to enable the workers
satisfactorily to mind the machinery, the motion of which has been greatly accelerated within the last few years, seems to me not unlikely to be
one of the causes of that excess of mortality from lung disease, which Dr. Greenhow has pointed out in his recent report on this subject." [941
There cannot be the slightest doubt that the tendency that urges capital, so soon as a prolongation of the hours of labour is once for all forbidden,
to compensate itself, by a systematic heightening of the intensity of labour, and to convert every improvement in machinery into a more perfect
means of exhausting the workman, must soon lead to a state of things in which a reduction of the hours of labour will again be inevitable. [951
On the other hand, the rapid advance of English industry between 1848 and the present time, under the influence of a day of 10 hours, surpasses
the advance made between 1833 and 1847, when the day was 12 hours long, by far more than the latter surpasses the advance made during the
half century after the first introduction of the factory system, when the working-day was without limits. [961



SECTION 4

THE FACTORY



At the commencement of this chapter we considered that which we may call the body of the factory, i.e., machinery organised into a system. We
there saw how machinery, by annexing the labour of women and children, augments the number of human beings who form the material for
capitalistic exploitation, how it confiscates the whole of the workman's disposable time, by immoderate extension of the hours of labour, and
how finally its progress, which allows of enormous increase of production in shorter and shorter periods, serves as a means of systematically
getting more work done in a shorter time, or of exploiting labour-power more intensely. We now turn to the factory as a whole, and that in its
most perfect form.

Dr. Ure, the Pindar of the automatic factory, describes it, on the one hand, as "Combined co-operation of many orders of workpeople, adult and
young, in tending with assiduous skill, a system of productive machines, continuously impelled by a central power" (the prime mover); on the
other hand, as "a vast automaton, composed of various mechanical and intellectual organs, acting in uninterrupted concert for the production of a
common object, all of them being subordinate to a self -regulated moving force." These two descriptions are far from being identical. In one, the
collective labourer, or social body of labour, appears as the dominant subject, and the mechanical automaton as the object; in the other, the
automaton itself is the subject, and the workmen are merely conscious organs, co-ordinate with the unconscious organs of the automaton, and
together with them, subordinated to the central moving-power. The first description is applicable to every possible employment of machinery on
a large scale, the second is characteristic of its use by capital, and therefore of the modern factory system. Ure prefers therefore, to describe the
central machine, from which the motion comes, not only as an automaton, but as an autocrat. "In these spacious halls the benignant power of
steam summons around him his myriads of willing menials." [971



Along with the tool, the skill of the workman in handling it passes over to the machine. The capabilities of the tool are emancipated from the
restraints that are inseparable from human labour-power. Thereby the technical foundation on which is based the division of labour in
Manufacture, is swept away. Hence, in the place of the hierarchy of specialised workmen that characterises manufacture, there steps, in the
automatic factory, a tendency to equalise and reduce to one and the same level every kind of work that has to be done by the minders of the
machines; [981 in the place of the artificially produced differentiations of the detail workmen, step the natural differences of age and sex.

So far as division of labour re-appears in the factory, it is primarily a distribution of the workmen among the specialised machines; and of masses
of workmen, not however organised into groups, among the various departments of the factory, in each of which they work at a number of
similar machines placed together; their co-operation, therefore, is only simple. The organised group, peculiar to manufacture, is replaced by the
connexion between the head workman and his few assistants. The essential division is, into workmen who are actually employed on the
machines (among whom are included a few who look after the engine), and into mere attendants (almost exclusively children) of these workmen.
Among the attendants are reckoned more or less all "Feeders" who supply the machines with the material to be worked. In addition to these two
principal classes, there is a numerically unimportant class of persons, whose occupation it is to look after the whole of the machinery and repair
it from time to time; such as engineers, mechanics, joiners, &c. This is a superior class of workmen, some of them scientifically educated, others
brought up to a trade; it is distinct from the factory operative class, and merely aggregated to it. [991 This division of labour is purely technical.

To work at a machine, the workman should be taught from childhood, in order that he may learn to adapt his own movements to the uniform and
unceasing motion of an automaton. When the machinery, as a whole, forms a system of manifold machines, working simultaneously and in
concert, the co-operation based upon it, requires the distribution of various groups of workmen among the different kinds of machines. But the
employment of machinery does away with the necessity of crystallising this distribution after the manner of Manufacture, by the constant
annexation of a particular man to a particular function. [1001 Since the motion of the whole system does not proceed from the workman, but
from the machinery, a change of persons can take place at any time without an interruption of the work. The most striking proof of this is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (14 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

afforded by the relays system, put into operation by the manufacturers during their revolt from 1848-1850. Lastly, the quickness with which
machine work is learnt by young people, does away with the necessity of bringing up for exclusive employment by machinery, a special class of
operatives. [1011 With regard to the work of the mere attendants, it can, to some extent, be replaced in the mill by machines, [1021 and owing to
its extreme simplicity, it allows of a rapid and constant change of the individuals burdened with this drudgery.

Although then, technically speaking, the old system of division of labour is thrown overboard by machinery, it hangs on in the factory, as a
traditional habit handed down from Manufacture, and is afterwards systematically re-moulded and established in a more hideous form by capital,
as a means of exploiting labour-power. The life-long speciality of handling one and the same tool, now becomes the life-long speciality of
serving one and the same machine. Machinery is put to a wrong use, with the object of transforming the workman, from his very childhood, into
a part of a detail-machine. [1031 In this way, not only are the expenses of his reproduction considerably lessened, but at the same time his
helpless dependence upon the factory as a whole, and therefore upon the capitalist, is rendered complete. Here as everywhere else, we must
distinguish between the increased productiveness due to the development of the social process of production, and that due to the capitalist
exploitation of that process. In handicrafts and manufacture, the workman makes use of a tool, in the factory, the machine makes use of him.
There the movements of the instrument of labour proceed from him, here it is the movements of the machine that he must follow. In manufacture
the workmen are parts of a living mechanism. In the factory we have a lifeless mechanism independent of the workman, who becomes its mere
living appendage. "The miserable routine of endless drudgery and toil in which the same mechanical process is gone through over and over
again, is like the labour of Sisyphus. The burden of labour, like the rock, keeps ever falling back on the worn-out labourer." [1041 At the same
time that factory work exhausts the nervous system to the uttermost, it does away with the many-sided play of the muscles, and confiscates every
atom of freedom, both in bodily and intellectual activity. [1051 The lightening of the labour, even, becomes a sort of torture, since the machine
does not free the labourer from work, but deprives the work of all interest. Every kind of capitalist production, in so far as it is not only a
labour-process, but also a process of creating surplus-value, has this in common, that it is not the workman that employs the instruments of
labour, but the instruments of labour that employ the workman. But it is only in the factory system that this inversion for the first time acquires
technical and palpable reality. By means of its conversion into an automaton, the instrument of labour confronts the labourer, during the
labour-process, in the shape of capital, of dead labour, that dominates, and pumps dry, living labour-power. The separation of the intellectual
powers of production from the manual labour, and the conversion of those powers into the might of capital over labour, is, as we have already
shown, finally completed by modern industry erected on the foundation of machinery. The special skill of each individual insignificant factory
operative vanishes as an infinitesimal quantity before the science, the gigantic physical forces, and the mass of labour that are embodied in the
factory mechanism and, together with that mechanism, constitute the power of the "master." This "master," therefore, in whose brain the
machinery and his monopoly of it are inseparably united, whenever he falls out with his "hands," contemptuously tells them: "The factory
operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low species of skilled labour; and that there is none which is
more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which by a short training of the least expert can be more quickly, as well as
abundantly, acquired.... The master's machinery really plays a far more important part in the business of production than the labour and the skill
of the operative, which six months' education can teach, and a common labourer can learn." [1061 The technical subordination of the workman to
the uniform motion of the instruments of labour, and the peculiar composition of the body of workpeople, consisting as it does of individuals of
both sexes and of all ages, give rise to a barrack discipline, which is elaborated into a complete system in the factory, and which fully develops
the before mentioned labour of overlooking, thereby dividing the workpeople into operatives and overlookers, into private soldiers and sergeants
of an industrial army. "The main difficulty [in the automatic factory] ... lay ... above all in training human beings to renounce their desultory
habits of work, and to identify themselves with the unvarying regularity of the complex automaton. To devise and administer a successful code
of factory discipline, suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the Herculean enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright! Even at
the present day, when the system is perfectly organised and its labour lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible to convert persons
past the age of puberty, into useful factory hands." [1071 The factory code in which capital formulates, like a private legislator, and at his own
good will, his autocracy over his workpeople, unaccompanied by that division of responsibility, in other matters so much approved of by the
bourgeoisie, and unaccompanied by the still more approved representative system, this code is but the capitalistic caricature of that social
regulation of the labour-process which becomes requisite in co-operation on a great scale, and in the employment in common, of instruments of
labour and especially of machinery. The place of the slave-driver's lash is taken by the overlooker's book of penalties. All punishments naturally
resolve themselves into fines and deductions from wages, and the law-giving talent of the factory Lycurgus so arranges matters, that a violation
of his laws is, if possible, more profitable to him than the keeping of them. [1081 We shall here merely allude to the material conditions under
which factory labour is carried on. Every organ of sense is injured in an equal degree by artificial elevation of the temperature, by the dust-laden
atmosphere, by the deafening noise, not to mention danger to life and limb among the thickly crowded machinery, which, with the regularity of
the seasons, issues its list of the killed and wounded in the industrial battle. [1091 Economy of the social means of production, matured
and forced as in a hothouse by the factory system, is turned, in the hands of capital, into systematic robbery of what is necessary for the life of
the workman while he is at work, robbery of space, light, air, and of protection to his person against the dangerous and unwholesome
accompaniments of the productive process, not to mention the robbery of appliances for the comfort of the workman. [1101 Is Fourier wrong
when he calls factories "tempered bagnos"? [1111



SECTION 5

THE STRIFE BETWEEN WORKMAN AND MACHINE

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (15 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

The contest between the capitalist and the wage-labourer dates back to the very origin of capital. It raged on throughout the whole manufacturing
period. [1121 But only since the introduction of machinery has the workman fought against the instrument of labour itself, the material
embodiment of capital. He revolts against this particular form of the means of production, as being the material basis of the capitalist mode of
production.

In the 17th century nearly all Europe experienced revolts of the workpeople against the ribbon-loom, a machine for weaving ribbons and
trimmings, called in Germany Bandmuhle, Schnurmuhle, and Muhlenstuhl. These machines were invented in Germany. Abbe Lancellotti, in a
work that appeared in Venice in 1636, but which was written in 1579, says as follows: "Anthony Miiller of Danzig saw about 50 years ago in
that town, a very ingenious machine, which weaves 4 to 6 pieces at once. But the Mayor being apprehensive that this invention might throw a
large number of workmen on the streets, caused the inventor to be secretly strangled or drowned." In Leyden, this machine was not used till
1629; there the riots of the ribbon-weavers at length compelled the Town Council to prohibit it. "In hac urbe," says Boxhorn (Inst. Pol., 1663),
referring to the introduction of this machine into Leyden, "ante hos viginti circiter annos instrumentum quidam invenerunt textorium, quo solus
plus panni et facilius conficere poterat, quan plures aequali tempore. Hinc turbae ortae et querulae textorum, tandemque usus hujus instrumenti a
magistratu prohibitus est." After making various decrees more or less prohibitive against this loom in 1632, 1639, &c, the States General of
Holland at length permitted it to be used, under certain conditions, by the decree of the 15th December, 1661. It was also prohibited in Cologne
in 1676, at the same time that its introduction into England was causing disturbances among the workpeople. By an imperial Edict of 19th Feb.,
1685, its use was forbidden throughout all Germany. In Hamburg it was burnt in public by order of the Senate. The Emperor Charles VI., on 9th
Feb., 1719, renewed the edict of 1685, and not till 1765 was its use openly allowed in the Electorate of Saxony. This machine, which shook
Europe to its foundations, was in fact the precursor of the mule and the power-loom, and of the industrial revolution of the 18th century. It
enabled a totally inexperienced boy, to set the whole loom with all its shuttles in motion, by simply moving a rod backwards and forwards, and
in its improved form produced from 40 to 50 pieces at once.

About 1630, a wind-sawmill, erected near London by a Dutchman, succumbed to the excesses of the populace. Even as late as the beginning of
the 18th century, sawmills driven by water overcame the opposition of the people, supported as it was by Parliament, only with great difficulty.
No sooner had Everet in 1758 erected the first wool-shearing machine that was driven by water-power, than it was set on fire by 100,000 people
who had been thrown out of work. Fifty thousand workpeople, who had previously lived by carding wool, petitioned Parliament against
Arkwright's scribbling mills and carding engines. The enormous destruction of machinery that occurred in the English manufacturing districts
during the first 15 years of this century, chiefly caused by the employment of the power-loom, and known as the Luddite movement, gave the
anti-Jacobin governments of a Sidmouth, a Castlereagh, and the like, a pretext for the most reactionary and forcible measures. It took both time
and experience before the workpeople learnt to distinguish between machinery and its employment by capital, and to direct their attacks, not
against the material instruments of production, but against the mode in which they are used. [1131

The contests about wages in Manufacture, pre-suppose manufacture, and are in no sense directed against its existence. The opposition against the
establishment of new manufactures, proceeds from the guilds and privileged towns, not from the workpeople. Hence the writers of the
manufacturing period treat the division of labour chiefly as a means of virtually supplying a deficiency of labourers, and not as a means of
actually displacing those in work. This distinction is self-evident. If it be said that 100 millions of people would be required in England to spin
with the old spinning-wheel the cotton that is now spun with mules by 500,000 people, this does not mean that the mules took the place of those
millions who never existed. It means only this, that many millions of workpeople would be required to replace the spinning machinery. If, on the
other hand, we say, that in England the power-loom threw 800,000 weavers on the streets, we do not refer to existing machinery, that would have
to be replaced by a definite number of workpeople, but to a number of weavers in existence who were actually replaced or displaced by the
looms. During the manufacturing period, handicraft labour, altered though it was by division of labour, was. yet the basis. The demands of the
new colonial markets could not be satisfied owing to the relatively small number of town operatives handed down from the middle ages, and the
manufactures proper opened out new fields of production to the rural population, driven from the land by the dissolution of the feudal system. At
that time, therefore, division of labour and co-operation in the workshops, were viewed more from the positive aspect, that they made the
workpeople more productive. [1141 Long before the period of Modern Industry, co-operation and the concentration of the instruments of labour
in the hands of a few, gave rise, in numerous countries where these methods were applied in agriculture, to great, sudden and forcible revolutions
in the modes of production, and consequentially, in the conditions of existence, and the means of employment of the rural populations. But this
contest at first takes place more between the large and the small landed proprietors, than between capital and wage-labour; on the other hand,
when the labourers are displaced by the instruments of labour, by sheep, horses, &c, in this case force is directly resorted to in the first instance
as the prelude to the industrial revolution. The labourers are first driven from the land, and then come the sheep. Land grabbing on a great scale,
such as was perpetrated in England, is the first step in creating a field for the establishment of agriculture on a great scale. [1151 Hence this
subversion of agriculture puts on, at first, more the appearance of a political revolution.

The instrument of labour, when it takes the form of a machine, immediately becomes a competitor of the workman himself. [1161 The
self-expansion of capital by means of machinery is thenceforward directly proportional to the number of the workpeople, whose means of
livelihood have been destroyed by that machinery. The whole system of capitalist production is based on the fact that the workman sells
his labour-power as a commodity. Division of labour specialises this labour-power, by reducing it to skill in handling a particular tool. So soon
as the handling of this tool becomes the work of a machine, then, with the use-value, the exchange-value too, of the workman's labour-power
vanishes; the workman becomes unsaleable, like paper money thrown out of currency by legal enactment. That portion of the working-class, thus
by machinery rendered superfluous, i.e., no longer immediately necessary for the self-expansion of capital, either goes to the wall in the unequal
contest of the old handicrafts and manufactures with machinery, or else floods all the more easily accessible branches of industry, swamps the
labour-market, and sinks the price of labour-power below its value. It is impressed upon the workpeople, as a great consolation, first, that their

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (16 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

sufferings are only temporary ("a temporary inconvenience"), secondly, that machinery acquires the mastery over the whole of a given field of
production, only by degrees, so that the extent and intensity of its destructive effect is diminished. The first consolation neutralises the second.
When machinery seizes on an industry by degrees, it produces chronic misery among the operatives who compete with it. Where the transition is
rapid, the effect is acute and felt by great masses. History discloses no tragedy more horrible than the gradual extinction of the English
hand-loom weavers, an extinction that was spread over several decades, and finally sealed in 1838. Many of them died of starvation, many with
families vegetated for a long time on 2 1/2 d. a day. [1171 On the other hand, the English cotton machinery produced an acute effect in India. The
Governor General reported 1834-35: "The misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of commerce. The bones of the cotton-weavers are
bleaching the plains of India." No doubt, in turning them out of this "temporal" world, the machinery caused them no more than "a temporary
inconvenience." For the rest, since machinery is continually seizing upon new fields of production, its temporary effect is really permanent.
Hence, the character of independence and estrangement which the capitalist mode of production as a whole gives to the instruments of labour
and to the product, as against the workman, is developed by means of machinery into a thorough antagonism. [1181 Therefore, it is with the
advent of machinery, that the workman for the first time brutally revolts against the instruments of labour.

The instrument of labour strikes down the labourer. This direct antagonism between the two comes out most strongly, whenever newly
introduced machinery competes with handicrafts or manufactures, handed down from former times. But even in Modern Industry the continual
improvement of machinery, and the development of the automatic system, has an analogous effect. "The object of improved machinery is to
diminish manual labour, to provide for the performance of a process or the completion of a link in a manufacture by the aid of an iron instead of
the human apparatus." [1191 "The adaptation of power to machinery heretofore moved by hand, is almost of daily occurrence ... the minor
improvements in machinery having for their object economy of power, the production of better work, the turning off more work in the same
time, or in supplying the place of a child, a female, or a man, are constant, and although sometimes apparently of no great moment, have
somewhat important results." [1201 "Whenever a process requires peculiar dexterity and steadiness of hand, it is withdrawn, as soon as possible,
from the cunning workman, who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it is t)laced in charge of a peculiar mechanism, so self -regulating
that a child can superintend it." [1211 "On the automatic plan skilled labour gets progressively superseded." [1221 "The effect of improvements
in machinery, not merely in superseding the necessity for the employment of the same quantity of adult labour as before, in order to produce a
given result, but in substituting one description of human labour for another, the less skilled for the more skilled, juvenile for adult, female for
male, causes a fresh disturbance in the rate of wages." [1231 "The effect of substituting the self-acting mule for the common mule, is to discharge
the greater part of the men spinners, and to retain adolescents and children." [1241 The extraordinary power of expansion of the factory system
owing to accumulated practical experience, to the mechanical means at hand, and to constant technical progress, was proved to us by the giant
strides of that system under the pressure of a shortened working-day. But who, in 1860, the Zenith year of the English cotton industry, would
have dreamt of the galloping improvements in machinery, and the corresponding displacement of working people, called into being during the
following 3 years, under the stimulus of the American Civil War? A couple of examples from the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories will
suffice on this point. A Manchester manufacturer states: "We formerly had 75 carding engines, now we have 12, doing the same quantity of
work.... We are doing with fewer hands by 14, at a saving in wages of £10 a-week. Our estimated saving in waste is about 10% in the quantity of
cotton consumed." "In another fine-spinning mill in Manchester, I was informed that through increased speed and the adoption of some
self-acting processes, a reduction had been made, in number, of a fourth in one department, and of above half in another, and that the
introduction of the combing machine in place of the second carding, had considerably reduced, the number of hands formerly employed in the
carding-room." Another spinning-mill is estimated to effect a saving of labour of 10%. The Messrs. Gilmour, spinners at Manchester, state: "In
our blowing-room department we consider our expense with new machinery is fully one-third less in wages and hands ... in the jack-frame and
drawing-frame room, about one-third less in expense, and likewise one-third less in hands; in the spinningroom about one-third less in expenses.
But this is not all; when our yarn goes to the manufacturers, it is so much better by the application of our new machinery, that they will produce
a greater quantity of cloth, and cheaper than from the yarn produced by old machinery." [1251 Mr. Redgrave further remarks in the same Report:
"The reduction of hands against increased production is, in fact, constantly taking place, in woollen mills the reduction commenced some time
since, and is continuing; a few days since, the master of a school in the neighbourhood of Rochdale said to me, that the great falling off in the
girls' school is not only caused by the distress, but by the changes of machinery in the woollen mills, in consequence of which a reduction of 70
short-timers had taken place." [1261

The following table shows the total result of the mechanical improvements in the English cotton industry due to the American Civil War.



Number of Factories


1857


1861


1868


England and Wales


2,046


2,715


2,405


Scotland


152


163


131


Ireland


12


9


13


United Kingdom


2,210


2,887


2,549


Number of Power Looms


1857


1861


1868


England and Wales


275,590


368,125


344,719


Scotland


21,624


30,110


31,864


Ireland


1,633


1,757


2,746


United Kingdom


298,847


399,992


379,329



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (17 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen



Number of Spindles 1857 1861 1868


England and Wales 25,818,576 28,352,125 30,478,228


Scotland 2,041,129 1,915,398 1,397,546


Ireland 150,512 119,944 124,240


United Kingdom 28,010,217 30,387,467 32,000,014


Number of Persons Employed 1857 1861 1868


England and Wales 341,170 407,598 357,052


Scotland 34,698 41,237 39,809


Ireland 3,345 2,734 4,203


United Kingdom 379,213 452,569 401,064



Hence, between 1861 and 1868, 338 cotton factories disappeared, in other words more productive machinery on a larger scale was concentrated
in the hands of a smaller number of capitalists. The number of power-looms decreased by 20,663; but since their product increased in the same
period, an improved loom must have yielded more than an old one. Lastly the number of spindles increased by 1,612,541, while the number of
operatives decreased by 50,505. The "temporary" misery inflicted on the workpeople by the cotton-crisis, was heightened, and from being
temporary made permanent, by the rapid and persistent progress of machinery.

But machinery not only acts as a competitor who gets the better of the workman, and is constantly on the point of making him superfluous. It is
also a power inimical to him, and as such capital proclaims it from the roof tops and as such makes use of it. It is the most powerful weapon for
repressing strikes, those periodical revolts of the working-class against the autocracy of capital. [1271 According to Gaskell, the steam-engine
was from the very first an antagonist of human power, an antagonist that enabled the capitalist to tread under foot the growing claims of
the workmen, who threatened the newly born factory system with a crisis. [1281 it would be possible to write quite a history of the inventions,
made since 1830, for the sole purpose of supplying capital with weapons against the revolts of the working-class. At the head of these in
importance, stands the self-acting mule, because it opened up a new epoch in the automatic system. [1291

Nasmyth, the inventor of the steam-hammer, gives the following evidence before the Trades' Union Commission, with regard to the
improvements made by him in machinery and introduced in consequence of the wide-spread and long strikes of the engineers in 1851. "The
characteristic feature of our modern mechanical improvements, is the introduction of self-acting tool machinery. What every mechanical
workman has now to do, and what every boy can do, is not to work himself but to superintend the beautiful labour of the machine. The whole
class of workmen that depend exclusively on their skill, is now done away with. Formerly, I employed four boys to every mechanic. Thanks to
these new mechanical combinations, I have reduced the number of grown-up men from 1,500 to 750. The result was a considerable increase in
my profits."

Ure says of a machine used in calico printing: "At length capitalists sought deliverance from this intolerable bondage" [namely the, in their eyes,
burdensome terms of their contracts with the workmen] "in the resources of science, and were speedily re-instated in their legitimate rule, that of
the head over the inferior members." Speaking of an invention for dressing warps: "Then the combined malcontents, who fancied themselves
impregnably entrenched behind the old lines of division of labour, found their flanks turned and their defences rendered useless by the new
mechanical tactics, and were obliged to surrender at discretion." With regard to the invention of the self-acting mule, he says: "A creation
destined to restore order among the industrious classes.... This invention confirms the great doctrine already propounded, that when capital
enlists science into her service, the refractory hand of labour will always be taught docility." [1301 Although Ure's work appeared 30 years ago,
at a time when the factory system was comparatively but little developed, it still perfectly expresses the spirit of the factory, not only by its
undisguised cynicism, but also by the naivete with which it blurts out the stupid contradictions of the capitalist brain. For instance, after
propounding the "doctrine" stated above, that capital, with the aid of science taken into its pay, always reduces the refractory hand of labour to
docility, he grows indignant because "it (physico-mechanical science) has been accused of lending itself to the rich capitalist as an instrument for
harassing the poor." After preaching a long sermon to show how advantageous the rapid development of machinery is to the working-classes, he
warns them, that by their obstinacy and their strikes they hasten that development. "Violent revulsions of this nature," he says, "display
short-sighted man in the contemptible character of a self- tormentor." A few pages before he states the contrary. "Had it not been for the violent
collisions and interruptions resulting from erroneous views among the factory operatives, the factory system would have been developed still
more rapidly and beneficially for all concerned." Then he exclaims again: "Fortunately for the state of society in the cotton districts of Great
Britain, the improvements in machinery are gradual ' " "It" (improvement in machinery) "is said to lower the rate of earnings of adults by
displacing a portion of them, and thus rendering their number superabundant as compared with the demand for their labour. It certainly augments
the demand for the labour of children and increases the rate of their wages.' On the other hand, this same dispenser of consolation defends the
lowness of the children's wages on the ground that it prevents parents from sending their children at too early an age into the factory. The whole
of his book is a vindication of a working-day of unrestricted length; that Parliament should forbid children of 13 years to be exhausted by
working 12 hours a day, reminds his liberal soul of the darkest days of the middle ages. This does not prevent him from calling upon the factory
operatives to thank Providence, who by means of machinery has given them the leisure to think of their "immortal interests." [1311



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (18 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

SECTION 6.

THE THEORY OF COMPENSATION AS REGARDS THE WORKPEOPLE DISPLACED BY MACHINERY



James Mill, MacCulloch, Torrens, Senior, John Stuart Mill, and a whole series besides, of bourgeois political economists, insist that all
machinery that displaces workmen, simultaneously and necessarily sets free an amount of capital adequate to employ the same identical
workmen. [1321

Suppose a capitalist to employ 100 workmen, at £30 a year each, in a carpet factory. The variable capital annually laid out amounts, therefore, to
£3,000. Suppose, also, that he discharges 50 of his workmen, and employs the remaining 50 with machinery that costs him £1,500. To simplify
matters, we take no account of buildings, coal, &c. Further suppose that the raw material annually consumed costs £3,000, both before and after
the change. [1331 Is any capital set free by this metamorphosis? Before the change, the total sum of £6,000 consisted half of constant, and half of
variable capital. After the change it consists of £4,500 constant ( £3,000 raw material and £1,500 machinery), and £1,500 variable capital. The
variable capital, instead of being one half, is only one quarter, of the total capital. Instead of being set free, a part of the capital is here locked up
in such a way as to cease to be exchanged against labour-power: variable has been changed into constant capital. Other things remaining
unchanged, the capital of £6,000, can, in future, employ no more than 50 men. With each improvement in the machinery, it will employ fewer. If
the newly introduced machinery had cost less than did the labour-power and implements displaced by it, if, for instance, instead of costing
£1,500, it had cost only £1,000, a variable capital of £1,000 would have been converted into constant capital, and locked up; and a capital of
£500 would have been set free. The latter sum, supposing wages unchanged, would form a fund sufficient to employ about 16 out of the 50 men
discharged; nay, less than 16, for, in order to be employed as capital, a part of this £500 must now become constant capital, thus leaving only the
remainder to be laid out in labour-power.

But, suppose, besides, that the making of the new machinery affords employment to a greater number of mechanics, can that be called
compensation to the carpet-makers, thrown on the streets? At the best, its construction employs fewer men than its employment displaces. The
sum of £1,500 that formerly represented the wages of the discharged carpet-makers, now represents in the shape of machinery: (1) the value of
the means of production used in the construction of that machinery, (2) the wages of the mechanics employed in its construction, and (3) the
surplus-value failing to the share of their "master." Further, the machinery need not be renewed till it is worn out. Hence, in order to keep the
increased number of mechanics in constant employment, one carpet manufacturer after another must displace workmen by machines.

As a matter of fact the apologists do not mean this sort of setting free.

They have in their minds the means of subsistence of the liberated work-people. It cannot be denied, in the above instance, that the machinery
not only liberates 50 men, thus placing them at others' disposal, but, at the same time, it withdraws from their consumption, and sets free, means
of subsistence to the value of £1,500. The simple fact, by no means a new one, that machinery cuts off the workmen from their means of
subsistence is, therefore, in economic parlance tantamount to this, that machinery liberates means of subsistence for the workman, or converts
those means into capital for his employment. The mode of expression, you see, is everything. Nominibus mollire licet mala.

This theory implies that the £1,500 worth of means of subsistence was capital that was being expanded by the labour of the 50 men discharged.
That, consequently, this capital falls out of employment so soon as they commence their forced holidays, and never rests till it has found a fresh
investment, where it can again be productively consumed by these same 50 men. That sooner or later, therefore, the capital and the workmen
must come together again, and that, then, the compensation is complete. That the sufferings of the workmen displaced by machinery are
therefore as transient as are the riches of this world.

In relation to the discharged workmen, the £1,500 worth of means of subsistence never was capital. What really confronted them as capital, was
the sum of £1,500, afterwards laid out in machinery. On looking closer it will be seen that this sum represented part of the carpets produced in a
year by the 50 discharged men, which part they received as wages from their employer in money instead of in kind. With the carpets in the form
of money, they bought means of subsistence to the value of £1,500. These means, therefore, were to them, not capital, but commodities, and
they, as regards these commodities, were not wage-labourers, but buyers. The circumstance that they were "freed" by the machinery, from the
means of purchase, changed them from buyers into non-buyers. Hence a lessened demand for those commodities — voila tout. If this diminution
be not compensated by an increase from some other quarter, the market price of the commodities falls. If this state of things lasts for some time,
and extends, there follows a discharge of workmen employed in the production of these commodities. Some of the capital that was previously
devoted to production of necessary means of subsistence, has to become reproduced in another form. While prices fall, and capital is being
displaced, the labourers employed in the production of necessary means of subsistence are in their turn "freed" from a part of their wages.
Instead, therefore, of proving that, when machinery frees the workman from his means of subsistence, it simultaneously converts those means
into capital for his further employment, our apologists, with their cut-and-dried law of supply and demand, prove, on the contrary, that
machinery throws workmen on the streets, not only in that branch of production in which it is introduced, but also in those branches in which it
is not introduced.

The real facts, which are travestied by the optimism of economists, are as follows: The labourers, when driven out of the workshop by the
machinery, are thrown upon the labour-market, and there add to the number of workmen at the disposal of the capitalists. In Part VII. of this
book it will be seen that this effect of machinery, which, as we have seen, is represented to be a compensation to the working-class, is on the
contrary a most frightful scourge. For the present I will only say this: The labourers that are thrown out of work in any branch of industry, can no

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (19 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

doubt seek for employment in some other branch. If they find it, and thus renew the bond between them and the means of subsistence, this takes
place only by the intermediary of a new and additional capital that is seeking investment; not at all by the intermediary of the capital that
formerly employed them and was afterwards converted into machinery. And even should they find employment, what a poor look-out is theirs!
Crippled as they are by division of labour, these poor devils are worth so little outside their old trade, that they cannot find admission into any
industries, except a few of inferior kind, that are over-supplied with underpaid workmen. f!341 Further, every branch of industry attracts each
year a new stream of men, who furnish a contingent from which to fill up vacancies, and to draw a supply for expansion. So soon as machinery
sets free a part of the workmen employed in a given branch of industry, the reserve men are also diverted into new channels of employment, and
become absorbed in other branches; meanwhile the original victims, during the period of transition, for the most part starve and perish.

It is an undoubted fact that machinery, as such, is not responsible for "setting free" the workman from the means of subsistence. It cheapens and
increases production in that branch which it seizes on, and at first makes no change in the mass of the means of subsistence produced in other
branches. Hence, after its introduction, the society possesses as much, if not more, of the necessaries of life than before, for the labourers thrown
out of work; and that quite apart from the enormous share of the annual produce wasted by the non- workers. And this is the point relied on by
our apologists! The contradictions and antagonisms inseparable from the capitalist employment of machinery, do not exist, they say, since they
do not arise out of machinery, as such, but out of its capitalist employment! Since therefore machinery, considered alone, shortens the hours of
labour, but, when in the service of capital, lengthens them; since in itself it lightens labour, but when employed by capital, heightens the intensity
of labour; since in itself it is a victory of man over the forces of Nature, but in the hands of capital, makes man the slave of those forces; since in
itself it increases the wealth of the producers, but in the hands of capital, makes them paupers-for all these reasons and others besides, says the
bourgeois economist without more ado, it is clear as noon-day that all these contradictions are a mere semblance of the reality, and that, as a
matter of fact, they have neither an actual nor a theoretical existence. Thus he saves himself from all further puzzling of the brain, and what is
more, implicitly declares his opponent to be stupid enough to contend against, not the capitalistic employment of machinery, but machinery
itself.

No doubt he is far from denying that temporary inconvenience may result from the capitalist use of machinery. But where is the medal without
its reverse! Any employment of machinery, except by capital, is to him an impossibility. Exploitation of the workman by the machine is
therefore, with him, identical with exploitation of the machine by the workman. Whoever, therefore, exposes the real state of things in the
capitalistic employment of machinery, is against its employment in any way, and is an enemy of social progress ! [1351 Exactly the reasoning of
the celebrated Bill Sykes. "Gentlemen of the jury, no doubt the throat of this commercial traveller has been cut. But that is not my fault, it is the
fault of the knife. Must we, for such a temporary inconvenience, abolish the use of the knife? Only consider! where would agriculture and trade
be without the knife? Is it not as salutary in surgery, as it is knowing in anatomy? And in addition a willing help at the festive board? If you
abolish the knife — you hurl us back into the depths of barbarism." [1361

Although machinery necessarily throws men out of work in those industries into which it is introduced, yet it may, notwithstanding this, bring
about an increase of employment in other industries. This effect, however, has nothing in common with the so-called theory of compensation.
Since every article produced by a machine is cheaper than a similar article produced by hand, we deduce the following infallible law: If the total
quantity of the article produced by machinery, be equal to the total quantity of the article previously produced by a handicraft or by manufacture,
and now made by machinery, then the total labour expended is diminished. The new labour spent on the instruments of labour, on the machinery,
on the coal, and so on, must necessarily be less than the labour displaced by the use of the machinery; otherwise the product of the machine
would be as dear, or dearer, than the product of the manual labour. But, as a matter of fact, the total quantity of the article produced by
machinery with a diminished number of workmen, instead of remaining equal to, by far exceeds the total quantity of the hand-made article that
has been displaced. Suppose that 400,000 yards of cloth have been produced on power-looms by fewer weavers than could weave 100,000 yards
by hand. In the quadrupled product there lies four times as much raw material. Hence the production of raw material must be quadrupled. But as
regards the instruments of labour, such as buildings, coal, machinery, and so on, it is different; the limit up to which the additional labour
required for their production can increase, varies with the difference between the quantity of the machine-made article, and the quantity of the
same article that the same number of workmen could make by hand.

Hence, as the use of machinery extends in a given industry, the immediate effect is to increase production in the other industries that furnish the
first with means of production. How far employment is thereby found for an increased number of men, depends, given the length of the
working-day and the intensity of labour, on the composition of the capital employed, i.e., on the ratio of its constant to its variable component.
This ratio, in its turn, varies considerably with the extent to which machinery has already seized on, or is then seizing on, those trades. The
number of the men condemned to work in coal and metal mines increased enormously owing to the progress of the English factory system; but
during the last few decades this increase of number has been less rapid, owing to the use of new machinery in mining. [137] A new type of
workman springs into life along with the machine, namely, its maker. We have already learnt that machinery has possessed itself even, of this
branch of production on a scale that grows greater every day. [1381 As to raw material, [1391 there is not the least doubt that the rapid strides of
cotton spinning, not only pushed on with tropical luxuriance the growth of cotton in the United States, and with it the African slave trade, but
also made the breeding of slaves the chief business of the border slave-states. When, in 1790, the first census of slaves was taken in the United
States, their number was 697,000; in 1861 it had nearly reached four millions. On the other hand, it is no less certain that the rise of the English
woollen factories, together with the gradual conversion of arable land into sheep pasture, brought, about the superfluity of agricultural labourers
that led to their being driven in masses into the towns. Ireland, having during the last twenty years reduced its population by nearly one half, is at
this moment undergoing the process of still further reducing the number of its inhabitants, so as exactly to suit the requirements of its landlords
and of the English woollen manufacturers.

When machinery is applied to any of the preliminary or intermediate stages through which the subject of labour has to pass on its way to
completion, there is an increased yield of material in those stages, and simultaneously an increased demand for labour in the handicrafts or

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (20 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

manufactures supplied by the produce of the machines. Spinning by machinery, for example, supplied yarn so cheaply and so abundantly that the
hand-loom weavers were, at first, able to work full time without increased outlay. Their earnings accordingly rose. [1401 Hence a flow of people
into the cotton-weaving trade, till at length the 800,000 weavers, called into existence by the Jenny, the throstle and the mule, were overwhelmed
by the power- loom. So also, owing to the abundance of clothing materials produced by machinery, the number of tailors, seamstresses and
needlewomen, went on increasing until the appearance of the sewing-machine.

In proportion as machinery, with the aid of a relatively small number of workpeople, increases the mass of raw materials, intermediate products,
instruments of labour, &c, the working-up of these raw materials and intermediate products becomes split up into numberless branches; social
production increases in diversity. The factory system carries the social division of labour immeasurably further than does manufacture, for it
increases the productiveness of the industries it seizes upon, in a far higher degree.

The immediate result of machinery is to augment surplus- value and the mass of products in which surplus-value is embodied. And, as the
substances consumed by the capitalists and their dependents become more plentiful, so too do these orders of society. Their growing wealth, and
the relatively diminished number of workmen required to produce the necessaries of life beget, simultaneously with the rise of new and
luxurious wants, the means of satisfying those wants. A larger portion of the produce of society is changed into surplus-produce, and a larger
part of the surplus-produce is supplied for consumption in a multiplicity of refined shapes. In other words, the production of luxuries increases.
IT411 The refined and varied forms of the products are also due to new relations with the markets of the world, relations that are created by
Modern Industry. Not only are greater quantities of foreign articles of luxury exchanged for home products, but a greater mass of foreign raw
materials, ingredients, and intermediate products, are used as means of production in the home industries. Owing to these relations with the
markets of the world, the demand for labour increases in the carrying trades, which split up into numerous varieties. [1421

The increase of the means of production and subsistence, accompanied by a relative diminution in the number of labourers, causes an increased
demand for labour in making canals, docks, tunnels, bridges, and so on, works that can only bear fruit in the far future. Entirely new branches of
production, creating new fields of labour, are also formed, as the direct result either of machinery or of the general industrial changes brought
about by it. But the place occupied by these branches in the general production is, even in the most developed countries, far from important. The
number of labourers that find employment in them is directly proportional to the demand, created by those industries, for the crudest form of
manual labour. The chief industries of this kind are, at present, gas-works, telegraphs, photography, steam navigation, and railways. According
to the census of 1861 for England and Wales, we find in the gas industry (gas-works, production of mechanical apparatus, servants of . the gas
companies, &c), 15,21 1 persons; in telegraphy, 2,399; in photography, 2,366; steam navigation, 3,570; and in railways, 70,599, of whom the
unskilled "navvies," more or less permanently employed, and the whole administrative and commercial staff, make up about 28,000. The total
number of persons, therefore, employed in these five new industries amounts to 94,145.

Lastly, the extraordinary productiveness of modern industry, accompanied as it is by both a more extensive and a more intense exploitation of
labour-power in all other spheres of production, allows of the unproductive employment of a larger and larger part of the working-class, and the
consequent reproduction, on a constantly extending scale, of the ancient domestic slaves under the name of a servant class, including
men-servants, women-servants, lackeys, &c. According to the census of 1861, the population of England and Wales was 20,066,244; of these,
9,776,259 males, and 10,289,965 females. If we deduct from this population all who are too old or too young for work, all unproductive women,
young persons and children, the "ideological" classes, such as government officials, priests, lawyers, soldiers, &c; further, all who have no
occupation but to consume the labour of others in the form of rent, interest, &c; and, lastly, paupers, vagabonds, and criminals, there remain in
round numbers eight millions of the two sexes of every age, including in that number every capitalist who is in any way engaged in industry,
commerce, or finance. Among these 8 millions are:

PERSONS

Agricultural labourers (including shepherds,

farm servants, and maidservants living in the

houses of farmers) 1,098,261

All who are employed in cotton, woollen,

worsted, flax, hemp, silk, and jute factories,

in stocking making and lace making by

machinery 642, 607 [1431

All who are employed in coal mines and metal

mines 565,835

All who are employed in metal works
(blastfurnaces, rolling mills, &c.),
and metal manufactures of every kind 396, 998 [1441

The servant class 1,208,648 [1451

All the persons employed in textile factories and in mines, taken together, number 1,208,442; those employed in textile factories and metal
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (21 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

industries, taken together, number 1,039,605; in both cases less than the number of modern domestic slaves. What a splendid result of the
capitalist exploitation of machinery!



SECTION 7

REPULSION AND ATTRACTION OF WORKPEOPLE BY THE FACTORY SYSTEM. CRISES IN THE COTTON TRADE



All political economists of any standing admit that the introduction of new machinery has a baneful effect on the workmen in the old handicrafts
and manufactures with which this machinery at first competes. Almost all of them bemoan the slavery of the factory operative. And what is the
great trump-card that they play? That machinery, after the horrors of the period of introduction and development have subsided, instead of
diminishing, in the long run increases the number of the slaves of labour! Yes, Political Economy revels in the hideous theory, hideous to every
"philanthropist" who believes in the eternal Nature-ordained necessity for capitalist production, that after a period of growth and transition, even
its crowning success, the factory system based on machinery, grinds down more workpeople than on its first introduction it throws on the streets.
[1461

It is true that in some cases, as we saw from instances of English worsted and silk factories, an extraordinary extension of the factory system
may, at a certain stage of its development, be accompanied not only by a relative, but by an absolute decrease in the number of operatives
employed. In the year 1860, when a special census of all the factories in the United Kingdom was taken by order of Parliament, the factories in
those parts of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire, included in the district of Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, numbered 652; 570 of these
contained 85,622 power-looms, 6,819,146 spindles (exclusive of doubling spindles), employed 27,439 horse-power (steam), and 1,390 (water),
and 94,119 persons. In the year 1865, the same factories contained, looms 95,163, spindles 7,025,031, had a steam-power of 28,925 horses, and a
water-power of 1,445 horses, and employed 88,913 persons. Between 1860 and 1865, therefore, the increase in looms was 11%, in spindles 3%,
and in engine-power 3%, while the number of persons employed decreased 5 1/2%. [147] Between 1852 and 1862, considerable extension of the
English woollen manufacture took place, while the number of hands employed in it remained almost stationary, showing how greatly the
introduction of new machines had superseded the labour of preceding periods. [1481 In certain cases, the increase in the number of hands
employed is only apparent; that is, it is not due to the extension of the factories already established, but to the gradual annexation of connected
trades; for instance, the increase in power-looms, and in the hands employed by them between 1838 and 1856, was, in the cotton trade, simply
owing to the extension of this branch of industry; but in the other trades to the application of steam-power to the carpet-loom, to the
ribbon-loom, and to the linen-loom, which previously had been worked by the power of men. [1491 Hence the increase of the hands in these
latter trades was merely a symptom of a diminution in the total number employed. Finally, we have considered this question entirely apart from
the fact, that everywhere, except in the metal industries, young persons (under 18), and women and children form the preponderating element in
the class of factory hands.

Nevertheless, in spite of the mass of hands actually displaced and virtually replaced by machinery, we can understand how the factory
operatives, through the building of more mills and the extension of old ones in a given industry, may become more numerous than the
manufacturing workmen and handicraftsman that have been displaced. Suppose, for example, that in the old mode of production, a capital of
£500 is employed weekly, two-fifths being constant and three-fifths variable capital, i.e., £200 being laid out in means of production, and £300,
say £1 per man, in labour-power. On the introduction of machinery the composition of this capital becomes altered. We will suppose it to consist
of four-fifths constant and one-fifth variable, which means that only £100 is now laid out in labour-power. Consequently, two-thirds of the
workmen are discharged. If now the business extends, and the total capital employed grows to £1,500 under unchanged conditions, the number
of operatives employed will increase to 300, just as many as before the introduction of the machinery. If the capital further grows to £2,000, 400
men will be employed, or one-third more than under the old system. Their numbers have, in point of fact, increased by 100, but relatively, i.e., in
proportion to the total capital advanced, they have diminished by 800, for the £2,000 capital would, in the old state of things, have employed
1,200 instead of 400 men. Hence, a relative decrease in the number of hands is consistent with an actual increase. We assumed above that while
the total capital increases, its composition remains the same, because the conditions of production remain constant. But we have already seen
that, with every advance in the use of machinery, the constant component of capital, that part which consists of machinery, raw material, &c,
increases, while the variable component, the part laid out in labour-power, decreases. We also know that in no, other system of production is
improvement so continuous, and the composition of the capital employed so constantly changing as in the factory system. These changes are,
however, continually interrupted by periods of rest, during which there is a mere quantitative extension of the factories on the existing technical
basis. During such periods the operatives increase in number.. Thus, in 1835, the total number of operatives in the cotton, woollen, worsted, flax,
and silk factories of the United Kingdom was only 354,684; while in 1861 the number of the power-loom weavers alone (of both sexes and of all
ages, from eight years upwards), amounted to 230,654. Certainly, this growth appears less important when we consider that in 1838 the
hand-loom weavers with their families still numbered 800,000, [1501 not to mention those thrown out of work in Asia, and on the Continent of
Europe.

In the few remarks I have still to make on this point, I shall refer to some actually existing relations, the existence of which our theoretical
investigation has not yet disclosed.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (22 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

So long as, in a given branch of industry, the factory system extends itself at the expense of the old handicrafts or of manufacture, the result is as
sure as is the result of an encounter between an army furnished with breach-loaders, and one armed with bows and arrows. This first period,
during which machinery conquers its field of action, is of decisive importance owing to the extraordinary profits that it helps to produce. These
profits not only form a source of accelerated accumulation, but also attract into the favoured sphere of production a large part of the additional
social capital that is being constantly created, and is ever on the look-out for new investments. The special advantages of this first period of fast
and furious activity are felt in every branch of production that machinery invades. So soon, however, as the factory system has gained a certain
breadth of footing and a definite degree of maturity, and, especially, so soon as its technical basis, machinery, is itself produced by machinery; so
soon as coal mining and iron mining, the metal industries, and the means of transport have been revolutionised; so soon, in short, as the general
conditions requisite for production by the modern industrial system have been established, this mode of production acquires an elasticity, a
capacity for sudden extension by leaps and bounds that finds no hindrance except in the supply of raw material and in the disposal of the
produce. On the one hand, the immediate effect of machinery is to increase the supply of raw material in the same way, for example, as the
cotton gin augmented the production of cotton. [151] On the other hand, the cheapness of the articles produced by machinery, and the improved
means of transport and communication furnish the weapons for conquering foreign markets. By ruining handicraft production in other countries,
machinery forcibly converts them into fields for the supply of its raw material. In this way East India was compelled to produce cotton, wool,
hemp, jute, and indigo for Great Britain . IT521 By constantly making a part of the hands "supernumerary," modern industry, in all countries
where it has taken root, gives a spur to emigration and to the colonisation of foreign lands, which are thereby converted into settlements for
growing the raw material of the mother country; just as Australia, for example, was converted into a colony for growing wool. [1531 A new and
international division of labour, a division suited to the requirements of the chief centres of modern industry springs up, and converts one part of
the globe into a chiefly agricultural field of production, for supplying the other part which remains a chiefly industrial field. This revolution
hangs together with radical changes in agriculture which we need not here further inquire into. [154]

On the motion of Mr. Gladstone, the House of Commons ordered, on the 17th February, 1867, a return of the total quantities of grain, corn, and
flour, of all sorts, imported into, and exported from, the United Kingdom, between the years 1831 and 1866. 1 give below a summary of the
result. The flour is given in quarters of corn. (See the Table on p. 42.6.)





QUINQUENNIAL PERIODS AND THE YEAR 1866


ANNUAL AVERAGE


1831-1835


1836-1840


1841-1845


1846-1850


1851-1855


1856-1860


1861-1865


1866


Import


1,096,373


2,389,729


2,843,865


8,776,552


8,345,237


10,913,612


15,009,871


16,457,340


Export


225,263


251,770


139,056


155,461


307,491


341,150


302,754


216,218


Excess of
import over
export


871,110


2,137,959


2,704,809


8,621,091


8,037,746


10,572,462


14,707,117


16,241,122


POPULATION


Yearly average
in each period


24,621,107


25,929,507


27,262,569


27,797,598


27,572,923


28,391,544


29,381,460


29,935,404


Average quantity of
corn etc,, in qrs.,
consumed annually
per head over and
above the home
produce consumed


0.036


0.082


0.099


0.310


0.291


0.372


0.501


0.543



The enormous power, inherent in the factory system, of expanding by jumps, and the dependence of that system on the markets of the world,
necessarily beget feverish production, followed by over-filling of the markets, whereupon contraction of the markets brings on crippling of
production. The life of modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate activity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation. The
uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the employment, and consequently the conditions of existence, of the operatives become
normal, owing to these periodic changes of the industrial cycle. Except in the periods of prosperity, there rages between the capitalists the most
furious combat for the share of each in the markets. This share is directly proportional to the cheapness of the. product. Besides the rivalry that
this struggle begets in the application of improved machinery for replacing labour-power, and of new methods of production, there also comes a
time in every industrial cycle, when a forcible reduction of wages beneath the value of labour-power, is attempted for the purpose of cheapening
commodities. IT561

A necessary condition, therefore, to the growth of the number of factory hands, is a proportionally much more rapid growth of the amount of
capital invested in mills. This growth, however, is conditioned by the ebb and flow of the industrial cycle. It is, besides, constantly interrupted by
the technical progress that at one time virtually supplies the place of new workmen, at another, actually displaces old ones. This qualitative
change in mechanical industry continually discharges hands from the factory, or shuts its doors against the fresh stream of recruits, while the
purely quantitative extension of the factories absorbs not only the men thrown out of work, but also fresh contingents. The workpeople are thus
continually both repelled and attracted, hustled from pillar to post, while, at the same time, constant changes take place in the sex, age, and skill
of the levies.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (23 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
The lot of the factory operatives will be best depicted by taking a rapid survey of the course of the English cotton industry.

From 1770 to 1815 this trade was depressed or stagnant for 5 years only. During this period of 45 years the English manufacturers had a
monopoly of machinery and of the markets of the world. From 1815 to 1821 depression; 1822 and 1823 prosperity; 1824 abolition of the laws
against Trades' Unions, great extension of factories everywhere; 1825 crisis; 1826 great misery and riots among the factory operatives; 1827
slight improvement; 1828 great increase in power-looms, and in exports; 1829 exports, especially to India, surpass all former years; 1830 glutted
markets, great distress; 1831 to 1833 continued depression, the monopoly of the trade with India and China withdrawn from the, East India
Company; 1834 great increase of factories and machinery, shortness of hands. The new poor law furthers the migration of agricultural labourers
into the factory districts. The country districts swept of children. White slave trade; 1835 great prosperity, contemporaneous starvation of the
hand-loom weavers; 1836 great prosperity; 1837 and 1838 depression and crisis; 1839 revival; 1840 great depression, riots, calling out of the
military; 1841 and 1842 frightful suffering among the factory operatives; 1842 the manufacturers lock the hands out of the factories in order to
enforce the repeal of the Corn Laws. The operatives stream in thousands into the towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, are driven back by the
military, and their leaders brought to trial at Lancaster; 1843 great misery; 1844 revival; 1845 great prosperity; 1846 continued improvement at
first, then reaction. Repeal of the Corn Laws; 1847 crisis, general reduction of wages by 10 and more per cent, in honour of the "big loaf"; 1848
continued depression; Manchester under military, protection; 1849 revival; 1850 prosperity; 1851 falling prices, low wages, frequent strikes;
1852 improvement begins, strikes continue, the manufacturers threaten to import foreign hands; 1853 increasing exports. Strike for 8 months,
and great misery at Preston; 1854 prosperity, glutted markets; 1855 news of failures stream in from the United States, Canada, and the Eastern
markets; 1856 great prosperity; 1857 crisis; 1858 improvement; 1859 great prosperity, increase in factories; 1860 Zenith of the English cotton
trade, the Indian, Australian, and other markets so glutted with goods that even in 1863 they had not absorbed the whole lot; the French Treaty of
Commerce, enormous growth of factories and machinery; 1861 prosperity continues for a time, reaction, the American Civil War, cotton famine:
1862 to 1863 complete collapse.

The history of the cotton famine is too characteristic to dispense with dwelling upon it for a moment. From the indications as to the condition of
the markets of the world in 1860 and 1861, we see that the cotton famine came in the nick of time for the manufacturers, and was to some extent
advantageous to them, a fact that was acknowledged in the reports of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, proclaimed in Parliament by
Palmerston and Derby, and confirmed by events. [1571 No doubt, among the 2,887 cotton mills in the United Kingdom in 1861, there were many
of small size. According to the report of Mr. A. Redgrave, out of the 2, 109 mills included in his district, 392, or 19% employed less than ten
horse-power each; 345, or 16% employed 10 H. P., and less than 20 H. P.; while 1,372 employed upwards of 20 H. P. £158] The majority of the
small mills were weaving sheds, built during the period of prosperity after 1858, for the most part by speculators, of whom one supplied the yam,
another the machinery, a third the buildings, and were worked by men who had been overlookers, or by other persons of small means. These
small manufacturers mostly went to the wall. The same fate would have overtaken them in the commercial crisis that was staved off only by the
cotton famine. Although they formed one-third of the total number of manufacturers, yet their mills absorbed a much smaller part of the capital
invested in the cotton trade. As to the extent of the stoppage, it appears from authentic estimates, that in October 1862, 60.3% of the spindles,
and 58% of the looms were standing. This refers to the cotton trade as a whole, and, of course, requires considerable modification for individual
districts. Only very few mills worked full time (60 hours a week), the remainder worked at intervals. Even in those few cases where full time
was worked, and at the customary rate of piece-wage, the weekly wages of the operatives necessarily shrank, owing to good cotton being
replaced by bad, Sea Island by Egyptian (in fine spinning mills), American and Egyptian by Surat, and pure cotton by mixings of waste and
Surat. The shorter fibre of the Surat cotton and its dirty condition, the greater fragility of the thread, the substitution of all sorts of heavy
ingredients for flour in sizing the warps, all these lessened the speed of the machinery, or the number of the looms that could be superintended by
one weaver, increased the labour caused by defects in the machinery, and reduced the piece-wage by reducing the mass of the product turned off.
Where Surat cotton was used, the loss to the operatives when on full time, amounted to 20, 30, and more per cent. But besides this, the majority
of the manufacturers reduced the rate of piece-wage by 5, 7 1/2, and 10 per cent. We can therefore conceive the situation of those hands who
were employed for only 3, 3 1/2 or 4 days a week, or for only 6 hours a day. Even in 1863, after a comparative improvement had set in, the
weekly wages of spinners and of weavers were 3s. 4d., 3s. 10d., 4s. 6d. and 5s. Id. [1591 Even in this miserable state of things, however, the
inventive spirit of the master never stood still, but was exercised in making deductions from wages. These were to some extent inflicted as a
penalty for defects in the finished article that were really due to his bad cotton and to his unsuitable machinery. Moreover, where the
manufacturer owned the cottages of the workpeople, he paid himself his rents by deducting the amount from these miserable Wages. Mr.
Redgrave tells us of self-acting minders (operatives who manage a pair of self-acting mules) "earning at the end of a fortnight's full work 8s.
lid., and that from this sum was deducted the rent of the house, the manufacturer, however, returning half the rent as a gift. The minders took
away the sum of 6s. 1 Id. In many places the self-acting minders ranged from 5s. to 9s. per week, and the weavers from 2s. to 6s. per week,
during the latter part of 1862." [1601 Even when working short time the rent was frequently deducted from the wages of the operatives. [1611 No
wonder that in some parts of Lancashire a kind of famine fever broke out. But more characteristic than all this, was, the revolution that took
place in the process of production at the expense of the workpeople. Experimenta in corpore vili, like those of anatomists on frogs, were formally
made. "Although," says Mr. Redgrave, "I have given the actual earnings of the operatives in the several mills, it does not follow that they earn
the same amount week by week. The operatives are subject to great fluctuation from the constant experimentalising of the manufacturers ... the
earnings of the operatives rise and fall with the quality of the cotton mixings; sometimes they have been within 15 per cent, of former earnings,
and then, in a week or two, they have fallen off from 50 to 60 per cent." [1621 These experiments were not made solely at the expense of the
workman's means of subsistence. His five senses also had to pay the penalty. "The people who are employed in making up Surat cotton complain
very much. They inform me, on opening the bales of cotton there is an intolerable smell, which causes sickness.... In the mixing, scribbling and
carding rooms, the dust and dirt which are disengaged, irritate the air passages, and give rise to cough and difficulty of breathing. A disease of
the skin, no doubt from the irritation of the dirt contained in the Surat cotton, also prevails.... The fibre being so short, a great amount of size,
both animal and vegetable, is used.... Bronchitis is more prevalent owing to the dust. Inflammatory sore throat is common, from the same cause.
Sickness and dyspepsia are produced by the frequent breaking of the weft, when the weaver sucks the weft through the eye of the shuttle." On

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (24 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

the other hand, the substitutes for flour were a Fortunatus' purse to the manufacturers, by increasing the weight of the yarn. They caused "15 lbs.
of raw material to weigh 26 lbs. after it was woven." [1631 In the Report of Inspectors of Factories for 30th April, 1864, we read as follows: "The
trade is availing itself of this resource at present to an extent which is even discreditable. I have heard on good authority of a cloth weighing 8
lbs. which was made of 5 1/4 lbs. cotton and 2 3/4 lbs. size; and of another cloth weighing 5 1/4 lbs., of which 2 lbs. was size. These were
ordinary export shirtings. In cloths of other descriptions, as much as 50 per cent, size is sometimes added; so that a manufacturer may, and does
truly boast, that he is getting rich by selling cloth for less money per pound than he paid for the mere yarn of which they are composed." IT641
But the workpeople had to suffer, not only from the experiments of the manufacturers inside the mills, and of the municipalities outside, not only
from reduced wages and absence of work, from want and from charity, and from the eulogistic speeches of lords and commons. "Unfortunate
females who, in consequence of the cotton famine, were at its commencement thrown out of employment, and have thereby become outcasts of
society; and now, though trade has revived, and work is plentiful, continue members of that unfortunate class, and are likely to continue so.
There are also in the borough more youthful prostitutes than I have known for the last 25 years." [1651

We find then, in the first 45 years of the English cotton trade, from 1770 to 1815, only 5 years of crisis and stagnation; but this was the period of
monopoly. The second period from 1815 to 1863 counts, during its 48 years, only 20 years of revival and prosperity against 28 of depression and
stagnation. Between 1815 and 1830 the competition with the continent of Europe and with the United States sets in. After 1833, the extension of
the Asiatic markets is enforced by "destruction of the human race" (the wholesale extinction of Indian hand-loom weavers). After the repeal of
the Corn Laws, from 1846 to 1863, there are 8 years of moderate activity and prosperity against 9 years of depression and stagnation. The
condition of the adult male operatives, even during the years of prosperity, may be judged from the note subjoined. [1661



SECTION 8

REVOLUTION EFFECTED IN MANUFACTURE, HANDICRAFTS, AND DOMESTIC INDUSTRY BY MODERN INDUSTRY



A. Overthrow of Co-operation Based on Handicraft, and on the Division of Labour

We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation based on handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the division of handicraft
labour. An example of the first sort is the mowing-machine; it replaces co-operation between mowers. A striking example of the second kind, is
the needle-making machine. According to Adam Smith, 10 men, in his day, made in co-operation, over 48,000 needles a-day. On the other hand,
a single needle-machine makes 145,000 in a working-day of 11 hours. One woman or one girl superintends four such machines, and so produces
near upon 600,000 needles in a day, and upwards of 3,000,000 in a week. [1671 A single machine, when it takes the place of co-operation or of
manufacture, may itself serve as the basis of an industry of a handicraft character. Still, such a return to handicrafts is but a transition to the
factory system, which, as a rule, makes its appearance so soon as the human muscles are replaced, for the purpose of driving the machines, by a
mechanical motive power, such as steam or water. Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an industry may be carried on, on a small
scale, by means of mechanical power. This is effected by hiring steam-power, as is done in some of the Birmingham trades, or by the use of
small caloric-engines, as in some branches of weaving. [1681 In the Coventry silk weaving industry the experiment of "cottage factories" was
tried. In the centre of a square surrounded by rows of cottages, an engine-house was built and the engine connected by shafts with the looms in
the cottages. In all cases the power was hired at so much per loom. The rent was payable weekly, whether the looms worked or not. Each cottage
held from 2 to 6 looms; some belonged to the weaver, some were bought on credit, some were hired. The struggle between these cottage
factories and the factory proper, lasted over 12 years. It ended with the complete ruin of the 300 cottage factories. [1691 Wherever the nature of
the process did not involve production on a large scale, the new industries that have sprung up in the last few decades, such as envelope making,
steel-pen making, &c, have, as a general rule, first passed through the handicraft stage, and then the manufacturing stage, as short phases of
transition to the factory stage. The transition is very difficult in those cases where the production of the article by manufacture consists, not of a
series of graduated processes, but of a great number of disconnected ones. This circumstance formed a great hindrance to the establishment of
steel-pen factories. Nevertheless, about 15 years ago, a machine was invented that automatically performed 6 separate operations at once. The
first steel-pens were supplied by the handicraft system, in the year 1820, at £7 4s. the gross; in 1830 they-were supplied by manufacture at 8s.,
and today the factory system supplies them to the trade at from 2s. to 6d. the gross. [1701



B. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries

Along with the development of the factory system and of the revolution in agriculture that accompanies it, production in all the other branches of
industry not only extends, but alters its character. The principle, carried out in the factory system, of analysing the process of production into its
constituent phases, and of solving the problems thus proposed by the application of mechanics, of chemistry, and of the whole range of the
natural sciences, becomes the determining principle everywhere. Hence, machinery squeezes itself into the manufacturing industries first for one
detail process, then for another. Thus the solid crystal of their organisation, based on the old division of labour, becomes dissolved, and makes
way for constant changes. Independently of this, a radical change takes place in the composition of the collective labourer, a change of the
persons working in combination. In contrast with the manufacturing period, the division of labour is thenceforth based, wherever possible, on the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (25 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

employment of women, of children of all ages, and of unskilled labourers, in one word, on cheap labour, as it is characteristically called in
England. This is the case not only with all production on a large scale, whether employing machinery or not, but also with the so-called domestic
industry, whether carried on in the houses of the workpeople or in small workshops. This modern so-called domestic industry has nothing,
except the name, in common with the old-fashioned domestic industry, the existence of which pre-supposes independent urban handicrafts,
independent peasant farming, and above all, a dwelling-house for the labourer and his family. That old-fashioned industry has now been
converted into an outside department of the factory, the manufactory, or the warehouse. Besides the factory operatives, the manufacturing
workmen and the handicraftsman, whom it concentrates in large masses at one spot, and directly commands, capital also sets in motion, by
means, of invisible threads, another army; that of the workers in the domestic industries, who dwell in the large towns and -are also scattered
over the face of the country. An example: The shirt factory of Messrs. Tillie at Londonderry, which employs 1 ,000 operatives in the factory
itself, and 9,000 people spread up and down the country and working in their own houses. [1711

The exploitation of cheap and immature labour-power is carried out in a more shameless manner in modern Manufacture than in the factory
proper. This is because the technical foundation of the factory system, namely, the substitution of machines for muscular power, and the
light character of the labour, is almost entirely absent in Manufacture, and at the same time women and over-young children are subjected, in a
most unconscionable way, to the influence of poisonous or injurious substances. This exploitation is more shameless in the so-called domestic
industry than in manufactures, and that because the power of resistance in the labourers decreases with their dissemination; because a whole
series of plundering parasites insinuate themselves between the employer and the workman; because a domestic industry has always to compete
either with the factory system, or with manufacturing in the same branch of production; because poverty robs the workman of the conditions
most essential to his labour, of space, light and ventilation; because employment becomes more and more irregular; and, finally, because in these
the last resorts of the masses made "redundant" by Modern Industry and Agriculture, competition for work attains its maximum. Economy in the
means of production, first systematically carried out in the factory system, and there, from the very beginning, coincident with the most reckless
squandering of labour-power, and robbery of the conditions normally requisite for labour — this economy now shows its antagonistic and
murderous side more and more in a given branch of industry, the less the social productive power of labour and the technical basis for a
combination of processes are developed in that branch.

C. Modern Manufacture

I now proceed, by a few examples, to illustrate the principles laid down above. As a matter of fact, the reader is already familiar with numerous
instances given in the chapter on the working-day. In the hardware manufactures of Birmingham and the neighbourhood, there are employed,
mostly in very heavy work, 30,000 children and young persons, besides 10,000 women. There they are to be seen in the unwholesome
brass-foundries, button factories, enamelling, galvanising, and lackering works. IT721 Owing to the excessive labour of their workpeople, both
adult and non-adult, certain London houses where newspapers and books are printed, have got the ill-omened name of "slaughterhouses." IT731
Similar excesses are practised in book-binding, where the victims are chiefly women, girls, and children; young persons have to do heavy work
in rope-walks and night-work in salt mines, candle manufactories, and chemical works; young people are worked to death at turning the looms in
silk weaving, when it is not carried on by machinery. [1741 One of the most shameful, the most dirty, and the worst paid kinds of labour, and one
on which women and young girls are by preference employed, is the sorting of rags. It is well known that Great Britain, apart from its own
immense store of rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the whole world. They flow in from Japan, from the most remote States of South
America, and from the Canary Islands. But the chief sources of their supply are Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Belgium, and
Holland. They are used for manure, for making bedflocks, for shoddy, and they serve as the raw material of paper. The rag-sorters are the
medium for the spread of small-pox and other infectious diseases, and they themselves are the first victims. [1751 A classical example of
over-work, of hard and inappropriate labour, and of its brutalising effects on the workman from his childhood upwards, is afforded not only by
coal-mining and miners generally, but also by tile and brick making, in which industry the recently invented machinery is, in England, used only
here and there. Between May and September the work lasts from 5 in the morning till 8 in the evening, and where the drying is done in the open
air, it often lasts from 4 in the morning till 9 in the evening. Work from 5 in the morning till 7 in the evening is considered "reduced" and
"moderate." Both boys and girls of 6 and even of 4 years of age are employed. They work for the same number of hours, often longer, than the
adults. The work is hard and the summer heat increases the exhaustion. In a certain tile-field at Mosley, e.g., a young woman, 24 years of age,
was in the habit of making 2,000 tiles a day, with the assistance of 2 little girls, who carried the clay for her, and stacked the tiles. These girls
carried daily 10 tons up the slippery sides of the clay pits, from a depth of 30 feet, and then for a distance of 210 feet. "It is impossible for a child
to pass through the purgatory of a tile-field without great moral degradation... the low language, which they are accustomed to hear from their
tenderest years, the filthy, indecent, and shameless habits, amidst which, unknowing, and half wild, they grow up, make them in after-life
lawless, abandoned, dissolute.... A frightful source of demoralisation is the mode of living. Each moulder, who is always a skilled labourer, and
the chief of a group, supplies his 7 subordinates with board and lodging in his cottages Whether members of his family or not, the men, boys,
and girls all sleep in the cottage, which contains generally two, exceptionally 3 rooms, all on the ground floor, and badly ventilated. These
people are so exhausted after the day's hard work, that neither the rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the least observed. Many
of these cottages are models of untidiness, dirt, and dust.... The greatest evil of the system that employs young girls on this sort of work, consists
in this, that, as a rule, it chains them fast from childhood for the whole of their after-life to the most abandoned rabble. They become rough,
foul-mouthed boys, before Nature has taught them that they are women. Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked far above the knees, hair and
face besmeared with dirt, they learn to treat all feelings of decency and of shame with contempt. During meal-times they lie at full length in the
fields, or watch the boys bathing in a neighbouring canal. Their heavy day's work at length completed, they put on better clothes, and accompany
the men to the public houses." That excessive insobriety is prevalent from childhood upwards among the whole of this class, is only natural.
"The worst is that the brickmakers despair of themselves. You might as well, said one of the better kind to a chaplain of Southallfield, try to raise

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (26 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
and improve the devil as a brickie, sir!" [1761

As to the manner, in which capital effects an economy in the requisites of labour, in modern Manufacture (in which I include all workshops of
larger size, except factories proper), official and most ample material bearing on it is to be found in the Public Health Reports IV. (1863) and VI.
(1864). The description of the Workshops, more especially those of the London printers and tailors, surpasses the most loathsome phantasies of
our romance writers- The effect on the health of the workpeople is self-evident. Dr. Simon, the chief medical officer of the Privy Council and the
official editor of the "Public Health Reports," says: "In my fourth Report (1863) I showed, how it is practically impossible for the workpeople to
insist upon that which is their first sanitary right, viz., the right that, no matter what the work for which their employer brings them together, the
labour, so far as it depends upon him, should be freed from all avoidably unwholesome conditions. I pointed out, that while the workpeople are
practically incapable of doing themselves this sanitary justice, they are unable to obtain any effective support from the paid administrations of
the sanitary police.... The life of myriads of workmen and workwomen is now uselessly tortured and shortened by the never-ending physical
suffering that their mere occupation begets." [177] In illustration of the way in which the workrooms influence the state of health Dr. Simon
gives the following table of mortality. [1781





Number of persons of

all ages employed

in the respective

industries.


Industries compared
as regards health.


Death-rate per 100,000 men

in the respective industries

between the stated ages


Age 25-35.


Age 35- 45.


Age 45-55.


958,265


Agriculture in
England & Wales


743


805


1,145


22,301 men
12,379 women


London tailors


958


1,262


2,093


13,803


London printers


894


1,747


2,367



D. Modern Domestic Industry

I now come to the so-called domestic industry. In order to get an idea of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital conducts its exploitation in
the background of modern mechanical industry, one must go to the apparently quite idyllic trade of nail-making, [1791 carried on in a few remote
villages of England. In this place, however, it will be enough to give a few examples from those branches of the lace-making and straw-plaiting
industries that are not yet carried on by the aid of machinery, and that as yet do not compete with branches carried on in factories or in
manufactories.

Of the 150,000 persons employed in England in the production of lace, about 10,000 fall under the authority of the Factory Act, 1861. Almost
the whole of the remaining 140,000 are women, young persons, and children of both sexes, the male sex, however, being weakly represented.
The state of health of this cheap material for exploitation will be seen from the following table, computed by Dr. Trueman, physician to the
Nottingham General Dispensary. Out of 686 female patients who were lace-makers, most of them between the ages of 17 and 24, the number of
consumptive ones were:



1852.


- 1


in


45


1857.


- 1


in


13.




1853.


- 1


in


28


1858.


- 1


in


15.




1854.


- 1


in


17


1859.


- 1


in


9.




1855.


- 1


in


18


1860.


- 1


in


8.




1856.


- 1


in


15


1861.


- 1


in


8.


[1801



This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for the most optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker of lies among the
Free-trade bagmen of Germany.

The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the lace, so far as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in England. The branches
that we are now about to examine, solely with regard to those of the workpeople who work at home, and not those who work in manufactories or
warehouses, fall into two divisions, viz. (1), finishing; (2), mending. The former gives the finishing touches to the machine-made lace, and
includes numerous sub-divisions.

The lace finishing is done either in what are called "mistresses' houses," or by women in their own houses, with or without the help of their
children. The women who keep the "mistresses' houses" are themselves poor. The workroom is in a private house. The mistresses take orders
from manufacturers, or from warehousemen, and employ as many women, girls, and young children as the size of their rooms and the fluctuating
demand of the business will allow. The number of the workwomen employed in these workrooms varies from 20 to 40 in some, and from 10 to
20 in others. The average age at which the children commence work is six years, but in many cases it is below five. The usual working-hours are
from 8 in the morning till eight in the evening, with 1 1/2 hours for meals, which are taken at irregular intervals, and often in the foul
workrooms. When business is brisk, the labour frequently lasts from 8 or even 6 o'clock in the morning till 10, 11, or 12 o'clock at night. In



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (27 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

English barracks the regulation space allotted to each soldier is 500-600 cubic feet, and in the military hospitals 1,200 cubic feet. But in those
finishing sties there are but 67 to 100 cubic feet to each person. At the same time the oxygen of the air is consumed by gas-lights. In order to
keep the lace clean, and although the floor is tiled or gagged, the children are often compelled, even in winter, to pull off their shoes. "It is not at
all uncommon in Nottingham to find 14 to 20 children huddled together in a small room, of, perhaps, not more than 12 feet square, and
employed for 15 hours out of the 24, at work that of itself is exhausting, from its weariness and monotony, and is besides carried on under every
possible unwholesome condition.... Even the very youngest children work with a strained attention and a rapidity that is astonishing, hardly ever
giving their fingers rest or glowering their motion. If a question be asked them, they never raise their eyes from their work from fear of losing a
single moment." The "long stick" is used by the mistresses as a stimulant more and more as the workinghours are prolonged. "The children
gradually tire and become as restless as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupation that is monotonous, eye-straining, and
exhausting from the uniformity in the posture of the body. Their work is like slavery." [181] When women and their children work at home,
which now-a-days means in a hired room, often in a garret, the state of things is, if possible, still worse. This sort of work is given out within a
circle of 80 miles radius from Nottingham. On leaving the warehouses at 9 or 10 o'clock at night, the children are often given a bundle of lace to
take home with them and finish. The Pharisee of a capitalist represented by one of his servants, accompanies this action, of course, with the
unctuous phrase: "That's for mother," yet he knows well enough that the poor children must sit up and help. [1821

Pillow lace-making is chiefly carried on in England in two agricultural districts; one, the Honiton lace district, extending from 20 to 30 miles
along the south coast of Devonshire, and including a few places in North Devon; the other comprising a great part of the counties of
Buckingham, Bedford, and Northampton, and also the adjoining portions of Oxfordshire and Huntingdonshire. The cottages of the agricultural
labourers are the places where the work is usually carried on. Many manufacturers employ upwards of 3,000 of these lace-makers, who are
chiefly children and young persons of the female sex exclusively. The state of things described as incidental to lace finishing is here repeated,
save that instead of the "mistresses' houses," we find what are called "lace-schools," kept by poor women in their cottages. From their fifth year
and often earlier, until their twelfth or fifteenth year, the children work in these schools; during the first year the very young ones work from four
to eight hours, and later on, from six in the morning till eight and ten o'clock at night. "The rooms are generally the ordinary living rooms of
small cottages, the chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates kept warm by their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in
winter. In other cases, these so-called school-rooms are like small store-rooms without fire-places.... The over-crowding in these dens and the
consequent vitiation of the air are often extreme. Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, privies, decomposing substances, and other filth
usual in the purlieus of the smaller cottages." With regard to space: "In one lace-school 18 girls and a mistress, 35 cubic feet to each person; in
another, where the smell was unbearable, 18 persons and 24 1/2 cubic feet per head. In this industry are to be found employed children of 2 and
2 1/2 years." [183]

Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and Bedford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part of Hertfordshire and
the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. In 1861, there were 40,043 persons employed in straw-plaiting and straw-hat making; of these 3,815
were males of all ages, the rest females, of whom 14,913, including about 7,000 children, were under 20 years of age. In the place of the
lace-schools we find here the "straw-plait schools." The children commence their instruction in straw-plaiting generally in their 4th, often
between their 3rd and 4th year. Education, of course, they get none. The children themselves call the elementary schools, "natural schools," to
distinguish them from these blood-sucking institutions, in which they are kept at work simply to get through the task, generally 30 yards daily,
prescribed by their half-starved mothers. These same mothers often make them work at home, after school is over, till 10, 1 1, and 12 o'clock at
night. The straw cuts their mouths, with which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers. Dr. Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the
whole body of medical officers in London, that 300 cubic feet is the minimum space proper for each person in a bedroom or workroom. But in
the straw-plait schools space is more sparingly allotted than in the lace-schools, " 12 2/3, 17, 18 1/2 and below 22 cubic feet for each person."
The smaller of these numbers, says one of the commissioners, Mr. White, represents less space than the half of what a child would occupy if
packed in a box measuring 3 feet in each direction. Thus do the children enjoy life till the age of 12 or 14. The wretched half-starved parents
think of nothing but getting as much as possible out of their children. The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not care a farthing, and
naturally so, for their parents, and leave them. "It is no wonder that ignorance and vice abound in a population so brought up.... Their morality is
at the lowest ebb,... a great number of the women have illegitimate children, and that at such an immature age that even those most conversant
with criminal statistics are astounded." [1841 And the native land of these model families is the pattern Christian country for Europe; so says at
least Count Montalembert, certainly a competent authority on Christianity!

Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (the maximum wages of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in rare cases to 3 shillings),
are reduced far below their nominal amount by the prevalence of the truck system everywhere, but especially in the lace districts. [1851



E. Passage of Modern Manufacture, an Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. The Hastening of This Revolution by the
Application of the Factory Acts to those Industries

The cheapening of labour-power, by sheer abuse of the labour of women and children, by sheer robbery of every normal condition requisite for
working and living, and by the sheer brutality of overwork and night-work, meets at last with natural obstacles that cannot be overstepped. So
also, when based on these methods, do the cheapening of commodities and capitalist exploitation in general. So soon as this point is at last
reached — and it takes many years — the hour has struck for the introduction of machinery, and for the thenceforth rapid conversion of the
scattered domestic industries and also of manufactures into factory industries.

An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is afforded by the production of wearing apparel. This industry, according to the
classification of the Children's Employment Commission, comprises straw-hat makers, ladies'-hat makers, cap-makers, tailors, milliners and
dressmakers, shirt-makers, corset-makers, glove-makers, shoemakers, besides many minor branches, such as the making of neck-ties, collars,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (28 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

&c. In 1861, the number of females employed in these industries, in England and Wales, amounted to 586,299, of these 1 15,242 at the least were
under 20, and 16,650. under 15 years of age. The number of these workwomen in the United Kingdom in 1861, was 750,334. The number of
males employed in England and Wales, in hat-making, shoemaking, glove-making and tailoring was 437,969; of these 14,964 under 15 years,
89,285 between 15 and 20, and 333,117 over 20 years. Many of the smaller branches are not included in these figures. But take the figures as
they stand; we then have for England and Wales alone, according to the census of 1861, a total of 1,024,277 persons, about as many as are
absorbed by agriculture and cattle breeding. We begin to understand what becomes of the immense quantities of goods conjured up by the magic
of machinery, and of the enormous masses of workpeople, which that machinery sets free.

The production of wearing apparel is carried on partly in manufactories in whose workrooms there is but a reproduction of that division of
labour, the membra disjecta of which were found ready to hand; partly by small master-handicraftsmen; these, however, do not, as formerly,
work for individual consumers, but for manufactories and warehouses, and to such an extent that often whole towns and stretches of country
carry on certain branches, such as shoemaking, as a speciality; finally, on a very great scale by the so-called domestic workers, who form an
external department of the manufactories, warehouses, and even of the workshops of the smaller masters. [1861

The raw material, &c, is supplied by mechanical industry, the mass of cheap human material (taillable a merci et misericorde) is composed of
the individuals "liberated" by mechanical industry and improved agriculture. The manufactures of this class owed their origin chiefly to the
capitalist's need of having at hand an army ready equipped to meet any increase of demand. [187] These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the
scattered handicrafts and domestic industries to continue to exist as a broad foundation. The great production of surplus- value in these branches
of labour, and the progressive cheapening of their articles, were and are chiefly due to the minimum wages paid, no more than requisite for a
miserable vegetation, and to the extension of working-time up to the maximum endurable by the human organism. It was in fact by the
cheapness of the human sweat and the human blood, which were converted into commodities, that the markets were constantly being extended,
and continue daily to be extended; more especially was this the case with England's colonial markets, where, besides, English tastes and habits
prevail. At last the critical point was reached. The basis of the old method, sheer brutality in the exploitation of the workpeople, accompanied
more or less by a systematic division of labour, no longer sufficed for the extending markets and for the still more rapidly extending competition
of the capitalists. The hour struck for the advent of machinery. The decisively revolutionary machine, the machine which attacks in an equal
degree the whole of the numberless branches of this sphere of production, dressmaking, tailoring, shoemaking, sewing, hat-making, and many
others, is the sewing-machine.

Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all machinery, which, since the rise of modern industry, has seized upon new branches of
trade. Children of too tender an age are sent adrift. The wage of the machine hands rises compared with that of the house-workers, many of
whom belong to the poorest of the poor. That of the better situated handicraftsman, with whom the machine competes, sinks. The new machine
hands are exclusively girls and young women. With the help of mechanical force, they destroy the monopoly that male labour had of the heavier
work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of old women and very young children. The overpowering competition crushes the
weakest of the manual labourers. The fearful increase in death from starvation during the last 10 years in London runs parallel with the extension
of machine sewing. IT881 The new workwomen turn the machines by hand and foot, or by hand alone, sometimes sitting, sometimes standing,
according to the weight, size, and special make of the machine, and expend a great deal of labour-power. Their occupation is unwholesome,
owing to the long hours, although in most cases they are not so long as under the old system. Wherever the sewing-machine locates itself in
narrow and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds to the unwholesome influences. "The effect," says Mr. Lord, "on entering low-ceiled
workrooms in which 30 to 40 machine hands are working is unbearable.... The heat, partly due to the gas stoves used for warming the irons, is
horrible.... Even when moderate hours of work, i.e., from 8 in the morning till 6 in the evening, prevail in such places, yet 3 or 4 persons fall into
a swoon regularly every day." [189]

The revolution in the industrial methods which is the necessary result of the revolution in the instruments of production, is effected by a medley
of transition forms. These forms vary according to the extent to which the sewing-machine has become prevalent in one branch, of industry or
the other, to the time during which it has been in operation, to the previous condition of the workpeople, to the preponderance of manufacture, of
handicrafts or of domestic industry, to the rent of the workrooms, [1901 &c. In dressmaking, for instance, where the labour for the most part was
already organised, chiefly by simple co-operation, the sewing-machine at first formed merely a new factor in that manufacturing industry. In
tailoring, shirtmaking, shoemaking, &c, all the forms are intermingled. Here the factory system proper. There middlemen receive the raw
material from the capitalist en chef, and group around their sewing-machines, in "chambers" and "garrets," from 10 to 50 or more workwomen.
Finally, as is always the case with machinery when not organised into a system, and when it can also be used in dwarfish proportions,
handicraftsman and domestic workers, along with their families, or with a little extra labour from without, make use of their own
sewing-machines. [1911 The system actually prevalent in England is, that the capitalist concentrates a large number of machines on his premises,
and then distributes the produce of those machines for further manipulation amongst the domestic workers. [1921 The variety of the transition
forms, however, does not conceal the tendency to conversion into the factory system proper. This tendency is nurtured by the very nature of the
sewing-machine, the manifold uses of which push on the concentration, under one roof, and one management, of previously separated branches
of a trade. It is also favoured by the circumstance that preparatory needlework, and certain other operations, are most conveniently done on the
premises where the machine is at work; as well as by the inevitable expropriation of the hand sewers, and of the domestic workers who work
with their own machines. This fate has already in part overtaken them. The constantly increasing amount of capital invested in sewing-machines,
[1931 gives the spur to the production of, and gluts the markets with, machine-made articles, thereby giving the signal to the domestic workers
for the sale of their machines. The overproduction of sewing-machines themselves, causes their producers, in bad want of a sale, to let them out
for so much a week, thus crushing by their deadly competition the small owners of machines. [1941 Constant changes in the construction of the
machines, and their ever-increasing cheapness, depreciate day by day the older makes, and allow of their being sold in great numbers, at absurd
prices, to large capitalists, who alone can thus employ them at a profit. Finally, the substitution of the steam-engine for man gives in this, as in all

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (29 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

similar revolutions, the finishing blow. At first, the use of steam power meets with mere technical difficulties, such as unsteadiness in the
machines, difficulty in controlling their speed, rapid wear and tear of the lighter machines, &c, all of which are soon overcome by experience.
[1951 If, on the one hand, the concentration of many machines in large manufactories leads to the use of steam power, on the other hand, the
competition of steam with human muscles hastens on the concentration of workpeople and machines in large factories. Thus England is at
present experiencing, not only in the colossal industry of making wearing apparel, but in most of the other trades mentioned above, the
conversion of manufacture, of handicrafts, and of domestic work into the factory system, after each of those forms of production, totally changed
and disorganised, under the Influence of modern industry, has long ago reproduced, and even overdone, all the horrors of the factory system,
without participating in any of the elements of social progress it contains. [1961

This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, is artificially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts to all industries in which
women, young persons and children are employed. The compulsory regulation of the working-day as regards its length, pauses, beginning and
end, the system of relays of children, the exclusion of all children under a certain age, &c, necessitate on the one hand more machinery [1971
and the substitution of steam as a motive power in the place of muscles. [1981 On the other hand, in order to make up for the loss of time, an
expansion occurs of the means of production used in common, of the furnaces, buildings, &c, in one word, greater concentration of the means of
production and a correspondingly greater concourse of workpeople. The chief objection, repeatedly and passionately urged on behalf of each
manufacture threatened with the Factory Act, is in fact this, that in order to continue the business on the old scale a greater outlay of capital will
be necessary. But as regards labour in the so-called domestic industries and the intermediate forms between them and Manufacture, so soon as
limits are put to the working-day and to the employment of children, those industries go to the wall. Unlimited exploitation of cheap
labour-power is the sole foundation of their power to compete.

One of the essential conditions for the existence of the factory system, especially when the length of the working-day is fixed, is certainty in the
result, i.e., the production in a given time of a given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful effect. The statutory pauses in the
working-day, moreover, imply the assumption that periodical and sudden cessation of the work does no harm to the article undergoing the
process of production. This certainty in the result, and this possibility of interrupting the work are, of course, easier to be attained in the purely
mechanical industries than in those in which chemical and physical processes play a part; as, for instance, in the earthenware trade, in bleaching,
dyeing, baking, and in most of the metal industries. Wherever there is a workingday without restriction as to length, wherever there is night-work
and unrestricted waste of human life, there the slightest obstacle presented by the nature of the work to a change for the better is soon looked
upon as an everlasting barrier erected by Nature. No poison kills vermin with more certainty than the Factory Act removes such everlasting
barriers. No one made a greater outcry over "impossibilities" than our friends the earthenware manufacturers. In 1864, however, they were
brought under the Act, and within sixteen months every "impossibility" had vanished. "The improved method," called forth by the Act, "of
making slip by pressure instead of by evaporation, the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware in its green state, &c, are each events of
great importance in the pottery art, and mark an advance which the preceding century could not rival.... It has even considerably reduced the
temperature of the stoves themselves with a considerable saving of fuel, and with a readier effect on the ware." [1991 In spite of every prophecy,
the cost-price of earthenware did not rise, but the quantity produced did, and to such an extent that the export for the twelve months, ending
December, 1865, exceeded in value by £138,628 the average of the preceding three years. In the manufacture of matches it was thought to be an
indispensable requirement, that boys, even while bolting their dinner, should go on dipping the matches in melted phosphorus, the poisonous
vapour from which rose into their faces. The Factory Act (1864) made the saving of time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping
machine, the vapour from which could not come in contact with the workers. [2001 So, at the present time, in those branches of the
lace manufacture not yet subject to the Factory Act, it is maintained that the meal-times cannot be regular owing to the different periods required
by the various kinds of lace for drying, which periods vary from three minutes up to an hour and more. To this the Children's Employment
Commissioners answer: "The circumstances of this case are precisely analogous to that of the paper-stainers, dealt with in our first report. Some
of the principal manufacturers in the trade urged that in consequence of the nature of the materials used, and their various processes, they would
be unable, without serious loss, to stop for meal-times at any given moment. But it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous
arrangement, the apprehended difficulty would be got over; and accordingly, by clause 6 of section 6 of the Factory Acts Extension Act, passed
during this Session of Parliament, an interval of eighteen months is given to them from the passing of the Act before they are required to
conform to the meal hours, specified by the Factory Acts." [2011 Hardly had the Act been passed when our friends the manufacturers found out:
"The inconveniences we expected to arise from the introduction of the Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have not
arisen. We do not find the production at all interfered with; in short, we produce more in the same time." [2021 It is evident that the English
legislature, which certainly no one will venture to reproach with being overdosed with genius, has been led by experience to the conclusion that a
simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away all the so-called impediments, opposed by the nature of the process, to the restriction and
regulation of the working-day. Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given industry, a period varying from six to eighteen months
is fixed within which it is incumbent on the manufacturers to remove all technical impediments to the working of the Act. Mirabeau's
"Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce bete de mot!" is particularly applicable to modern technology. But though the Factory Acts thus artificially
ripen the material elements necessary for the conversion of the manufacturing system into the factory system, yet at the same time, owing to the
necessity they impose for greater outlay of capital, they hasten on the decline of the small masters, and the concentration of capital. [2031

Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable by technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople themselves obstruct the
regulation of the hours of labour. This is especially the case where piece- wage predominates, and where loss of time in one part of the day or
week can be made good by subsequent over-time, or by night-work, a process which brutalises the adult workman, and ruins his wife and
children. [2041 Although this absence of regularity in the expenditure of labour-power is a natural and rude reaction against the tedium of
monotonous drudgery, it originates, also, to a much greater degree from anarchy in production, anarchy that in its turn pre-supposes unbridled
exploitation of labour-power by the capitalist. Besides the general periodic changes of the industrial cycle, and the special fluctuations in the
markets to which each industry is subject, we may also reckon what is called "the season," dependent either on the periodicity of favourable

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (30 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

seasons of the year for navigation; or on fashion, and the sudden placing of large orders that have to be executed in the shortest possible time.
The habit of giving such orders becomes more frequent with the extension of railways and telegraphs. "The extension of the railway system
throughout the country has tended very much to encourage giving short notice. Purchasers now come up from Glasgow, Manchester, and
Edinburgh once every fortnight or so to the wholesale city warehouses which we supply, and give small orders requiring immediate execution,
instead of buying from stock as they used to do. Years ago we were always able to work in the slack times, so as to meet demand of the next
season, but now no one can say beforehand what will be the demand then." [2051

In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject to the Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails periodically during what is
called the season, in consequence of sudden orders. In the outside department of the factory, of the manufactory, and of the warehouse, the
so-called domestic workers, whose employment is at the best irregular, are entirely dependent for their raw material and their orders on the
caprice of the capitalist, who, in this industry, is not hampered by any regard for depreciation of his buildings and machinery, and risks nothing
by a stoppage of work, but the skin of the worker himself. Here then he sets himself systematically to work to form an industrial reserve force
that shall be ready at a moment's notice; during one part of the year he decimates this force by the most inhuman toil, during the other part, he
lets it starve for want of work. "The employers avail themselves of the habitual irregularity in the homework, when any extra work is wanted at a
push, so that the work goes on till 11, and 12 p.m. or 2 a.m., or as the usual phrase is, "all hours," and that in localities where "the stench is
enough to knock you down, you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but shudder to go further." [2061 "They are curious men," said one of the
witnesses, a shoemaker, speaking of the masters, "they think it does a boy no harm to work too hard for half the year, if he is nearly idle for the
other half." [2071

In the same way as technical impediments, so, too, those "usages which have grown with the growth of trade" were and still are proclaimed by
interested capitalists as obstacles due to the nature of the work. This was a favourite cry of the cotton lords at the time they were first threatened
with the Factory Acts. Although their industry more than any other depends on navigation, yet experience has given them the lie. Since then,
every pretended obstruction to business has been treated by the Factory inspectors as a mere sham. [2081 The thoroughly conscientious
investigations of the Children's Employment Commission prove that the effect of the regulation of the hours of work, in some industries, was to
spread the mass of labour previously employed more evenly over the whole year [208al that this regulation was the first rational bridle on the
murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion, [208bl caprices that consort so badly with the system of modern industry; that the development of
ocean navigation and of the means of communication generally, has swept away the technical basis on which season-work was really supported,
[2091 and that all other so-called unconquerable difficulties vanish before larger buildings, additional machinery, increase in the number of
workpeople employed, [2101 and the alterations caused by all these in the mode of conducting the wholesale trade. [2111 But for all that, capital
never becomes reconciled to such changes — and this is admitted over and over again by its own representatives — except "under the pressure
of a General Act of Parliament" [2121 for the compulsory regulation of the hours of labour.



SECTION 9

THE FACTORY ACTS. SANITARY AND EDUCATIONAL CLAUSES OF THE SAME. THEIR GENERAL EXTENSION IN
ENGLAND



Factory legislation, that first conscious and methodical reaction of society against the spontaneously developed form of the process of
production, is, as we have seen, just as much the necessary product of modern industry as cotton yam, self-actors, and the electric telegraph.
Before passing to the consideration of the extension of that legislation in England, we shall shortly notice certain clauses contained in the Factory
Acts, and not relating to the hours of work.

Apart from their wording, which makes it easy for the capitalist to evade them, the sanitary clauses are extremely meagre, and, in fact, limited to
provisions for whitewashing the walls, for insuring cleanliness in some other matters, for ventilation, and for protection against dangerous
machinery. In the third book we shall return again to the fanatical opposition of the masters to those clauses which imposed upon them a slight
expenditure on appliances for protecting the limbs of their workpeople, an opposition that throws a fresh and glaring light on the Free-trade
dogma, according to which, in a society with conflicting interests, each individual necessarily furthers the common weal by seeking nothing but
his own personal advantage! One example is enough. The reader knows that during the last 20 years, the flax industry has very much extended,
and that, with that extension, the number of scutching mills in Ireland has increased. In 1864 there were in that country 1,800 of these mills.
Regularly in autumn and winter women and "young persons," the wives, sons, and daughters of the neighbouring small farmers, a class of people
totally unaccustomed to machinery, are taken from field labour to feed the rollers of the scotching mills with flax. The accidents, both as regards
number and kind, are wholly unexampled in the history of machinery. In one scotching mill, at Kildinan, near Cork, there occurred between
1852 and 1856, six fatal accidents and sixty mutilations; every one of which might have been prevented by the simplest appliances, at the cost of
a few shillings. Dr. W. White, the certifying surgeon for factories at Downpatrick, states in his official report, dated the 15th December, 1865:
"The serious accidents at the scotching mills are of the most fearful nature. In many cases a quarter of the body is torn from the trunk, and either
involves death, or a future of wretched incapacity and suffering. The increase of mills in the country will, of course, extend these dreadful
results, and it will be a great boon if they are brought under the legislature. I am convinced that by proper supervision of scutching mills a vast

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (31 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
sacrifice of life and limb would be averted." [2131

What could possibly show better the character of the capitalist mode of production, than the necessity that exists for forcing upon it, by Acts of
Parliament, the simplest appliances for maintaining cleanliness and health? In the potteries the Factory Act of 1864 "has whitewashed and
cleansed upwards of 200 workshops, after a period of abstinence from any such cleaning, in many cases of 20 years, and in some, entirely," (this
is the "abstinence" of the capitalist!) "in which were employed 27,800 artisans, hitherto breathing through protracted days and often nights of
labour, a mephitic atmosphere, and which rendered an otherwise comparatively innocuous occupation, pregnant with disease and death. The Act
has improved the ventilation very much." [2141 At the same time, this portion of the Act strikingly shows that the capitalist mode of production,
owing to its very nature, excludes all rational improvement beyond a certain point. It has been stated over and over again that the English doctors
are unanimous in declaring that where the work is continuous, 500 cubic feet is the very least space that should be allowed for each person. Now,
if the Factory Acts, owing to their compulsory provisions, indirectly hasten on the conversion of small workshops into factories, thus indirectly
attacking the proprietary rights of the smaller capitalists, and assuring a monopoly to the great ones, so, if it were made obligatory to provide the
proper space for each workman in every workshop, thousands of small employers would, at one full swoop, be expropriated directly ! The very
root of the capitalist mode of production, i.e., the self-expansion of all capital, large or small, by means of the "free" purchase and consumption
of labour-power, would be attacked. Factory legislation is therefore brought to a deadlock before these 500 cubic feet of breathing space. The
sanitary officers, the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all harp, over and over again, upon the necessity for those 500
cubic feet, and upon the impossibility of wringing them out of capital. They thus, in fact, declare that consumption and other lung diseases
among the workpeople are necessary conditions to the existence of capital. [2151

Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the whole, yet they proclaim elementary education to be an indispensable condition to the
employment of children. [2161 The success of those clauses proved for the first time the possibility of combining education and gymnastics
[2171 with manual labour, and, consequently, of combining manual labour with education and gymnastics. The factory inspectors soon found out
by questioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although receiving only one half the education of the regular day scholars, yet learnt
quite as much and often more. "This can be accounted for by the simple fact that, with only being at school for one half of the day, they are
always fresh, and nearly always ready and willing to receive instruction. The system on which they work, half manual labour, and half school,
renders each employment a rest and a relief to the other; consequently, both are far more congenial to the child, than would be the case were he
kept constantly at one. It is quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the morning, cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who
comes fresh and bright from his work." [2181 Further information on this point will be found in Senior's speech at the Social Science Congress at
Edinburgh in 1863. He there shows, amongst other things, how the monotonous and uselessly long school hours of the children of the upper and
middle classes, uselessly add to the labour of the teacher, "while he not only fruitlessly but absolutely injuriously, wastes the time, health, and
energy of the children." [2191 From the Factory system budded, as Robert Owen has shown us in detail, the germ of the education of the future,
an education that will, in the case of every child over a given age, combine productive labour with instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of
the methods of adding to the efficiency of production, but as the only method of producing fully developed human beings.

Modern Industry, as we have seen, sweeps away by technical means the manufacturing division of labour, under which each man is bound hand
and foot for life to a single detail-operation. At the same time, the capitalistic form of that industry reproduces this same division of labour in a
still more monstrous shape; in the factory proper, by converting the workman into a living appendage of the machine; and everywhere outside
the Factory, partly by the sporadic use of machinery and machine workers, [2201 partly by re-establishing the division of labour on a fresh basis
by the general introduction of the labour of women and children, and of cheap unskilled labour.

The antagonism between the manufacturing division of labour and the methods of Modern Industry makes itself forcibly felt. It manifests itself,
amongst other ways, in the frightful fact that a great part of the children employed in modern factories and manufactures, are from their earliest
years riveted to the most simple manipulations, and exploited for years, without being taught a single sort of work that would afterwards make
them of use, even in the same manufactory or factory. In the English letter-press printing trade, for example, there existed formerly a system,
corresponding to that in the old manufactures and handicrafts, of advancing the apprentices from easy to more and more difficult work. They
went through a course of teaching till they were finished printers. To be able to read and write was for every one of them a requirement of their
trade. All this was changed by the printing machine. It employs two sorts of labourers, one grown up, renters, the other, boys mostly from 1 1 to
17 years of age whose sole business is either to spread the sheets of paper under the machine, or to take from it the printed sheets. They perform
this weary task, in London especially, for 14, 15, and 16 hours at a stretch, during several days in the week, and frequently for 36 hours, with
only 2 hours' rest for meals and sleep. [2211 A great part of them cannot read, and they are, as a rule, utter savages and very extraordinary
creatures. "To qualify them for the work which they have to do, they require no intellectual training; there is little room in it for skill, and less for
judgment; their wages, though rather high for boys, do not increase proportionately as they grow up, and the majority of them cannot look for
advancement to the better paid and more responsible post of machine minder, because while each machine has but one minder, it has at least
two, and often four boys attached to it." [2221 As soon as they get too old for such child's work, that is about 17 at the latest, they are discharged
from the printing establishments. They become recruits of crime. Several attempts to procure them employment elsewhere, were rendered of no
avail by their ignorance and brutality, and by their mental and bodily degradation.

As with the division of labour in the interior of the manufacturing workshops, so it is with the division of labour in the interior of society. So
long as handicraft and manufacture form the general groundwork of social production, the subjection of the producer to one branch exclusively,
the breaking up of the multifariousness of his employment, [2231 is a necessary step in the development. On that groundwork each separate
branch of production acquires empirically the form that is technically suited to it, slowly perfects it, and, so soon as a given degree of maturity
has been reached, rapidly crystallises that form. The only thing, that here and there causes a change, besides new raw material supplied by
commerce, is the gradual alteration of the instruments of labour. But their form, too, once definitely settled by experience, petrifies, as is proved

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (32 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

by their being in many cases handed down in the same form by one generation to another during thousands of years. A characteristic feature is,
that, even down into the eighteenth century, the different trades were called "mysteries" (mysteres); [2241 into their secrets none but those duly
initiated could penetrate. Modern Industry rent the veil that concealed from men their own social process of production, and that turned the
various, spontaneously divided branches of production into so many riddles, not only to outsiders, but even to the. initiated. The principle which
it pursued, of resolving each process into its constituent movements, without any regard to their possible execution by the hand of man, created
the new modern science of technology. The varied, apparently unconnected, and petrified forms of the industrial processes now resolved
themselves into so many conscious and systematic applications of natural science to the attainment of given useful effects. Technology also
discovered the few main fundamental forms of motion, which, despite the diversity of the instruments used, are necessarily taken by every
productive action of the human body; just as the science of mechanics sees in the most complicated machinery nothing but the continual
repetition of the simple mechanical powers.

Modern Industry never looks upon and treats the existing form of a process as final. The technical basis of that industry is therefore
revolutionary, while all earlier modes of production were essentially conservative. [2251 By means of machinery, chemical processes and other
methods, it is continually causing changes not only in the technical basis of production, but also in the functions of the labourer, and in the social
combinations of the labour-process. At the same time, it thereby also revolutionises the division of labour within the society, and incessantly
launches masses of capital and of workpeople from one branch of production to another. But if Modern Industry, by its very nature, therefore
necessitates variation of labour, fluency of function, universal mobility of the labourer, on the other hand, in its capitalistic form, it reproduces
the old division of labour with its ossified particularisations. We have seen how this absolute contradiction between the technical necessities of
Modern Industry, and the social character inherent in its capitalistic form, dispels all fixity and security in the situation of the labourer; how it
constantly threatens, by taking away the instruments of labour, to snatch from his hands his means of subsistence, [2261 and, by suppressing his
detail-function, to make him superfluous, We have seen, too, how this antagonism vents its rage in the creation of that monstrosity, an industrial
reserve army, kept in misery in order to be always at the disposal of capital; in the incessant human sacrifices from among the working-class, in
the most reckless squandering of labour-power and in the devastation caused by a social anarchy which turns every economic progress into a
social calamity. This is the negative side. But if, on the one hand, variation of work at present imposes itself after the manner of an overpowering
natural law, and with the blindly destructive action of a natural law that meets with resistance [2271 at all points, Modern Industry, on the other
hand, through its catastrophes imposes the necessity of recognising, as a fundamental law of production, variation of work, consequently fitness
of the labourer for varied work, consequently the greatest possible development of his varied aptitudes. It becomes a question of life and death
for society to adapt the mode of production to the normal functioning of this law. Modern Industry, indeed, compels society, under penalty of
death, to replace the detail-worker of to-day, grappled by life-long repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and thus reduced to the mere
fragment of a man, by the fully developed individual, fit for a variety of labours, ready to face any change of production, and to whom the
different social functions he performs, are but so many modes of giving free scope to his own natural and acquired powers.

One step already spontaneously taken towards effecting this revolution is the establishment of technical and agricultural schools, and of "ecoles
d'enseignement professionnel," in which the children of the working-men receive some little instruction in technology and in the practical
handling of the various implements of labour. Though the Factory Act, that first and meagre concession wrung from capital, is limited to
combining elementary education with work in the factory, there can be no doubt that when the working-class comes into power, as inevitably it
must, technical instruction, both theoretical and practical, will take its proper place in the working-class schools. There is also no doubt that such
revolutionary regents, the final result of which is the abolition of the old division of labour, are diametrically opposed to the capitalistic form of
production, and to the economic status of the labourer corresponding to that form. But the historical development of the antagonisms, immanent
in a given form of production, is the only way in which that form of production can be dissolved and a new form established. "Ne sutor ultra
crepidam" — this nee plus ultra of handicraft wisdom became sheer nonsense, from the moment the watchmaker Watt invented the
steam-engine, the barber Arkwright, the throstle, and the working -jeweller, Fulton, the steamship. [2281

So long as Factory legislation is confined to regulating the labour in factories, manufactories, &c, it is regarded as a mere interference with the
exploiting rights of capital. But when it comes to regulating the so-called "home-labour," [2291 it is immediately viewed as a direct attack on the
patria potestas, on parental authority. The tender-hearted English Parliament long affected to shrink from taking this step. The force of facts,
however, compelled it at last to acknowledge that modern industry, in overturning the economic foundation on which was based the traditional
family, and the family labour corresponding to it, had also unloosened all traditional family ties. The rights of the children had to be proclaimed.
The final report of the Ch. Empl. Comm. of 1866, states: "It is unhappily, to a painful degree, apparent throughout the whole of the evidence,
that against no persons do the children of both sexes so much require protection as against their parents." The system of unlimited exploitation of
children's labour in general and the so-called home-labour in particular is "maintained only because the parents are able, without check or
control, to exercise this arbitrary and mischievous power over their young and tender offspring.... Parents must not possess the absolute power of
making their children mere 'machines to earn so much weekly wage....' The children and young persons, therefore, in all such cases may
justifiably claim from the legislature, as a natural right, that an exemption should be secured to them, from what destroys prematurely their
physical strength, and lowers them in the scale of intellectual and moral beings." [2301 It was not, however, the misuse of parental authority that
created the capitalistic exploitation, whether direct or indirect, of children's labour; but, on the contrary, it was the capitalistic mode of
exploitation which, by sweeping away the economic basis of parental authority, made its exercise degenerate into a mischievous misuse of
power. However terrible and disgusting the dissolution, under the capitalist system, of the old family ties may appear, nevertheless, modern
industry, by assigning as it does an important part in the process of production, outside the domestic sphere, to women, to young persons, and to
children of both sexes, creates a new economic foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations between the sexes. It is, of course,
just as absurd to hold the Teutonic-Christian form of the family to be absolute and final as it would be to apply that character to the ancient
Roman, the ancient Greek, or the Eastern forms which, moreover, taken together form a series in historical development. Moreover, it is obvious
that the fact of the collective working group being composed of individuals of both sexes and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (33 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

conditions, become a source of humane development; although in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalistic form, where the labourer
exists for the process of production, and not the process of production for the labourer, that fact is a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery.
[2311

The necessity for a generalisation of the Factory Acts, for transforming them from an exceptional law relating to mechanical spinning and
weaving — those first creations of machinery — into a law affecting social production as a whole, arose, as we have seen, from the mode in
which Modern Industry was historically developed. In the rear of that industry, the traditional form of manufacture, of handicraft, and of
domestic industry, is entirely revolutionised; manufactures are constantly passing into the factory system, and handicrafts into manufactures; and
lastly, the spheres of handicraft and of the domestic industries become, in a, comparatively speaking, wonderfully short time, dens of misery in
which capitalistic exploitation obtains free play for the wildest excesses. There are two circumstances that finally turn the scale: first, the
constantly recurring experience that capital, so soon as it finds itself subject to legal control at one point, compensates itself all the more
recklessly at other points; [2321 secondly, the cry of the capitalists for equality in the conditions of competition, i.e., for equal restrain on all
exploitation of labour. f2331 On this point let us listen to two heart-broken cries. Messrs. Cooksley of Bristol, nail and chain, &c, manufacturers,
spontaneously introduced the regulations of the Factory Act into their business. "As the old irregular system prevails in neighbouring works, the
Messrs. Cooksley are subject to the disadvantage of having their boys enticed to continue their labour elsewhere after 6 p.m. ' This,' they
naturally say, 'is an unjustice and loss to us, as it exhausts a portion of the boy's strength, of which we ought to have the full benefit." [2341 Mr. J.
Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, London) states before the commissioners of the Ch. Empl. Comm.: "He would sign any petition for it"
(legislative interference).... "As it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed his place, lest others should be working later than him
and getting away his orders." [2351 Summarising, the Ch. Empl. Comm. says: "It would be unjust to the larger employers that their factories
should be placed under regulation, while the hours of labour in the smaller places in their own branch of business were under no legislative
restriction. And to the injustice arising from the unfair conditions of competition, in regard to hours, that would be created if the smaller places
of work were exempt, would be added the disadvantage to the larger manufacturers, of finding their supply of juvenile and female labour drawn
off to the places of work exempt from legislation. Further, a stimulus would be given to the multiplication of the smaller places of work, which
are almost invariably the least favourable to the health, comfort, education, and general improvement of the people." [2361

In its final report the Commission proposes to subject to the Factory Act more than 1,400,000 children, young persons, and women, of which
number about one half are exploited in small industries and by the so-called home-work. [2371 It says, "But if it should seem fit to Parliament to
place the whole of that large number of children, young persons and females under the protective legislation above adverted to ... it cannot be
doubted that such legislation would have a most beneficent effect, not only upon the young and the feeble, who are its more immediate objects,
but upon the still larger body of adult workers, who would in all these employments, both directly and indirectly, come immediately under its
influence. It would enforce upon them regular and moderate hours; it would lead to their places of work being kept in a healthy and cleanly state;
it would therefore husband and improve that store of physical strength on which their own well-being and that of the country so much depends; it
would save the rising generation from that overexertion at an early age which undermines their constitutions and leads to premature decay;
finally, it would ensure them — at least up to the age of 13 — the opportunity of receiving the elements of education, and would put an end to
that utter ignorance ... go faithfully exhibited in the Reports of our Assistant Commissioners, and which cannot be regarded without the deepest
pain, and a profound sense of national degradation. [2381

The Tory Cabinet [2391 announced in the Speech from the Throne, on February 5, 1867, that it had framed the proposals of the Industrial
Commission of Inquiry [2401 into Bills. To get that far, another twenty years of experimentum in corpore vili had been required. Already in 1840
a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the labour of children had been appointed. Its Report, in 1842, unfolded, in the words of Nassau W.
Senior, "the most frightful picture of avarice, selfishness and cruelty on the part of masters and of parents, and of juvenile and infantile misery,
degradation and destruction ever presented.... It may be supposed that it describes the horrors of a past age. But there is unhappily evidence that
those horrors continue as intense as they were. A pamphlet published by Hardwicke about 2 years ago states that the abuses complained of in
1842, are in full bloom at the present day. It is a strange proof of the general neglect of the morals and health of the children of the
working-class, that this report lay unnoticed for 20 years, during which the children, 'bred up without the remotest sign of comprehension as to
what is meant by the term morals, who had neither knowledge, nor religion, nor natural affection,' were allowed to become the parents of the
present generation." [2411

The social conditions having undergone a change, Parliament could not venture to shelve the demands of the Commission of 1862, as it had done
those of the Commission of 1840. Hence in 1864, when the Commission had not yet published more than a part of its reports, the earthenware
industries (including the potteries), makers of paperhangings, matches, cartridges, and caps, and fustian cutters were made subject to the Acts in
force in the textile industries. In the Speech from the Throne, on 5th February, 1867, the Tory Cabinet of the day announced the introduction of
Bills, founded on the final recommendations of the Commission, which had completed its labours in 1866.

On the 15th August, 1867, the Factory Acts Extension Act, and on the 21st August, the Workshops' Regulation Act received the Royal Assent;
the former Act having reference to large industries, the latter to small.

The former applies to blast-furnaces, iron' and copper mills, foundries, machine shops, metal manufactories, gutta-percha works, paper mills,
glass-works, tobacco manufactories, letter-press printing (including newspapers), book-binding, in short to all industrial establishments of the
above kind, in which 50 individuals or more are occupied simultaneously, and for not less than 100 days during the year.

To give an idea of the extent of the sphere embraced by the Workshops' Regulation Act in its application, we cite from its interpretation clause,
the following passages:



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (34 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

"Handicraft shall mean any manual labour exercised by way of trade, or for purposes of gain in, or incidental to, the making any article or part of
an article, or in, or incidental to, the altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, or otherwise adapting for sale any article."

"Workshop shall mean any room or place whatever in the open air or undercover, in which any handicraft is carried on by any child, young
person, or woman, and to which and over which the person by whom such child, young person, or woman is employed, has the right of access
and control."

"Employed shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether for wages or not, under a master or under a parent as herein defined."

"Parent shall mean parent, guardian, or person, having the custody of, or control over, any... child or young person."

Clause 7, which imposes a penalty for employment of children, young persons, and women, contrary to the provisions of the Act, subjects to
fines, not only the occupier of the workshop, whether parent or not, but even "the parent of, or the person deriving any direct benefit from the
labour of, or having the control over, the child, young person or woman. "

The Factory Acts Extension Act, which affects the large establishments, derogates from the Factory Act by a crowd of vicious exceptions and
cowardly compromises with the masters.

The Workshops' Regulation Act, wretched in all its details, remained a dead letter in the hands of the municipal and local authorities who were
charged with its execution. When, in 1871, Parliament withdrew from them this power, in order to confer it on the Factory Inspectors, to whose
province it thus added by a single stroke more than one hundred thousand workshops, and three hundred brickworks, care was taken at the same
time not to add more than eight assistants to their already undermanned staff. \2A2\

What strikes us, then, in the English legislation of 1867, is, on the one hand, the necessity imposed on the parliament of the ruling classes, of
adopting in principle measures so extraordinary, and on so great a scale, against the excesses of capitalistic exploitation; and on the other hand,
the hesitation, the repugnance, and the bad faith, with which it lent itself to the task of carrying those measures into practice.

The Inquiry Commission of 1862 also proposed a new regulation of the mining industry, an industry distinguished from others by the
exceptional characteristic that the interests of landlord and capitalist there join hands. The antagonism of these two interests had been favourable
to Factory legislation, while on the other hand the absence of that antagonism is sufficient to explain the delays and chicanery of the legislation
on mines.

The Inquiry Commission of 1840 had made revelations so terrible, so shocking, and creating such a scandal all over Europe, that to salve its
conscience Parliament passed the Mining Act of 1842, in which it limited itself to forbidding the employment underground in mines of children
under 10 years of age and females.

Then another Act, The Mines' Inspecting Act of 1860, provides that mines shall be inspected by public officers nominated specially for that
purpose, and that boys between the ages of 10 and 12 years shall not be employed, unless they have a school certificate, or go to school for a
certain number of hours. This Act was a complete dead letter owing to the ridiculously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of their
powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we proceed.

One of the most recent Blue books on mines is the "Report from the Select Committee on Mines, together with &c. Evidence, 23rd July, 1866."
This Report is the work of a Parliamentary Committee selected from members of the House of Commons, and authorised to summon and
examine witnesses. It is a thick folio volume in which the Report itself occupies only five lines to this effect; that the committee has nothing to
say, and that more witnesses must be examined!

The mode of examining the witnesses reminds one of the crossexamination of witnesses in English courts of justice, where the advocate tries, by
means of impudent, unexpected, equivocal and involved questions, put without connexion, to intimidate, surprise, and confound the witness, and
to give a forced meaning to the answers extorted from him. In this inquiry the members of the committee themselves are the cross-examiners,
and among them are to be found both mine-owners and mine exploiters; the witnesses are mostly working coal miners. The whole farce is too
characteristic of the spirit of capital, not to call for a few extracts from this Report. For the sake of conciseness I have classified them. I may also
add that every question and its answer are numbered in the English Blue books.

1. Employment in mines of boys of 10 years and upwards. — In the mines the work, inclusive of going and returning, usually lasts 14 or 15
hours, sometimes even from 3, 4 and 5 o'clock a.m., till 5 and 6 o'clock p.m. (n. 6, 452, 83). The adults work in two shifts, of eight hours each;
but there is no alternation with the boys, on account of the expense (n. 80, 203, 204). The younger boys are chiefly employed in opening and
shutting the ventilating doors in the various parts of the mine; the older ones are employed on heavier work, in carrying coal, &c. (n. 122, 739,
1747). They work these long hours underground until their 18th or 22nd year, when they are put to miner's work proper (n. 161). Children and
young persons are at present worse treated, and harder worked than at any previous period (n. 1663-1667). The miners demand almost
unanimously an act of Parliament prohibiting the employment in mines of children under 14. And now Hussey Vivian (himself an exploiter of
mines) asks: "Would not the opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty of the workman's family?" Mr. Bruce: "Do you not think it would
be a very hard case, where a parent had been injured, or where he was sickly, or where a father was dead, and there was only a mother, to
prevent a child between 12 and 14 earning Is. 7d. a day for the good of the family? ... You must lay down a general rule? ... Are you prepared to
recommend legislation which would prevent the employment of children under 12 and 14, whatever the state of their parents might be?" "Yes."
(ns. 107-1 10). Vivian: "Supposing that an enactment were passed preventing the employment of children under the age of 14, would it not be
probable that ... the parents of children would seek employment for their children in other directions, for instance, in manufacture?" "Not
generally I think" (n. 174). Kinnaird: "Some of the boys are keepers of doors?" "Yes." "Is there not generally a very great draught every time you

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (35 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

open a door or close it?" "Yes, generally there is." "It sounds a very easy thing, but it is in fact rather a painful one?" "He is imprisoned there just
the same as if he was in a cell of a gaol." Bourgeois Vivian: "Whenever a boy is furnished with a lamp cannot he read?" "Yes, he can read, if he
finds himself in candles.... I suppose he would be found fault with if he were discovered reading; he is there to mind his business, he has a duty
to perform, and he has to attend to it in the first place, and I do not think it would be allowed down the pit." (ns. 139, 141, 143, 158, 160).

II. Education. — The working miners want a law for the compulsory education of their children, as in factories. They declare the clauses of the
Act of 1860, which require a school certificate to be obtained before employing boys of 10 and 12 years of age, to be quite illusory. The
examination of the witnesses on this subject is truly droll. "Is it (the Act) required more against the masters or against the parents?" "It is
required against both I think." "You cannot say whether it is required against one more than against the other?" "No; I can hardly answer that
question." (ns. 1 15, 116). "Does there appear to be any desire on the part of the employers that the boys should have such hours as to enable
them to go to school?" "No; the hours are never shortened for that purpose." (n. 137) Mr. Kinnaird: "Should you say that the colliers generally
improve their education; have you any instances of men who have, since they began to work, greatly improved their education, or do they not
rather go back, and lose any advantage that they may have gained?" "They generally become worse: they do not improve; they acquire bad
habits; they get on to drinking and gambling and such like,, and they go completely to wreck." (n. 21 1.) "Do they make any attempt of the kind
(for providing instruction) by having schools at night?" "There are few collieries where night schools are held, and perhaps at those collieries a
few boys do go to those schools; but they are so physically exhausted that it is to no purpose that they go there." (n. 454.) "You are then,"
concludes the bourgeois, "against education?" "Most certainly not; but," &c. (n. 443.) "But are they (the employers) not compelled to demand
them (school certificates)?" "By law they are; but I am not aware that they are demanded by the employers." "Then it is your opinion, that this
provision of the Act as to requiring certificates, is not generally carried out in the collieries?" "It is not carried out." (ns. 443, 444.) "Do the men
take a great interest in this question (of education)?" "The majority of them do." (n. 717.) "Are they very anxious to see the law enforced?" "The
majority are." (n. 718.) "Do you think that in this country any law that you pass ... can really be effectual unless the population themselves assist
in putting it into operation?" "Many a man might wish to object to employing a boy, but he would perhaps become marked by it." (n. 720.)
"Marked by whom?" "By his employers." (n. 721.) "Do you think that the employers would find any fault with a man who obeyed the law. . . ?"
"I believe they would." (n. 722.) "Have you ever heard of any workman objecting to employ a boy between 10 and 12, who could not write or
read?" "It is not left to men's option." (n. 123.) "Would you call for the interference of Parliament?" "I think that if anything effectual is to be
done in the education of the colliers' 'children, it will have to be made compulsory by Act of Parliament." (n. 1634.) "Would you lay that
obligation upon the colliers only, or all the workpeople of Great Britain?" "I came to speak for the colliers." (n. 1636.) "Why should you
distinguish them (colliery boys) from other boys?" "Because I think they are an exception to the rule." (n. 1638.) "In what respect?" "In a
physical respect." (n. 1639.) "Why should education be more valuable to them than to other classes of lads?" "I do not know that it is more
valuable; but through the over-exertion in mines there is less chance for the boys that are employed there to get education, either at Sunday
schools, or at day schools." (n. 1640.) "It is impossible to look at a question of this sort absolutely by itself?" (n. 1644.) "Is there a sufficiency of
schools?" — "No"... (n. 1646). "If the State were to require that every child should be sent to school, would there be schools for the children to
go to?" "No; but I think if the circumstances were to spring up, the schools would be forthcoming." (n. 1647.) "Some of them (the boys) cannot
read and write at all, I suppose?" "The majority cannot. . The majority of the men themselves cannot." (ns. 705, 725.)

III. Employment of women. — Since 1842 women are no more employed underground, but are occupied on the surface in loading the coal,
&c, in drawing the tubs to the canals and railway waggons, in sorting, &c. Their numbers have considerably increased during the last three or
four years, (n. 1727.) They are mostly the wives, daughters, and widows of the working miners, and their ages range from 12 to 50 or 60 years,
(ns. 645, 1779.) "What is the feeling among the working miners as to the employment of women?" "I think they generally condemn it." (n. 648.)
"What objection do you see to it?" "I think it is degrading to the sex." (n. 649.) "There is a peculiarity of dress?" "Yes ... it is rather a man's dress,
and I believe in some cases, it drowns all sense of decency." "Do the women smoke?" "Some do." "And I suppose it is very dirty work?" "Very
dirty." "They get black and grimy?" "As black as those who are down the mines ... I believe that a woman having children (and there are plenty
on the banks that have) cannot do her duty to her children." (ns. 650-654, 701.) "Do you think that those widows could get employment
anywhere else, which would bring them in as much wages as that (from 8s. to 10s. a week)?" "I cannot speak to that." (n. 709.) "You would still
be prepared, would you," (flint-hearted fellow!) "to prevent their obtaining a livelihood by these means?" "I would." (n. 710.) "What is the
general feeling in the district ... as to the employment of women?" "The feeling is that it is degrading; and we wish as miners to have more
respect to the fair sex than to see them placed on the pit bank... Some part of the work is very hard; some of these girls have raised as much as 10
tons of stuff a day." (ns. 1715,1717.) "Do you think that the women employed about the collieries are less moral than the women employed in
the factories?" ". ..the percentage of bad ones may be a little more ... than with the girls in the factories." (n. 1237.) "But you are not quite
satisfied with the state of morality in the factories?" "No." (n. 1733.) "Would you prohibit the employment of women in factories also?" "No, I
would not." (n. 1734.) "Why not?" "I think it a more honourable occupation for them in the mills." (n. 1735.) "Still it is injurious to their
morality, you think?" "Not so much as working on the pit bank; but it is more on the social position I take it; I do not take it on its moral ground
alone. The degradation, in its social bearing on the girls, is deplorable in the extreme. When these 400 or 500 girls become colliers' wives, the
men suffer greatly from this degradation, and it causes them to leave their homes and drink." (n. 1736.) "You would be obliged to stop the
employment of women in the ironworks as well, would you not, if you stopped it in the collieries?" "I cannot speak for any other trade." (n.
1737.) "Can you see any difference in the circumstances of women employed in ironworks, and the circumstances of women employed above
ground in collieries?" "I have not ascertained anything as to that." (n. 1740.) "Can you see anything that makes a distinction between one class
and the other?" "I have not ascertained that, but I know from house to house visitation, that it is a deplorable state of things in our district...." (n.
1741.) "Would you interfere in every case with the employment of women where that employment was degrading?" "It would become injurious,
I think, in this way: the best feelings of Englishmen have been gained from the instruction of a mother. . . (n. 1750.) "That equally applies to
agricultural employments, does it not?" "Yes, but that is only for two seasons, and we have work all the four seasons." (n. 1751.) "They often
work day and night, wet through to the skin, their constitution undermined and their health ruined." "You have not inquired into that subject
perhaps?" "I have certainly taken note of it as I have gone along, and certainly I have seen nothing parallel to the effects of the employment of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (36 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

women on the pit bank.... It is the work of a man... a strong man." (ns. 1753, 1793, 1794.) "Your feeling upon the whole subject is that the better
class of colliers who desire to raise themselves and humanise themselves, instead of deriving help from the women, are pulled down by
them?" "Yes." (n. 1808.) After some further crooked questions from these bourgeois, the secret of their "sympathy" for widows, poor families,
&c, comes out at last. "The coal proprietor appoints certain gentlemen to take the oversight of the workings, and it is their policy, in order to
receive approbation, to place things on the most economical basis they can, and these girls are employed at from Is. up to Is. 6d. a day, where a
man at the rate of 2s. 6d. a day would have to be employed." (n. 1816.)

IV. Coroner's inquests. — "With regard to coroner's inquests in your district, have the workmen confidence in the proceedings at those inquests
when accidents occur?" "No; they have not." (n. 360.) "Why not?" "Chiefly because the men who are generally chosen, are men who know
nothing about mines and such like." "Are not workmen summoned at all upon the juries?" "Never but as witnesses to my knowledge." "Who are
the people who are generally summoned upon these juries?" "Generally tradesmen in the neighbourhood ... from their circumstances they are
sometimes liable to be influenced by their employers ... the owners of the works. They are generally men who have no knowledge, and can
scarcely understand the witnesses who are called before them, and the terms which are used and such like." "Would you have the jury composed
of persons who had been employed in mining?" "Yes, partly... they (the workmen) think that the verdict is not in accordance with the evidence
given generally." (ns. 361, 364, 366, 368, 371, 375.) "One great object in summoning a jury is to have an impartial one, is it not?" "Yes, I should
think so." "Do you think that the juries would be impartial if they were composed to a considerable extent of workmen?" "I cannot see any
motive which the workmen would have to act partially ... they necessarily have a better knowledge of the operations in connexion with the
mine." "You do not think there would be a tendency on the part of the workmen to return unfairly severe verdicts?" "No, I think not." (ns. 378,
379, 380.)

V. False weights and measures. — The workmen demand to be paid weekly instead of fortnightly, and by weight instead of by cubical contents
of the tubs; they also demand protection against the use of false weights, &c. (n. 1071.) "If the tubs were fraudulently increased, a man. could
discontinue working by giving 14 days' notice?" "But if he goes to another place, there is the same thing going on there." (n. 1071.) "But he can
leave that place where the wrong has been committed?" "It is general; wherever he goes, he has to submit to it." (n. 1072.) "Could a man leave
by giving 14 days' notice?" "Yes." (n. 1073.) And yet they are not satisfied!

VI. Inspection of mines. — Casualties from explosions are not the only things the workmen suffer from. (n. 234, sqq.) "Our men complained
very much of the bad ventilation of the collieries ... the ventilation is so bad in general that the men can scarcely breathe; they are quite unfit for
employment of any kind after they have been for a length of time in connexion with their work; indeed, just at the part of the mine where I am
working, men have been obliged to leave their employment and come home in consequence of that ... some of them have been out of work for
weeks just in consequence of the bad state of the ventilation where there is not explosive gas ... there is plenty of air generally in the main
courses, yet pains are not taken to get air into the workings where men are working." "Why do you not apply to the inspector?" "To tell the truth
there are many men who are timid on that point; there have been cases of men being sacrificed and losing their employment in consequence of

applying to the inspector." "Why is he a marked man for having complained?" "Yes And he finds it difficult to get employment in another

mine?" "Yes." "Do you think the mines in your neighbourhood are sufficiently inspected to insure a compliance with the provisions of the Act?"
"No; they are not inspected at all ... the inspector has been down just once in the pit, and it has been going seven years.... In the district to which I
belong there are not a sufficient number of inspectors. We have one old man more than 70 years of age to inspect more than 130 collieries."
"You wish to have a class of sub-inspectors?" "Yes." (ns. 234, 241, 251, 254, 274, 275, 554, 276, 293.) "But do you think it would be possible
for Government to maintain such an army, of inspectors as would be necessary to do all that you want them to do, without information from the
men?" "No, I should think it would be next to impossible...." "It would be desirable the inspectors should come oftener?" "Yes, and without
being sent for." (n. 280, 277.) "Do you not think that the effect of having these inspectors examining the collieries so frequently would be to shift
the responsibility (!) of supplying proper ventilation from the owners of the collieries to the Government officials?" "No, I do not think that, I
think that they should make it their business to enforce the Acts which are already in existence." (n. 285.) "When you speak of sub-inspectors, do
you mean men at a less salary, and of an inferior stamp to the present inspectors?" "I would not have them inferior, if you could get them
otherwise." (n. 294.) "Do you merely want more inspectors, or do you want a lower class of men as an inspector?" "A man who would knock
about, and see that things are kept right; a man who would not be afraid of himself." (n. 295.) "If you obtained your wish in getting an inferior
class of inspectors appointed, do you think that there would be no danger from want of skill, &c?" "I think not, I think that the Government
would see after that, and have proper men in that position." (n. 297.) This kind of examination becomes at last too much even for the chairman of
the committee, and he interrupts with the observation: "You want a class of men who would look into all the details of the mine, and would go
into all the holes and corners, and go into the real facts ... they would report to the chief inspector, who would then bring his scientific knowledge
to bear on the facts they have stated?" (ns. 298, 299.) "Would it not entail very great expense if all these old workings were kept ventilated?"
"Yes, expense might be incurred, but life would be at the same time protected." (n. 53 1.) A working miner objects to the 17th section of the Act
of 1860; he says, "At the present time, if the inspector of mines finds a part of the mine unfit to work in, he has to report it to the mine-owner and
the Home Secretary. After doing that, there is given to the owner 20 days to look over the matter; at the end of 20 days he has the power to
refuse making any alteration in the mine; but, when he refuses, the mine-owner writes to the Home Secretary, at the same time nominating five
engineers, and from those five engineers named by the mine-owner himself, the Home Secretary appoints one, I think, as arbitrator, or appoints
arbitrators from them; now we think in that case the mine-owner virtually appoints his own arbitrator." (n. 581.) Bourgeois examiner, himself a
mine-owner: "But ... is this a 'Merely speculative objection?" (n. 586.) "Then you have a very poor opinion of the integrity of mining engineers?"
"It is most certainly unjust and inequitable." (n. 588.) "Do not mining engineers possess a sort of public character, and do not you think that they
are above making such a partial decision as you apprehend?" "I do not wish to answer such a question as that with respect to the personal
character of those men. I believe that in many cases they would act very partially indeed, and that it ought not to be in their hands to do so, where
men's lives are at stake." (n. 589.) This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this question: "Do you not think that the mine-owner also suffers
loss from an explosion?" Finally, "Are not you workmen in Lancashire able to take care of your own interests without calling in the Government
to help you?" "No." (n. 1042.)

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (37 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

In the year 1865 there were 3,217 coal mines in Great Britain, and 12 inspectors. A Yorkshire mine-owner himself calculates (Times, 26th
January, 1867), that putting on one side their office work, which absorbs all their time, each mine can be visited but once in ten years by an
inspector. No wonder that explosions have increased progressively, both in number and extent (sometimes with a loss of 200-300 men), during
the last ten years. These are the beauties of "free" capitalist production! [This sentence has been added to the English text in conformity with the
4th German edition. — Ed.]

The very defective Act, passed in 1872, is the first that regulates the hours of labour of the children employed in mines, and makes exploiters and
owners, to a certain extent, responsible for so-called accidents.

The Royal Commission appointed in 1867 to inquire into the employment in agriculture of children, young persons, and women, has published
some very important reports. Several attempts to apply the principles of the Factory Acts, but in a modified form, to agriculture have been made,
but have so far resulted in complete failure. All that I wish to draw attention to here is the existence of an irresistible tendency towards the
general application of those principles.

If the general extension of factory legislation to all trades for the purpose of protecting the working-class both in mind and body has become
inevitable, on the other hand, as we have already pointed out, that extension hastens on the general conversion of numerous isolated small
industries into a few combined industries carried on upon a large scale; it therefore accelerates the concentration of capital and the exclusive
predominance of the factory system. It destroys both the ancient and the transitional forms, behind which the dominion of capital is still in part
concealed, and replaces them by the direct and open sway of capital; but thereby it also generalises the direct opposition to this sway. While in
each individual workshop it enforces uniformity, regularity, order, and economy, it increases by the immense spur which the limitation and
regulation of the working-day give to technical improvement, the anarchy and the catastrophes of capitalist production as a whole, the intensity
of labour, and the competition of machinery with the labourer. By the destruction of petty and domestic industries it destroys the last resort of the
"redundant population," and with it the sole remaining safety-valve of the whole social mechanism. By maturing the material conditions, and the
combination on a social scale of the processes of production, it matures the contradictions and antagonisms of the capitalist form of production,
and thereby provides, along with the elements for the formation of a new society, the forces for exploding the old one. [2431



SECTION 10.

MODERN INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE



The revolution called forth by modern industry in agriculture, and in the social relations of agricultural producers, will be investigated later on.
In this place, we shall merely indicate a few results by way of anticipation. If the use of machinery in agriculture is for the most part free from
the injurious physical effect it has on the factory operative, its action in superseding the labourers is more intense, and finds less resistance, as we
shall see later in detail. In the counties of Cambridge and Suffolk, for example, the area of cultivated land has extended very much within the last
20 years (up to 1868), while in the same period the rural population has diminished, not only relatively, but absolutely. In the United States it is
as yet only virtually that agricultural machines replace labourers; in other words, they allow of the cultivation by the farmer of a larger surface,
but do not actually expel the labourers employed. In 1861 the number of persons occupied in England and Wales in the manufacture of
agricultural machines was 1 ,034, whilst the number of agricultural labourers employed in the use of agricultural machines and steam-engines did
not exceed 1,205.

In the sphere of agriculture, modern industry has a more revolutionary effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it annihilates the peasant, that
bulwark of the old society, and replaces him by the wage-labourer. Thus the desire for social changes, and the class antagonisms are brought to
the same level in the country as in the towns. The irrational, old-fashioned methods of agriculture are replaced by scientific ones. Capitalist
production completely tears asunder the old bond of union which held together agriculture and manufacture in their infancy. But at the same time
it creates the material conditions for a higher synthesis in the future, viz., the union of agriculture and industry on the basis of the more perfected
forms they have each acquired during their temporary separation. Capitalist production, by collecting the population in great centres, and causing
an ever-increasing preponderance of town population, on the one hand concentrates the historical motive power of society; on the other hand, it
disturbs the circulation of matter between man and the soil, i.e., prevents the return to the soil of its elements consumed by man in the form of
food and clothing; it therefore violates the conditions necessary to lasting fertility of the soil. By this action it destroys at the same time the
health of the town labourer and the intellectual life of the rural labourer. [2441 But while upsetting the naturally grown conditions for the
maintenance of that circulation of matter, it imperiously calls for its restoration as a system, as a regulating law of social production, and under a
form appropriate to the full development of the human race. In agriculture as in manufacture, the transformation of production under the sway of
capital, means, at the same time, the martyrdom of the producer; the instrument of labour becomes the means of enslaving, exploiting, and
impoverishing the labourer; the social combination and organisation of labour-processes is turned into an organised mode of crushing out the
workman's individual vitality, freedom, and independence. The dispersion of the rural labourers over larger areas breaks their power of
resistance while concentration increases that of the town operatives. In modern agriculture, as in the urban industries, the increased
productiveness and quantity of the labour set in motion are bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labour-power itself.
Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the labourer, but of robbing the soil; all progress in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (38 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time, is a progress towards ruining the lasting sources of that fertility. The more a country starts its
development on the foundation of modern industry, like the United States, for example, the more rapid is this process of destruction. [2451
Capitalist production, therefore, develops technology, and the combining together of various processes into a social whole, only by sapping the
original sources of all wealth-the soil and the labourer.



Footnotes

[11 Mill should have said, "of any human being not fed by other people's labour," for, without doubt, machinery has greatly increased the number
of well-to-do idlers.

[21 See, for instance, Hutton: "Course of Mathematics."

[31 "From this point of view we may draw a sharp line of distinction between a tool and a machine: spades, hammers, chisels, &c, combinations
of levers and of screws, in all of which, no matter how complicated they may be in other respects, man is the motive power, ... all this falls under
the idea of a tool; but the plough, which is drawn by animal power, and wind-mills, &c, must be classed among machines." (Wilhelm Schulz:
"Die Bewegung der Produktion." Zurich, 1843, p. 38.) In many respects a book to be recommended.

[41 Before his time, spinning machines, although very imperfect ones, had already been used, and Italy was probably the country of their first
appearance. A critical history of technology would show how little any of the inventions of the 1 8th century are the work of a single individual.
Hitherto there is no such book. Darwin has interested us in the history of Nature's Technology, i.e., in the formation of the organs of plants and
animals, which organs serve as instruments of production for sustaining life. Does not the history of the productive organs of man, of organs that
are the material basis of all social organisation, deserve equal attention? And would not such a history be easier to compile, since, as Vico says,
human history differs from natural history in this, that we have made the former, but not the latter? Technology discloses man's mode of dealing
with Nature, the process of production by which he sustains his life, and thereby also lays bare the mode of formation of his social relations, and
of the mental conceptions that flow from them. Every history of religion, even, that fails to take account of this material basis, is uncritical. It is,
in reality, much easier to discover by analysis the earthly core of the misty creations of religion, than, conversely, it is, to develop from the actual
relations of life the corresponding celestialised forms of those relations. The latter method is the only materialistic, and therefore the only
scientific one. The weak points in the abstract materialism of natural science, a materialism that excludes history and its process, are at once
evident from the abstract and ideological conceptions of its spokesmen, whenever they venture beyond the bounds of their own speciality.

[51 Especially in the original form of the power-loom, we recognise, at the first glance, the ancient loom. In its modern form, the power-loom has
undergone essential alterations.

[61 It is only during the last 15 years (i.e., since about 1850), that a constantly increasing portion of these machine tools have been made in
England by machinery, and that not by the same manufacturers who make the machines. Instances of machines for the fabrication of these
mechanical tools are, the automatic bobbin-making engine, the cardsetting engine, shuttle-making machines, and machines for forging mule and
throstle spindles.

[71 Moses says: "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treads the corn." The Christian philanthropists of Germany, on the contrary, fastened a
wooden board round the necks of the serfs, whom they used as a motive power for grinding, in order to prevent them from putting flour into their
mouths with their hands.

[81 It was partly the want of streams with a good fall on them, and partly their battles with superabundance of water in other respects, that
compelled the Dutch to resort to wind as a motive power. The wind-mill itself they got from Germany, where its invention was the origin of a
pretty squabble between the nobles, the priests, and the emperor, as to which of those three the wind "belonged." The air makes bondage, was the
cry in Germany, at the same time that the wind was making Holland free. What it reduced to bondage in this case, was not the Dutchman, but the
land for the Dutchman. In 1836, 12,000 windmills of 6,000 horse-power were still employed in Holland, to prevent two-thirds of the land from
being reconverted into morasses.

[91 It was, indeed, very much improved by Watt's first so-called single acting engine; but, in this form, it continued to be a mere machine for
raising water, and the liquor from salt mines.

[101 "The union of all these simple instruments, set in motion by a single motor, constitutes a machine." (Babbage, 1. c.)

[Ill In January, 1861, John C. Morton read before the Society of Arts a paper on "The forces employed in agriculture." He there states: "Every
improvement that furthers the uniformity of the land makes the steam-engine more and more applicable to the production of pure mechanical
force.... Horse-power is requisite wherever crooked fences and other obstructions prevent uniform action. These obstructions are vanishing day
by day. For operations that demand more exercise of will than actual force, the only power applicable is that controlled every instant by the
human mind-in other words, man- power." Mr. Morton then reduces steam-power, horse-power, and man-power, to the unit in general use for
steam-engines, namely, the force required to raise 33,000 lbs. one foot in one minute, and reckons the cost of one horse-power from a
steam-engine to be 3d., and from a horse to be 5-l/2d. per hour. Further, if a horse must fully maintain its health, it can work no more than 8
hours a day. Three at the least out of every seven horses used on tillage land during the year can be dispensed with by using steam-power, at an
expense not greater than that which, the horses dispensed with, would cost during the 3 or 4 months in which alone they can be used effectively.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (39 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

Lastly, steam-power, in those agricultural operations in which it can be employed, improves, in comparison with horse-power, the quality of the
work. To do the work of a steam-engine would require 66 men, at a total cost of 15 S. an hour, and to do the work of a horse, 32 men, at a total
cost of 8s. an hour.



12] Faulhaber, 1625; De Caus, 1688.

131 The modern turbine frees the industrial exploitation of water-power from many of its former fetters.



[141 "In the early days of textile manufactures, the locality of the factory depended upon the existence of a stream having a sufficient fall to turn
a water-wheel; and, although the establishment of the water-mills was the commencement of the breaking up of the domestic system of
manufacture, yet the mills necessarily situated upon streams, and frequently at considerable distances the one from the other, formed part of a
rural, rather than an urban system; and it was not until the introduction of the steam-power as a substitute for the stream that factories were
congregated in towns, and localities where the coal and water required for the production of steam were found in sufficient quantities. The
steam-engine is the parent of manufacturing towns." (A. Redgrave in "Reports of the Insp. of Fact., 30th April, 1860," p. 36.)

[151 From the standpoint of division of labour in Manufacture, weaving was not simple, but, on the contrary, complicated manual labour; and
consequently the power-loom is a machine that does very complicated work. It is altogether erroneous to suppose that modern machinery
originally appropriated those operations alone, which division of labour had simplified. Spinning and weaving were, during the manufacturing
period, split up into new species, and the implements were modified and improved; but the labour itself was in no way divided, and it retained its
handicraft character. It is not the labour, but the instrument of labour, that serves as the starting-point of the machine.



[161 Before the epoch of Mechanical Industry, the wool manufacture was the predominating manufacture in England. Hence it was in this
industry that, in the first half of the 18th century, the most experiments were made. Cotton, which required less careful preparation for its
treatment by machinery, derived the benefit of the experience gained on wool, just as afterwards the manipulation of wool by machinery was
developed on the lines of cotton-spinning and weaving by machinery. It was only during the 10 years immediately preceding 1866, that isolated
details of the wool manufacture, such as woolcombing, were incorporated in the factory system. "The application of power to the process of
combing wool ... extensively in operation since the introduction of the combingmachine, especially Lister's ... undoubtedly had the effect of
throwing a very large number of men out of work. Wool was formerly combed by hand, most frequently in the cottage of the comber. It is now
very generally combed in the factory, and hand-labour is superseded, except in some particular kinds of work, in which hand-combed wool is
still preferred. Many of the hand-combers found employment in the factories, but the produce of the hand-combers bears so small a proportion to
that of the machine, that the employment of a very large number of combers has passed away." ("Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1856," p.
16.)



[171 "The principle of the factory system, then, is to substitute ... the partition of a process into its essential constituents, for the division or
graduation of labour among artisans." (Andrew Ure: "The Philosophy of Manufactures," Lond., 1835, p. 20.)



[181 The power-loom was at first made chiefly of wood; in its improved modern form it is made of iron. To what an extent the old forms of the
instruments of production influenced their new forms at first starting, is shown by, amongst other things, the most superficial comparison of the
present power-loom with the old one, of the modern blowing apparatus of a blast-furnace with the first inefficient mechanical reproduction of the
ordinary bellows, and perhaps more strikingly than in any other way, by the attempts before the invention of the present locomotive, to construct
a locomotive that actually had two feet, which after the fashion of a horse, it raised alternately from the ground. It is only after considerable
development of the science of mechanics, and accumulated practical experience, that the form of a machine becomes settled entirely in
accordance with mechanical principles, and emancipated from the traditional form of the tool that gave rise to it.



[191 Eli Whitney's cotton gin had until very recent times undergone less essential changes than any other machine of the 1 8th century. It is only
during the last decade (i.e., since 1856) that another American, Mr. Emery, of Albany, New York, has rendered Whitney's gin antiquated by an
improvement as simple as it is effective.

[201 "The Industry of Nations," Lond., 1855, Part II., p. 239. This work also remarks: 'Simple and outwardly unimportant as this appendage to
lathes may appear, it is not, we believe, averring too much to state, that its influence in improving and extending the use of machinery has been
as great as that produced by Watt's improvements of the steam-engine itself. Its introduction went at once to perfect all machinery, to cheapen it,
and to stimulate invention and improvement."

[211 One of these machines, used for forging paddle-wheel shafts in London, is called "Thor." It forges a shaft of 16 1/2 tons with as much ease
as a blacksmith forges a horseshoe.

[221 Wood- working machines that are also capable of being employed on a small scale are mostly American inventions.



[231 Science, generally speaking, costs the capitalist nothing, a fact that by no means hinders him from exploiting it. The science of others is as
much annexed by capital as the labour of others. Capitalistic appropriation and personal appropriation, whether of science or of material wealth,
are, however, totally different things. Dr. Ure himself deplores the gross ignorance of mechanical science existing among his dear
machinery-exploiting manufacturers, and Liebig can a tale unfold about the astounding ignorance of chemistry displayed by English chemical
manufacturers.



[241 Ricardo lays such stress on this effect of machinery (of which, in other connexions, he takes no more notice than he does of the general
distinction between the labour process and the process of creating surplus-value), that he occasionally loses sight of the value given up by

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (40 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

machines to the product, and puts machines on the same footing as natural forces. Tbus "Adam Smith nowhere undervalues the services which
the natural agents and machinery perform for us, but he very justly distinguishes the nature of the value which they add to commodities... as they
perform their work gratuitously, the assistance which they afford us, adds nothing to value in exchange." (Ric, 1. c, pp. 336, 337.) This
observation of Ricardo is of course correct in so far as it is directed against J. B. Say, who imagines that machines render the "service" of
creating value which forms a part of "profits."



[251 A horse-power is equal to a force of 33,000 foot-pounds per minute, i.e., to a force that raises 33,000 pounds one foot in a minute, or one
pound 33,000 feet. This is the horse power meant in the text. In ordinary language, and also here and there in quotations in this work, a
distinction is drawn between the "nominal" and the "commercial" or "indicated" horse-power of the same engine. The old or nominal
horse-power is calculated exclusively from the length of piston- stroke, and the diameter of the cylinder, and leaves pressure of steam and piston
speed out of consideration. It expresses practically this: This engine would be one of 50 horse-power, if it were driven with the same low
pressure of steam, and the same slow piston speed, as in the days of Boulton and Watt. But the two latter factors have increased enormously
since those days. In order to measure the mechanical force exerted today by an engine, an indicator has been invented which shows the pressure
of the steam in the cylinder. The piston speed is easily ascertained. Thus the "indicated" or "commercial" horse-power of an engine is expressed
by a mathematical formula, involving diameter of cylinder, length of stroke, piston speed, and steam pressure, simultaneously, and showing what
multiple of 33,000 pounds is really raised by the engine in a minute. Hence, one "nominal" horse-power may exert three, four, or even five
"indicated" or "real" horse-powers. This observation is made for the purpose of explaining various citations in the subsequent pages. — F. E.



[261 The reader who is imbued with capitalist notions will naturally miss here the "interest" that the machine, in proportion to its capital value,
adds to the product. It is, however, easily seen that since a machine no more creates new value than any other part of constant capital, it cannot
add any value under the name of "interest." It is also evident that here, where we are treating of the production of surplus-value, we cannot
assume a priori the existence of any part of that value under the name of interest. The capitalist mode of calculating, which appears, prima facie,
absurd, and repugnant to the laws of the creation of value, will be explained in the third book of this work.

[271 This portion of value which is added by the machinery, decreases both absolutely and relatively, when the machinery does away with horses
and other animals that are employed as mere moving forces, and not as machines for changing the form of matter. It may here be incidentally
observed, that Descartes, in defining animals as mere machines, .saw with eyes of the manufacturing period, while to eyes of the middle ages,
animals were assistants to man, as they were later to Von Haller in his "Restauration der Staatswissenschaften." That Descartes, like Bacon,
anticipated an alteration in the form of production, and the practical subjugation of Nature by Man, as a result of the altered methods of thought,
is plain from his "Discours de la Methode." He there says: "If est possible (by the methods he introduced in philosophy) de parvenir i des
connaissances fort utiles i la vie, et qu'au lieu de cette philosophic speculative qu'on enseigne dans les ecoles, on en peut trouver une pratique,
par laquelle, connaissant la force et les actions du feu, de l'eau, de Fair, des astres, et de tons les autres corps qui nous environment, aussi
distinctement que nous connaissons les divers metiers de nos artisans, nous les pourrions employer en meme facon a tous les usages auxquels ils
sont propres, et ainsi nous rendre comme maitres et possesseurs de la nature" and thus "contrubuer au perfectionnement de la vie humaine." In
the preface to Sir Dudley North's "Discourses upon Trade" (1691) it is stated, that Descartes' method had begun to free Political Economy from
the old fables and superstitious notions of gold, trade, &c. On the whole, however, the early English economists sided with Bacon and Hobbes as
their philosophers; while, at a later period, the philosopher [...] of Political Economy in England, France, and Italy, was Locke.



[281 According to the annual report (1863) of the Essen chamber of commerce, there was produced in 1862, at the cast-steel works of Krupp,
with its 161 furnaces, thirty-two steam-engines (in the year 1800 this was about the number of all the steam-engines working in Manchester),
and fourteen steam-hammers (representing in all 1,236 horse-power) forty-nine forges, 203 tool-machines, and about 2,400 workmen-thirteen
million pounds of cast steel. Here there are not two workmen to each horse-power.



[291 Babbage estimates that in Java the spinning labour alone adds 117% to the value of the cotton. At the same period (1832) the total value
added to the cotton by machinery and labour in the fine-spinning industry, amounted to about 33% of the value of the cotton. ("On the Economy
of Machinery," pp. 165, 166.)



30] Machine printing also economises colour.

311 See Paper read by Dr. Watson, Reporter on Products to the Government of India, before the Society of Arts, 17th April, 1860.



[321 "These mute agents (machines) are always the produce of much less labour than that which they displace, even when they are of the same
money-value." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 40.)

[331 Hence in a communistic society there would be a very different scope for the employof machinery than there can be in a bourgeois society.



[341 "Employers of labour would not unnecessarily retain two sets of children under thirteen.... In fact one class of manufacturers, the spinners of
woollen yam, now rarely employ children under thirteen years of age, i.e., half-timers. They have introduced improved and new machinery of
various kinds, which altogether supersedes the employment of children (i.e., under 13 years); f. i., I will mention one process as an illustration of
this diminution in the number of children, wherein by the addition of an apparatus, called a piecing machine, to existing machines, the work of
six or four half-timers, according to the peculiarity of each machine, can be performed by one young person (over 13 years)... the half-time
system 'stimulated' the invention of the piecing machine." (Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858.)



351 "Wretch" is the recognised term in English Political Economy for the agricultural labourer.

361 "Machinery ... can frequently not be employed until labour (he means wages) rises." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 479.)

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (41 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
[37] See "Report of the Social Science Congress, at Edinburgh." Oct., 1863.



P81 Dr. Edward Smith, during the cotton crisis caused by the American Civil War, was sent by the English Government to Lancashire, Cheshire,
and other places, to report on the sanitary condition of the cotton operatives. He reported, that from a hygienic point of view, and apart from the
banishment of the operatives from the factory atmosphere, the crisis had several advantages. The women now had sufficient leisure to give their
infants the breast, instead of poisoning them with "Godfrey's cordial." They had time to learn to cook. Unfortunately the acquisition of this art
occurred at a time when they had nothing to cook. But from this we see how capital, for the purposes of its self-expansion, has usurped the
labour necessary in the home of the family. This crisis was also utilised to teach sewing to the daughters of the workmen in sewing schools. An
American revolution and a universal crisis, in order that the working girls, who spin for the whole world, might learn to sew!



[391 "The numerical increase of labourers has been great, through the growing substitution of female for male, and above all, of childish for adult
labour. Three girls of 13, at wages of from 6 shillings to 8 shillings a week, have replaced the one man of mature age, of wages varying from 18
shillings to 45 shillings." (Th. de Quincey: "The Logic of Political Econ.," London, 1844. Note to p. 147.) Since certain family functions, such as
nursing and suckling children, cannot be entirely suppressed, the mothers confiscated by capital, must try substitutes of some sort. Domestic
work, such as sewing and mending, must be replaced by the purchase of ready-made articles. Hence, the diminished expenditure of labour in the
house is accompanied by an increased expenditure of money. The cost of keeping the family increases, and balances the greater income. In
addition to this, economy and judgment in the consumption and preparation of the means of subsistence becomes impossible. Abundant material
relating to these facts, which are concealed by official Political Economy, is to be found in the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories, of the
Children's Employment Commission, and more especially in the Reports on Public Health.



[401 In striking contrast with the great fact, that the shortening of the hours of labour of women and children in English factories was exacted
from capital by the male operatives, we find in the latest reports of the Children's Employment Commission traits of the operative parents in
relation to the traffic in children, that are truly revolting and thoroughly like slave-dealing. But the Pharisee of a capitalist, as may be seen from
the same reports, denounces this brutality which he himself creates, perpetuates, and exploits, and which he moreover baptises "freedom of
labour." "Infant labour has been called into aid ... even to work for their own daily bread. Without strength to endure such disproportionate toil,
without instruction to guide their future life, they have been thrown into a situation physically and morally polluted. The Jewish historian has
remarked upon the overthrow of Jerusalem by Titus that it was no wonder it should have been destroyed, with such a signal destruction, when an
inhuman mother sacrificed her own offspring to satisfy the cravings of absolute hunger." ("Public Economy Concentrated." Carlisle, 1833, p.
66.)

[41] A. Redgrave in "Reports of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1858," pp. 40, 41.

[421 "Children's Employment Commission, Fifth Report," London, 1866, p. 81, n. 31. [Added in the 4th German edition. — The Bethnal Green
silk industry is now almost destroyed. — F. E.]

[431 "Children's Employment Commission, Third Report," London, 1864, p. 53, n. 15.

[441 1. c., Fifth Report, p. 22, n. 137.

[451 "Sixth Report on Public Health," Lond., 1864, p. 34.



[461 "It (the inquiry of 1861)... showed, moreover, that while, with the described circumstances, infants perish under the neglect and
mismanagement which their mothers' occupations imply, the mothers become to a grievous extent denaturalised towards their
offspring-commonly not troubling themselves much at the death, and even sometimes... taking direct measures to insure it." (1. c.)

[471 1. c, p. 454.

[481 1- c, pp. 454-463. "Report by Dr. Henry Julian Hunter on the excessive mortality of infants in some rural districts of England."

[491 1. c, p. 35 and pp. 455, 456.

[501 1. c, p. 456.

[51] In the agricultural as well as in the factory districts the consumption of opium among the grown-up labourers, both male and female, is
extending daily. "To push the sale of opiate... is the great aim of some enterprising wholesale merchants. By druggists it is considered the leading
article." (1. c, p. 459.) Infants that take opiates "shrank up into little old men," or "wizened like little monkeys." (1. c, p. 460.) We here see how
India and China avenged themselves on England.

[521 1. c, p. 37.

[531 "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," p. 59. Mr. Baker was formerly a doctor.

[541 L. Horner in "Reports of lnsp. of Fact, for 30th June, 1857," p. 17.

[551 L. Horner in "Rep, of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1855," pp. 18, 19.

[56] Sir John Kincaid in "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858," pp. 31, 32.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (42 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

[571 L. Homer in "Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1857," pp. 17, 18.

[581 Sir J. Kincaid in "Reports, &c., 31st Oct., 1856," p. 66.

[591 A. Redgrave in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st. Oct., 1857," pp. 41-42. In those industries where the Factory Act proper (not the Print Works
Act referred to in the text) has been in force for some time, the obstacles in the way of the education clauses have, in recent years, been
overcome. In industries not under the Act, the views of Mr. J. Geddes, a glass manufacturer, still extensively prevail. He informed Mr. White,
one of the Inquiry Commissioners: "As far as I can see, the greater amount of education which a part of the working-class has enjoyed for some
years past is an evil. It is dangerous, because it makes them independent." ("Children's Empl. Comm., Fourth Report," Lond., 1865, p. 253.)

[601 "Mr. E., a manufacturer ... informed me that he employed females exclusively at his power-looms ... gives a decided preference to married
females, especially those who have families at home dependent on them for support; they are attentive, docile, more so than unmarried females,
and are compelled to use their utmost exertions to procure the necessaries of life. Thus are the virtues, the peculiar virtues of the female character
to be perverted to her injury-thus all that is most dutiful and tender in her nature is made a means of her bondage and suffering." (Ten Hours'
Factory Bill. The Speech of Lord Ashley, March 15th, Lond., 1844, p. 20.)



[611 "Since the general introduction of machinery, human nature has been forced far beyond its average strength." (Rob. Owen: "Observations
on the Effects of the Manufacturing System," 2nd Ed., London, 1817.)



[621 The English, who have a tendency to look upon the earliest form of appearance of a thing as the cause of its existence, are in the habit of
attributing the long hours of work in factories to the extensive kidnapping of children, practised by capitalists in the infancy of the factory
system, on workhouses and orphanages, by means of which robbery, unresisting material for exploitation was procured. Thus, for instance,
Ficiden, himself a manufacturer, says: "It is evident that the long hours of work were brought about by the circumstance of so great a number of
destitute children being supplied from different parts of the country, that the masters were independent of the hands, and that having once
established the custom by means of the miserable materials they had procured in this way, they could impose it on their neighbours with the
greater facility." (J. Ficiden: "The Curse of the Factory System," Lond., 1836, p. I 1.) With reference to the labour of women, Saunders, the
factory inspector, says in his report of 1844: "Amongst the female operatives there are some women who, for many weeks in succession, except
for a few days, are employed from 6 a. in. till midnight, with less than 2 hours for meals, so that on 5 days of the week they have only 6 hours
left out of the 24, for going to and from their homes and resting in bed."

[631 "Occasion... injury to the delicate moving parts of metallic mechanism by inaction." (Ure, 1. c, p. 281.)



[641 The Manchester Spinner (Times, 26th Nov., 1862) before referred to says in relation to this subject: "It (namely, the "allowance for
deterioration of machinery") is also intended to cover the loss which is constantly arising from the superseding of machines before they are worn
out, by others of a new and better construction."



[651 "It has been estimated, roughly, that the first individual of a newly-invented machine will cost about five times as much as the construction
of the second." (Babbage, 1. c, p. 349.



[661 "The improvements which took place not long ago in frames for making patent net were so great that a machine in good repair which had
cost £1,200, sold a few years after for £60 ... improvements succeeded each other so rapidly, that machines which had never been finished were
abandoned in the hands of their makers, because new improvements bad superseded their utility." (Babbage, 1. c, p. 233.) In these stormy,
go-ahead times, therefore, the tulle manufacturers soon extended the working-day, by means of double sets of hands, from the original 8 hours to
24.



[67] "It is self-evident, that, amid the ebbings and flowings of the markets and the alternate expansions and contractions of demand, occasions
will constantly recur, in which the manufacturer may employ additional floating capital without employing additional fixed capital... if additional
quantities of raw material can be worked up without incurring an additional expense for buildings and machinery." (R. Torrens: "On Wages and
Combination." London, 1834, p. 64.)

[681 This circumstance is mentioned only for the sake of completeness, for I shall not consider the rate of profit, i.e., the ratio of the
surplus-value to the total capital advanced, until I come to the third book.

[691 Senior, "Letters on the Factory Act." London, 1837, pp. 13, 14.



[701 "The great proportion of fixed to circulating capital ... makes long hours of work desirable." With the increased use of machinery, &c, "the
motives to long hours of work will become greater, as the only means by which a large proportion of fixed capital can be made profitable." (1. c,
pp. 1 1-13.) "There are certain expenses upon a mill which go on in the same proportion whether the mill be running short or full time, as, for
instance, rent rates, and taxes, insurance against fire, wages of several permanent servants, deterioration of machinery, with various other charges
upon a manufacturing establishment, the proportion of which to profits increases as the production decreases." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st
Oct., 1862," p. 19.)

[711 Why it is, that the capitalist, and also the political economists who am imbued with his views, are unconscious of this immanent
contradiction, will appear from the first part of the third book.



721 It is one of the greatest merits of Ricardo to have seen in machinery not only the means of producing commodities, but of creating a
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (43 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
"redundant population."

1731 F. Biese. "Die Philosophie des Aristoteles," Vol. 2. Berlin, 1842, p. 408.



[741 1 give below the translation of this poem by Stolberg, because it brings into relief, quite in the spirit of former quotations referring to
division of labour, the antithesis between the views of the ancients and the moderns. "Spare the hand that grinds the corn, Oh, miller girls, and
softly sleep. Let Chanticleer announce the morn in vain! Deo has commanded the work of the girls to be done by the Nymphs, and now they skip
lightly over the wheels, so that the shaken axles revolve with their spokes and pull round the load of the revolving stones. Let us live the life of
our fathers, and let us rest from work and enjoy the gifts that the Goddess sends us."

"Schonet der mahlenden Hand, o Miillerinnen, und schlafet
Sanft! es verkiinde der Hahn euch den Morgen umsonst!
Dao hat die Arbeit der Midchen den Nymphen befohlen,
Und itzt hiipfen sic leicht liber die Rader dahin,
DaB die erschiitterten Achsen mit ihren Speichen sich walzen,
Und im Kreise die Last drehen des walzenden Steins.
LaBt uns leben das Leben der Vater, und laBt uns der Gaben
Arbeitsios uns freun, welche die Gottin uns schenkt."

(Gedichte aus dem Griechischen ubersetzt von Christian Graf zu Stolberg, Hamburg, 1782.)



[751 There are, of course, always differences, in the intensities of the labour in various industries. But these differences are, as Adam Smith has
shown, compensated to a partial extent by minor circumstances, peculiar to each sort of labour. Labour-time, as a measure of value, is not,
however, affected in this case, except in so far as the duration of labour, and the degree of its intensity, are two antithetical and mutually
exclusive expressions for one and the same quantity of labour.



[761 Especially by piece-work, a form we shall investigate in Part VI. of this book.

[771 See "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1865."

[781 Rep, of lnsp, of Fact, for 1844 and the quarter ending 30th April, 1845, pp. 20-21.

[791 1- c, p. 19. Since the wages for piece-work were unaltered, the weekly wages depended on the quantity produced.

[801 1. c, p. 20.



[811 The moral element played an important part in the above experiments. The workpeople told the factory inspector: "We work with more
spirit, we have the reward ever before us of getting away sooner at night, and one active and cheerful spirit pervades the whole mill, from the
youngest piecer to the oldest hand, and we can greatly help each other." (1. c, p. 21.)

[821 John Fielden, 1. c, p. 32.

[831 Lord Ashley, 1. c, pp. 6-9, passim.

[841 Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for Quarter ending 30th September, 1844, and from 1st October, 1844, to 30th April, 1845, p. 20.

[851 1. c, p. 22.

[861 "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1862," p. 62.



[871 This was altered in the "Parliamentary Return" of 1862. In it the actual horse-power of the modern steam engines and water wheels appears
in place of the nominal. The doubling spindles, too, are no longer included in the spinning spindles (as was the case in the "Returns" of 1839,
1850, and 1856); further, in the case of woollen mills, the number of "gigs" is added, a distinction made between jute and hemp mills on the one
hand and flax mills on the other, and finally stocking-weaving is for the first time inserted in the report.

[881 "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1856," pp. 13-14, 20 and 1852, p. 23.

[89J I.e., pp. 14-15.

[901 1. c, P. 20.

[911 "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1858," pp. 0-10. Compare "Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1860," p. 30, sqq.

[921 "Reports of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," pp. 100 and 130.



[931 On 2 modern power-looms a weaver now makes in a week of 60 hours 26 pieces of certain quality, length, and breadth; while on the old
power-looms he could make no more than 4 such pieces. The cost of weaving a piece of such cloth had already soon after 1850 fallen from 2s.
9d. to 5 l/8d.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (44 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

"Thirty years ago (1841) one spinner with three placers was not required to attend to more than one pair of mules with 300-324 spindles. At the
present time (1871) he has to mind with the help of 5 piecers 2,200 spindles, and produces not less than seven times as much yarn as in 1841."
(Alex. Redgrave, Factory Inspector-in the Journal of Arts, 5th January, 1872.)

[94j "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1861," pp. 25, 26.

[951 The agitation for a working-day of 8 hours has now (1867) begun in Lancashire among the factory operatives.

[961 The following few figures indicate the increase in the "factories" of the United Kingdom since 1848:









Quantity

Exported.

1848.


Quantity

Exported.

1851.


Quantity

Exported.

1860.


Quantity

Exported.

1865.


COTTON


Cotton yarn


lbs.
135,831,162


lbs.
143,966,106


lbs.
197,343,655


lbs.
103,751,455


Sewing thread


—


lbs.
4,392,176


lbs.
6,297,554


lbs.
4,648,611


Cotton cloth


yds.
1,091,373,930


yds.
1,543,161,789


yds.

2,776,218,427


yds.
2,015,237,851


FLAX & HEMP


Yarn


lbs.
11,722,182


lbs.
18,841,326


lbs.
31,210,612


lbs.

36,777,334


Cloth


yds.
88,901,519


yds.
129,106,753


yds.
143,996,773


yds.
247,012.529


SILK


Yarn


lbs.
466,825


lbs.
462,513


lbs.
897,402


lbs.
812,589


Cloth


—


yds.
1,181,455


yds.
1,307,293


yds.
2,869,837


WOOL


Woollen and
Worsted yarns


—


lbs.
14,670,880


lbs.
27,533,968


lbs.
31,669,267


Cloth


—


yds.
151,231,153


yds.
190,371,507


yds.
278,837,418









Value

Exported.

1848.

£


Value

Exported.

1851.

£


Value

Exported.

1860.

£


Value

Exported.

1865.

£


COTTON


Yarn


5,927,831


6,634,026


9,870,875


10,351,049


Cloth


16,753,369


23,454,810


42,141,505


46,903,796


FLAX & HEMP


Yarn


493,449


951,426


1,801,272


2,505,497


Cloth


2,802,789


4,107,396


4,804,803


9,155,358


SILK


Yarn


77,789


196,380


826,107


768,064


Cloth


—


1,130,398


1,587,303


1,409,221


WOOL


Yarn


776,975


1,484,544


3,843,450


5,424,047


Cloth


5,733,828


8,377,183


12,156,998


20,102,259



See the Blue books "Statistical Abstract of the United Kingdom," Nos. 8 and 13. Lond., 1961 and 1866. In Lancashire the number of mills
increased only 4 per cent, between 1839 and 1850; 19 per cent, between 1850 and 1856; and 33 per cent, between 1856 and 1862; while the
persons employed in them during each of the above periods of It years increased absolutely, but diminished relatively. (See "Rep. of Insp. of
Fact., for 3 1st Oct., 1862," p. 63.) The cotton trade preponderates in Lancashire. We may form an idea of the stupendous nature of the cotton



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (45 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

trade in that district when we consider that, of the gross number of textile factories in the United Kingdom, it absorbs 45.2 per cent., of the
spindles 83.3 per cent., of the power-looms 81.4 per cent., of the mechanical horse-power 72.6 per cent., and of the total number of persons
employed 58.2 per cent. (1. c, pp. 62-63.)

[971 Ure, 1. c, p. 18.

[981 Ure, 1. c, P. 3 1. See Karl Marx, 1. c, pp. 140-141.



[991 It looks very like intentional misleading by statistics (which misleading it would be possible to prove in detail in other cases too), when the
English factory legislation excludes from its operation the class of labourers last mentioned in the text, while the parliamentary returns expressly
include in the category of factory operatives, not only engineers, mechanics, &c, but also managers, salesmen, messengers, warehousemen,
packers, &c, in short everybody, except the owner of the factory himself.

riOOl Ure grants this. He says, "in case of need," the workmen can be moved at the will of the manager from one machine to another, and he
triumphantly exclaims: "Such a change is in flat contradiction with the old routine, that divides the labour, and to one workman assigns the task
of fashioning the head of a needle, to another the sharpening of the point." He had much better have asked himself, why this "old routine" is
departed from in theautomatic factory, only "in case of need. "

[1011 When distress is very great, as, for instance, during the American Civil War, the factory operative is now and then set by the Bourgeois to
do the roughest Of Work, such as road-making, &c. The English "ateliers nationaux" of 1862 and the following years, established for the benefit
of the destitute cotton operatives, differ from the French of 1848 in this, that in the latter the workmen had to do unproductive work at the
expense of the state, in the former they had to do productive municipal work to the advantage of the bourgeois, and that, too, cheaper than the
regular workmen, with whom they were thus thrown into competition. "The physical appearance of the cotton operatives is unquestionably
improved. This I attribute ... as to the men, to outdoor labour on public works." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1863," p. 59.) The writer here
alludes to the Preston factory operatives, who were employed on Preston Moor.

[1021 An example: The various mechanical apparatus introduced since the Act of 1844 into woollen mills, for replacing the labour of children.
So soon as it shall happen that the children of the manufacturers themselves have to go through a course of schooling as helpers in the mill, this
almost unexplored territory of mechanics will soon make remarkable progress. "Of machinery, perhaps self-acting mules are as dangerous as any
other kind. Most of the accidents from them happen to little children, from their creeping under the mules to sweep the floor whilst the mules are
in motion. Several 'minders' have been fined for this offence, but without much general benefit. If machine makers would only invent a
self-sweeper, by whose use the necessity for these little children to creep under the machinery might be prevented, it would be a happy addition
to our protective measures." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st. Oct., 1866," p. 63.)

[1031 So much then for Proudhon's wonderful idea: he "construes" machinery not as a synthesis of instruments of labour, but as a synthesis of
detail operations for the benefit of the labourer himself.

[1041 F. Engels, 1. c, p. 217. Even an ordinary and optimist Free-trader, like Mr. Molinari, goes so far as to say, "Un homme s'use plus vite en
surveillant, quinze heures par jour, revolution uniforme d'un mecanisme, qu'en exercant, dans le meme espace de temps, sa force physique. Ce
travail de surveillance qui servirait peut-etre d'utile gymnastique a l'intelligence, s'il n'etait pas trop prolonge, detruit a la longue, par son exces,
et l'intelligence, et le corps meme." (G. de Molinari: "Etudes Economiques." Paris, 1846.)

[1051 F- Engels, 1. c, p. 216.

[1061 "The Master Spinners' and Manufacturers' Defence Fund. Report of the Committee." Manchester, 1854, p. 17. We shall see hereafter, that
the "master" can sing quite another song, when he is threatened with the loss of his "living" automaton.

[1071 Ure, 1. c, p. 15. Whoever knows the life history of Arkwright, will never dub this barber-genius "noble." Of all the great inventors of the
18th century, he was incontestably the greatest thiever of other people's inventions and the meanest fellow.

[1081 "The slavery in which the bourgeoisie has bound the proletariat, comes nowhere more plainly into daylight than in the factory system. In it
all freedom comes to an end both at law and in fact. The workman must be in the factory at half past five. If he come a few minutes late, he is
punished; if he come 10 minutes late, he is not allowed to enter until after breakfast, and thus loses a quarter of a day's wage. He must eat, drink
and sleep at word of command.... The despotic bell calls him from his bed, calls him from breakfast and dinner. And how does he fare in the
mill? There the master is the absolute law-giver. He makes what regulations he pleases; he alters and makes additions to his code at pleasure; and
if he insert the veriest nonsense, the courts say to the workman: Since you have entered into this contract voluntarily, you must now carry it out
.... These workmen are condemned to live, from their ninth year till their death, under this mental and bodily torture." (F. Engels, 1. c, p. 217,
sq.) What, "the courts say," I will illustrate by two examples. One occurs at Sheffield at the end of 1866. In that town a workman had engaged
himself for 2 years in a steelworks. In consequence of a quarrel with his employer he left the works, and declared that under no circumstances
would he work for that master any more. He was prosecuted for breach of contract, and condemned to two months' imprisonment. (If the master
break the contract, he can be proceeded against only in a civil action, and risks nothing but money damages.) After the workman has served his
two months, the master invites him to return to the works, pursuant to the contract. Workman says: No, he has already been punished for the
breach. The master prosecutes again, the court condemns again, although one of the judges, Mr. Shee, publicly denounces this as a legal
monstrosity, by which a man can periodically, as long as he lives, be punished over and over again for the same offence or crime. This judgment
was given not by the "Great Unpaid," the provincial Dogberries, but by one of the highest courts of justice in London. — [Added in the 4th
German edition. — This has now been done away with. With few exceptions, e.g., when public gas-works are involved, the worker in England is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (46 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

now put on an equal footing with the employer in case of breach of contract and can be sued only civilly. — F. E.] The second case occurs in
Wiltshire at the end of November 1863. About 30 power-loom weavers, in the employment of one Harrup, a cloth manufacturer at Leower's
Mill, Westbury Leigh, struck work because master Harrup indulged in the agreeable habit of making deductions from their wages for being late
in the morning; 6d. for 2 minutes; Is. for 3 minutes, and Is. 6d. for ten minutes. This is at the rate of 9s. per hour, and £4 10s. Od. per diem;
while the wages of the weavers on the average of a year, never exceeded 10s. to 12s. weekly. Harrup also appointed a boy to announce the
starting time by a whistle, which he often did before six o'clock in the morning: and if the hands were not all there at the moment the whistle
ceased, the doors were closed, and those hands who were outside were fined: and as there was no clock on the premises, the unfortunate hands
were at the mercy of the young Harrup-inspired time-keeper. The hands on strike, mothers of families as well as girls, offered to resume work if
the timekeeper were replaced by a clock, and a more reasonable scale of fines were introduced. Harrup summoned 19 women and girls before the
magistrates for breach of contract. To the utter indignation of all present, they were each mulcted in a fine of 6d. and 2s. 6d. for costs. Harrup
was followed from the court by a crowd of people who hissed him. A favourite operation with manufacturers is to punish the workpeople by
deductions made from their wages on account of faults in the material worked on. This method gave rise in 1866 to a general strike in the
English pottery districts. The reports of the Ch. Empl. Corn. (1863-1866), give cases where the worker not only receives no wages, but becomes,
by means of his labour, and of the penal regulations, the debtor to boot, of his worthy master. The late cotton crisis also furnished edifying
examples of the sagacity shown by the factory autocrats in making deductions from wages. Mr. R. Baker, the Inspector of Factories, says, "I
have myself had lately to direct prosecutions against one cotton mill occupier for having in these pinching and painful times deducted lOd. a
piece from some of the young workers employed by him, for the surgeon's certificate (for which he himself had only paid 6d.), when only
allowed by the law to deduct 3d., and by custom nothing at all .... And I have been informed of another, who, in order to keep without the law,
but to attain the same object, charges the poor children who work for him a shilling each, as a fee for learning them the art and mystery of cotton
spinning, so soon as they are declared by the surgeon fit and proper persons for that occupation. There may therefore be undercurrent causes for
such extraordinary exhibitions as strikes, not only wherever they arise, but particularly at such times as the present, which without explanation,
render them inexplicable to the public understanding." He alludes here to a strike of power-loom weavers at Darwen, June, 1863. ("Reports of
Insp. of Fact, for 30 April, 1863," pp. 50-51.) The reports always go beyond their official dates.

[1091 The protection afforded by the Factory Acts against dangerous machinery has had a beneficial effect. "But ... there are other sources of
accident which did not exist twenty years since; one especially, viz., the increased speed of the machinery. Wheels, rollers, spindles and shuttles
are now propelled at increased and increasing rates; fingers must be quicker and defter in their movements to take up the broken thread, for, if
placed with hesitation or carelessness, they are sacrificed.... A large number of accidents are caused by the eagerness of the workpeople to get
through their work expeditiously. It must be remembered that it is of the highest importance to manufacturers that their machinery should be in
motion, i.e., producing yams and goods. Every minute's stoppage is not only a loss of power, but of production, and the workpeople are urged by
the overlookers, who are interested in the quantity of work turned off, to keep the machinery in motion, and it is no less important to those of the
operatives who are paid by the weight or piece, that the machines should be kept in motion. Consequently, although it is strictly forbidden in
many, nay in most factories, that machinery should be cleaned while in motion, it is nevertheless the constant practice in most, if not in all, that
the workpeople do, unreproved, pick out waste, wipe rollers and wheels, &c, while their frames are in motion. Thus from this cause only, 906
accidents have occurred during the six months.... Although a great deal of cleaning is constantly going on day by day, yet Saturday is generally
the day set apart for the thorough cleaning of the machinery, and a great deal of this is done while the machinery is in motion." Since cleaning is
not paid for, the workpeople seek to get done with it as speedily as possible. Hence "the number of accidents which occur on Fridays, and
especially on Saturdays, is much larger than on any other day. On the former day the excess is nearly '.2 per cent, over the average number of the
four first days of the week, and on the latter day the excess is 25 per cent, over the average of the preceding five days; or, if the number of
working-hours on Saturday being taken into account — 7 1/2 hours on Saturday as compared with 10 1/2 on other days — there is an excess of
65 per cent, on Saturdays over the average of the other five days." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," pp. 9, 15, 16, 17.)

[1101 In Part I. of Book III. I shall give an account of a recent campaign by the English manufacturers against the Clauses in the Factory Acts
that protect the "hands" against dangerous machinery. For the present, let this one quotation from the official report of Leonard Horner suffice: "I
have heard some mill-owners speak with inexcusable levity of some of the accidents; such, for instance, as the loss of a finger being a trifling
matter. A working-man's living and prospects depend so much upon his fingers, that any loss of them is a very serious matter to him. When I
have heard such inconsiderate remarks made, I have usually put this question: Suppose you were in want of an additional workman, and two
were to apply, both equally well qualified in other respects, but one had lost a thumb or a forefinger, which would you engage? There never was
a hesitation as to the answer...." The manufacturers have "mistaken prejudices against what they have heard represented as a
pseudo-philanthropic legislation." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1855.") These manufacturers are clever folk, and not without reason were
they enthusiastic for the slave-holders' rebellion.

[1111 In those factories that have been longest subject to the Factory Acts, with their compulsory limitation of the hours of labour, and other
regulations, many of the older abuses have vanished. The very improvement of the machinery demands to a certain extent "improved
construction of the buildings," and this is an advantage to the workpeople. (See "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1863," p. 109.)

[1121 See amongst others, John Houghton: "Husbandry and Trade Improved." London, 1727. "The Advantages of the East India Trade, 1720."
John Bellers, 1. c. "The masters and their workmen are, unhappily, in a perpetual war with each other. The invariable object of the former is to
get their work done as cheaply as possible; and they do not fail to employ every artifice to this purpose, whilst the latter are equally attentive to
every occasion of distressing their masters into a compliance with higher demands." ("An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of
Provisions," pp. 61-62. Author, the Rev. Nathaniel Forster, quite on the side of the workmen.)

[1131 In old-fashioned manufactures the revolts of the workpeople against machinery, even to this day, occasionally assume a savage character,
as in the case of the Sheffield file cutters in 1865.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (47 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

[1141 Sir James Steuart also understands machinery quite in this sense. "Je considere done les machines comme des moyens d'augmenter
(virtuellement) le nombre des gens industrieux qu'on n'est pas oblige de nourrir.... En quoi l'effet d'une machine differe-t-il de celui de nouveaux
habitants?" (French trans. 1. 1., 1. 1., ch. XIX.) More naive is Petty, who says, it replaces "Polygamy." The above point of view is, at the most,
admissible only for some parts of the United States. On the other hand, "machinery can seldom be used with success to abridge the labour of an
individual; more time would be lost in its construction than could be saved by its application. It is only really useful when it acts on great masses,
when a single machine can assist the work of thousands. It is accordingly in the most populous countries, where there are most idle men, that it is
most abundant.... It is trot called into use by a scarcity of men, but by the facility with which they can be brought to work in masses." (Piercy
Ravenstone: "Thoughts on the Funding System and its Effects." London, 1824, p. 45.)

[1151 [Note in the 4th German edition. — This applies to Germany too. Where in our country agriculture on a large scale exists, hence
particularly in the East, it has become possible only in consequence of the clearing of the estates ("Bauernlegen"), a practice which became
widerspread in the 16th century and was particularly so since 1648. — F. E.]

[1161 "Machinery and labour are in constant competition." Ricardo, 1. c, p. 479.

[1171 The competition between hand-weaving and power-weaving in England, before the passing of the Poor Law of 1833, was prolonged by
supplementing the wages, which had fallen considerably below the minimum, with parish relief. "The Rev. Mr. Turner was, in 1827, rector of
Wilmslow in Cheshire, a manufacturing district. The questions of the Committee of Emigration, and Mr. Turner's answers, show how the
competition of human labour is maintained against machinery. 'Question: Has not the use of the power-loom superseded the use of the
hand-loom? Answer: Undoubtedly; it would have superseded them much more than it has done, if the hand-loom weavers were not enabled to
submit to a reduction of wages.' 'Question: But in submitting he has accepted wages which are insufficient to support him, and looks to parochial
contribution as the remainder of his support? Answer: Yes, and in fact the competition between the hand-loom and the power-loom is maintained
out of the poor-rates.' Thus degrading pauperism or expatriation, is the benefit which the industrious receive from the introduction of machinery,
to be reduced from the respectable and in some degree independent mechanic, to the cringing wretch who lives on the debasing bread of charity.
This they call a temporary inconvenience." ("A Prize Essay on the Comparative Merits of Competition and Co-operation." Lond., 1834, p. 29.)

[1181 "The same cause which may increase the revenue of the country" (i.e., as Ricardo explains in the same passage, the revenues of landlords
and capitalists, whose wealth, from the economic point of view, forms the Wealth of the Nation), "may at the same time render the population
redundant and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 469.) "The constant aim and the tendency of every improvement in
machinery is, in fact, to do away entirely with the labour of man, or to lessen its price by substituting the labour of women and children for that
of grown-up men, or of unskilled for that of skilled workmen." (Ure, 1. c, 1. 1., p. 35.)

[1191 "Rep. Insp. Fact, for 31st October, 1858," p. 43.

[1201 "Rep. Insp. Fact, for 31st October, 1856," p. 15.

[1211 Ure, 1. c, p. 19. "The great advantage of the machinery employed in brick-making consists in this, that the employer is made entirely
independent of skilled labourers." ("Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Report," Lond., 1866, p. 130, n. 46.) Mr. A. Sturrock, superintendent of the machine
department of the Great Northern Railway, says, with regard to the building of locomotives, &c: "Expensive English workmen are being less
used every day. The production of the workshops of England is being increased by the use of improved tools and these tools are again served by
a low class of labour.... Formerly their skilled labour necessarily produced all the parts of engines. Now the parts of engines are produced by
labour with less skill, but with good tools. By tools, I mean engineer's machinery, lathes, planing machines, drills, and so on." ("Royal Corn, on
Railways," Lond., 1867, Minutes of Evidence, n. 17, 862 and 17, 863.)

[1221 Ure, 1. c, p. 20.

[1231 Ure, I.e., p. 321.

[1241 Ure, 1. c, p. 23.

[1251 "Rep. Insp. Fact, 31st Oct., 1863," pp. 108,109.

[1261 1- c, p. 109. The rapid improvement of machinery, during the crisis, allowed the English manufacturers, immediately after the termination
of the American Civil War, and almost in no time, to glut the markets of the world again. Cloth,' during the last six months of 1866, was almost
unsaleable. Thereupon began the consignment of goods to India and China, thus naturally making the glut more intense. At the beginning of
1867 the manufacturers resorted to their usual way out of the difficulty, viz., reducing wages 5 per cent. The workpeople resisted, and said that
the only remedy was to work short time, 4 days a-week; and their theory was the correct one. After holding out for some time, the self-elected
captains of industry had to make up their minds to short time, with reduced wages in some places, and in others without.

[1271 "The relation of master and man in the blown-flint bottle trades amounts to a chronic strike." Hence the impetus given to the manufacture
of pressed glass, in which the chief operations are done by machinery. One firm in Newcastle, who formerly produced 350,000 lbs. of
blown-flint glass, now produces in its place 3,000,500 lbs. of pressed glass. ("Ch. Empl. Comm., Fourth Rep.," 1865, pp. 262-263.)

[1281 Gaskell. "The Manufacturing Population of England," London, 1833, pp. 3, 4.

[1291 W. Fairbaim discovered several very important applications of machinery to the construction of machines, in consequence of strikes in his

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (48 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
own workshops.

IT301 Ure, 1. c, pp. 368-370

[131] Ure, 1. c, pp. 368, 7, 370, 280, 281, 321, 370, 475.

11321 Ricardo originally was also of this opinion, but afterwards expressly disclaimed it with the scientific impartiality and love of truth
characteristic of him. See 1. c, ch. xxxi. "On Machinery."

[1331 Nota bene. My illustration is entirely on the lines of those given by the above named economists.

[1341 A disciple of Ricardo, in answer to the insipidities of J. B. Say, remarks on this point: "Where division of labour is well developed, the
skill of the labourer is available only in that particular branch in which it has been acquired; he himself is a sort of machine. It does not therefore
help matters one jot, to repeat in parrot fashion, that things have a tendency to find their level. On looking around us we cannot but see, that they
are unable to find their level for a long time; and that when they do find it, the level is always lower than at the commencement of the process."
(".An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand," &c, Lond. 1821, p. 72.)

[1351 MacCulloch, amongst others, is a past master in this pretentious cretinism. "If," he says, with the affected naivete of a child of 8 years, "if
it be advantageous, to develop the skill of the workman more and more, so that he is capable of producing, with the same or with a less quantity
of labour, a constantly increasing quantity of commodities, it must also be advantageous, that he should avail himself of the help of such
machinery as will assist him most effectively in the attainment of this result." (MacCulloch: "Princ. of Pol. Econ.," Lond. 1830, p. 166.)

[1361 "The inventor of the spinning machine has ruined India, a fact, however, that touches us but little." A. Thiers: De la propriete. — M. Thiers
here confounds the spinning machine with the power-loom, "a fact, however, that touches us but little."

[1371 According to the census of 1861 (Vol. II., Lond., 1863), the number of people employed in coal mines in England and Wales, amounted to
246,613 of which 73,545 were under, and 173,067 were over 20 years. Of those under 20, 835 were between 5 and 10 years, 30,701 between 10
and 15 years, 42,010 between 15 and 19 years. The number employed in iron, copper, lead, tin, and other mines of every description, was 319,

222.

[1381 In England and Wales, in 1861, there were employed in making machinery, 60,807 persons, including the masters and their clerks, &c,
also all agents and business people connected with this industry, but excluding the makers of small machines, such as sewing-machines, &c, as
also the makers of the operative parts of machines, such as spindles. The total number of civil engineers amounted to 3,329.

[1391 Since iron is one of the most important raw materials; let me here state that, in 1861, there were in England and Wales 125,771 operative
iron founders, of whom 123,430 were maim 2,341 females. Of the former 30,810 were under, and 92,620 over 20 years.

[1401 "A family of four grown-up persons, with two children as winders, earned at the end of the last, and the beginning of the present century,
by ten hours' daily labour, L4 a week. If the work was very pressing, they could earn more.... Before that, they had always suffered from a
dificient supply of yarn." (Gaskell, 1. c, pp. 25-27.)

[1411 F. Engels, in "Lage, &c," points out the miserable condition of a large number of those who work on these very articles of luxury. See also
numerous instances in the "Reports of the Children's Employment Commission."

[1421 In 1861, in England and Wales, there were 94,665 sailors in the merchant service.

[1431 Of these only 177,596 are males above 13 years of age.

[1441 Of these, 30,501 are females.

[1451 Of these, 137,447 males. None are included in the 1,208,648 who do not serve in private houses. Between 1861 and 1870 the number of
male servants nearly doubled itself. It increased to 267,671. In the year 1847 there were 2,694 gamekeepers (for the landlords' preserves), in
1869 there were 4,921. The young servant girls in the houses of the London lower middle class are in common parlance called "slaveys."

[1461 Ganilh, on the contrary, considers the final result of the factory system to be an absolutely less number of operatives, at whose expense an
increased number of "gens honnetes" live and develop their well-known "perfectibilite perfectible." Little as he understands the movement of
production, at least he feels, that machinery must needs be a very fatal institution, if its introduction converts busy workmen into paupers, and its
development calls more slaves of labour into existence than it has suppressed. It is not possible to bring out the cretinism of his standpoint,
except by his own words: "Les classes condamnees a produire et a consommer diminuent, et les classes qui dirigent le travail, qui soulagent,
consolent, et eclairent toute la population, se multiplient ... et s'approprient tons les bienfaits qui resultent de la diminution des fmis du travail, de
I'abondance des productions, et du bon marche des consommations. Dans cette direction, l'espece humaine s'eleve aux plus hautes conceptions
du genie, penetre dans les profoundeurs mysterieuses de la religion, etablit les principes salutaires de la morale (which consists in 's'approprier
tous les beinfaits,' &c), les lois tutelaires de la liberte (liberty of 'les classes condamnees a produire?') et du pouvoir, de l'obeissance et de la
justice, du devoir et de la I'humanite." For this twaddle, see "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique, &c, Par M. Ch. Ganilh," 2eme ed., Paris,
1821, 1. 1, p. 224, and see p. 212.

[1471 "Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1865," p. 58, sq. At the same time, however, means of employment for an increased number of hands
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (49 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
was ready in 110 new mills with 11,625 looms, 628,576 spindles and 2,695 total horse-power of steam and water (1. a).

11481 "Reports, &c., for 31 Oct., 1862," p. 79. At the end of 1871, Mr. A. Redgrave, the factory inspector, in a lecture given at Bradford, in the
New Mechanics' Institution, said: "What has struck me for some time past is the altered appearance of the woollen factories. Formerly they were
filled with women and children, now machinery seems to do all the work. At my asking for an explanation of this from a manufacturer, he gave
me the following: 'Under the old system I employed 63 persons; after the introduction of improved machinery I reduced my hands to 33, and
lately, in consequence of new and extensive alterations, I have been in a position to reduce those 33 to 13."

[149] See "Reports, &c, 31 Oct., 1856," p. 16.

[1501 "The sufferings of the hand-loom weavers were the subject of an inquiry by a Royal Commission, but although their distress was
acknowledged and lamented, the amelioration of their condition was left, and probably necessarily so, to the chances and changes of time, which
it may now be hoped" [20 years later!] "have nearly obliterated those miseries, and not improbably by the present great extention of the
power-loom." ("Rep. Insp. of Fact, 31 Oct., 1856," p. 75.)

[1511 Other ways in which machinery affects the production of raw material will be mentioned in the third book.

[1521 EXPORT OF COTTON FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 34,540,143 lbs. 1860. — 204,141,168 lbs. 1865. — 445,947,600
lbs.

EXPORT OF WOOL FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 4,570,581 lbs. 1860. — 20,214,173 lbs. 1865. — 20,679,1 11 lbs.

[1531 EXPORT OF WOOL FROM THE CAPE TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 2,958,457 lbs. 1860. — 16,574,345 lbs. 1865. — 29,920,623
lbs.

EXPORT OF WOOL FROM AUSTRALIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 21,789,346 lbs. 1860. — 59,166,616 lbs. 1865. — 109,734,261
lbs.

[1541 The economic development of the United States is itself a product of European, more especially of English modern industry. In their
present form (1866) the States must still be considered a European colony. [Added in the 4th German edition. — "Since then they have developed
into country whose industry holds second place in the world, without on that account entirely losing their colonial character. " — F. E.]

EXPORT OF COTTON FROM THE UNITED STATES TO GREAT

1846. - 401,949,393 lbs. 1852. - 765,630,54
1859. - 961,707,264 lbs. 1860. - 1,115,890,60



EXPORT OF CORN, &c, FROM THE UNITED STATE
TO GREAT BRITAIN

1850

Wheat, cwts 16,202,312

Barley, cwts 3,669,653

Oats, cwts 3,174,801

Rye, cwts 388,749

Flour, cwts 3,819,440

Buckwheat, cwts 1,054

Maize, cwts 5,473,161

Bere or Bigg (a sort of Barley), cwts 2,039

Peas, cwts 811,620

Beans, cwts 1,822,972



Total exports 35,365,801

[1561 In an appeal made in July, 1866, to the Trade Societies of England, by the shoemakers of Leicester, who had been thrown on the streets by
a lock-out, it is stated: "Twenty years ago the Leicester shoe trade was revolutionised by the introduction of riveting in the place of stitching. At
that time good wages could be earned. Great competition was shown between the different firms as to which could turn out the neatest article.
Shortly afterwards, however a worse kind of competition sprang up, namely, that of underselling one another in the market. The injurious
consequences soon manifested themselves in reductions of wages, and so sweepingly quick was the fall in the price of labour, that many firms

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (50 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

now pay only one half of the original wages. And yet, though wages sink lower and lower, profits appear, with each alteration in the scale of
wages, to increase." Even bad times are utilised by the manufacturers, for making exceptional profits by excessive lowering of wages, i.e., by a
direct robbery of the labourer's means of subsistence. One example (it has reference to the crisis in the Coventry silk weaving): "From
information I have received from manufacturers as well as workmen, there seems to be no doubt that wages have been reduced to a greater
extent than either the competition of the foreign producers, or other circumstances have rendered necessary ... the majority of weavers are
working at a reduction of 30 to 40 per cent, in their wages. A piece of ribbon for. making which the weaver got 6s. or 7s. five years back, now
only brings them 3s. 3d. or 3s. 6d.; other work is now priced at 2s. and 2s. 3d. which was formerly priced at 4s. and 4s. 3d. The reduction in
wage seems to have been carried to a greater extent than is necessary for increasing demand. Indeed, the reduction in the cost of weaving, in the
case of many descriptions of ribbons, has net been accompanied by any corresponding reduction in the selling price of the manufactured article."
(Mr. F. D. Longes Report. "Ch. Emp. Corn., V. Rep., 1866," p. 114, 1.)

[157] Conf "Reports of Insp. of Fact., 3 1st October, 1862," p. 30.

[15811. c, p. 19.

IT591 "Rep. Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1863," pp. 41-45.

IT 601 1- c, pp. 41-42

[16111. c, p. 57.

IT 621 I.e., pp. 50-51.

11631 1. c, pp. 62-63.

11641 "Rep. &c, 30th April, 1864," p. 27.

[1651 From a letter of Mr. Harris, Chief Constable of Bolton, in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. 61-62.

[1661 In an appeal, dated 1863, of the factory operatives of Lancashire, &c, for the purpose of forming a society for organised emigration, we
find the following: "That a large emigration of factory workers is now absolutely essential to raise them from their present prostrate condition,
few will deny; but to show that a continuous stream of emigration is at all times demanded, and, without which it is impossible for than to
maintain their position in ordinary times, we beg to call attention to the subjoined facts: — In 1814 the official value of cotton goods exported
was £17,665,378, whilst the real marketable value was £20,070,824. In 1858 the official value of cotton goods exported, was £182,221,681; but
the real or marketable value was only £43,001,322, being a ten-fold quantity sold for little more than double the former price. To produce results
so disadvantageous to the country generally, and to the factory workers in particular, several causes have cooperated, which, had circumstances
permitted, we should have brought more prominently under your notice; suffice it for the present to say that the most obvious one is the constant
redundancy of labour, without which a trade so ruinous in its effects never could have been carried on, and which requires a constantly extending
market to save it from annihilation. Our cotton mills may be brought to a stand by the periodical stagnations of trade, which, under present
arrangements, are as inevitable as death itself; but the human mind is constantly at work, and although we believe we are under the mark in
stating that six millions of persons have left these shores during the last 25 years, yet, from the natural increase of population, and the
displacement of labour to cheapen production, a large percentage of the male adults in the most prosperous times find it impossible to obtain
work in factories on any conditions whatever." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 30th April 1863," pp. 51-52.) We shall, in a later chapter, see how our
friends, the manufacturers, endeavoured, during the catastrophe in the cotton trade, to prevent by every means, including State interference, the
emigration of the operatives.

[1671 "Ch. Empt. Comm. III. Report, 1864," p. 108, n. 447.

[1681 In the United States the restoration, in this way, of handicrafts based on machinery is frequent; and therefore, when the inevitable transition
to the factory system shall take place, the ensuing concentration will, compared with Europe and even with England, stride on in seven-league
boots.

[1691 See "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, 31st Oct., 1865," p. 64.

[1701 Mr. Gillott erected in Birmingham the first steel-pen factory on a large scale. It produced, so early as 185 1, over 180,000,000 of pens
yearly, and consumed 120 tons of steel. Birmingham has the monopoly of this industry in the United Kingdom, and at present produces
thousands of millions of steel-pens. According to the Census of 1861, the number of persons employed was 1,428, of whom 1,268 females from
5 years of age upwards.

[1711 "Ch. Empl. Comm. II. Rep. 1864," p. LXVIIL, n. 415.

[1721 And now forsooth children are employed at file-cutting in Sheffield.

ri731 "Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep. 1866," p. 3, n. 24; p. 6, n. 55, 56; p. 7, n. 59, 60.

[1741 1- c., pp. 1 14, 1 15, n. 6, 7. The commissioner justly remarks that though as a rule machines take the place of men, here literally young
persons replace machines.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (51 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
IT751 See the Report on the rag trade, and numerous details in "Public Health, VIII. Rep." Lond. 1866, app., pp. 196, 208.

[176] "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep., 1866," pp. xvi-xviii, n. 86-97, and pp. 130-133, n. 39-71. See also III. Rep., 1864, pp. 48, 56.

ri771 "Public Health. Sixth Rep.," Lond. 1864, pp. 29, 31.

[1781 1- c., p. 30. Dr. Simon remarks that the mortality among the London tailors and printers between the ages of 25 and 35 is in fact much
greater, because the employers in London obtain from the country a great number of young people up to 30 years of age, as "apprentices" and
"improvers," who come for the purpose of being perfected in their trade. These figure in the census as Londoners, they swell out the number of
heads on which the London death-rate is calculated, without adding proportionally to the number of deaths in that place. The greater part of them
in fact return to the country, and especially in cases of severe illness. (1. c.)

[1791 1 allude here to hammered nails, as distinguished from nails cut out and made by machinery. See "Child. Empl. Comm., Third Rep.," pp.
xi., xix., n. 125-130, p. 52, n. 11, p. 114, n. 487, p. 137, n. 674.

IT 801 "Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep.," p. xxii, n. 166.

[1811 "Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep., 1864," pp. xix., xx., xxi.

IT821 1. c, pp. xxi.. xxii.

[1831 1- c., pp. xxix., xxx.

[1841 1. c, pp. xi., xii.

[1851 "Child. Empl. Comm., I. Rep. 1863," p. 185.

[1861 In England millinery and dressmaking are for the most part carried on, on the premises of the employer, partly by workwomen who live
there, partly by women who live off the premises.

[1871 Mr. White, a commissioner, visited a military clothing manufactory that employed 1,000 to 1,200 persons, almost all females, and a shoe
manufactory with 1,300 persons; of these nearly one half were children and young persons.

IT881 An instance. The weekly report of deaths by the Registrar-General dated 26th Feb., 1864, contains 5 cases of death from starvation. On the
same day The Times reports another case. Six victims of starvation in one week!

[1891 "Child. Empl. Comm., Second Rep., 1864," p. lxvii., n. 406-9, p. 84, n. 124, p. lxxiii, n. 441, p. 68, n. 6, p. 84, n. 126, p. 78, n. 85, p. 76, n.
69, p. lxxii, n. 483.

[1901 "The rental of premises required for workrooms seems the element which ultimately determines the point; and consequently it is in the
metropolis, that the old system of giving work out to small employers and families has been longest retained, and earliest returned to." (1. c, p.
83, n. 123.) The concluding statement in this quotation refers exclusively to shoemaking.

IT911 In glove-making and other industries where the condition of the work-people is hardly distinguishable from that of paupers, this does not
occur.

[1921 1. c, p. 83, n. 122.

IT931 In the wholesale boot and shoe trade of Leicester alone, there were in 1864, 800 sewing-machines already in use.

[19411. c, p. 84, n. 124.

IT951 Instances: The Army Clothing Depot at Pimlico, London, the Shirt factory of Tillie and Henderson at Londonderry, and the clothes factory
of Messrs. Tait at Limerick which employs about 1,200 hands.

[1961 "Tendency to Factory System" (1. c, p. lxvii). "The whole employment is at this time in a state of transition, and is undergoing the same
Change as that effected in the lace trade, weaving, &c." (1. c, n. 405.) "A complete revolution" (1. c, p. xlvi., n. 318). At the date of the Child.
Empl. Comm. of 1840 stocking making was still done by manual labour. Since 1846 various sorts of machines have been introduced, which are
now driven by steam. The total number of persons of both sexes and of all ages from 3 years upwards, employed in stocking making in England,
was in 1862 about 129,000. Of these only 4,063 were, according to the Parliamentary Return of the 1 1th February, 1862, working under the
Factory Acts.

[1971 Thus, e.g., in the earthenware trade, Messrs. Cochrane, of the Britain Pottery, Glasgow, report: "To keep up our quantity we have gone
extensively into machines wrought by unskilled tabour, and every day convinces us that we can produce a greater quantity than by the old
method." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 3 1st Oct., 1865," p. 13.) "The effect of the Fact. Acts is to force on the further introduction of machinery" (1. c,
pp. 13-14).

[1981 Thus, after the extension of the Factory Act to the potteries, great increase of powerjiggers in place of hand-moved jiggers.
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (52 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
[1991 "Report of lnsp. of Fact, 31st Oct., 1865," pp. 96 and 127.

[2001 The introduction of this and other machinery into match-making caused in one department alone 230 young persons to be replaced by 32
boys and girls of 14 to 17 years of age. This saving in labour was carried still further in 1865, by the employment of steam power.

[2011 "Ch. Empl. Comm, 11. Rep., 1864," p. ix., n. 50.

[2021 "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p..22.

[2031 "But it must be borne in mind that those improvements, though carried out fully in some establishments, are by no means general, and are
not capable of being brought into use in many of the old manufactories without an expenditure of capital beyond the means of many of the
present occupiers." "I cannot but rejoice," writes Sub-Insp. May, "that notwithstanding the temporary disorganisation which inevitably follows
the introduction of such a measure (as the Factory Act Extension Act), and is, indeed, directly indicative of the evils which it was intended to
remedy, &c." (Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, 31st Oct, 1865.)

[204] With blast furnaces, for instance, "work towards the end of the week being generally much increased in duration in consequence of the
habit of the men of idling on Monday and occasionally during a part or the whole of Tuesday also." ("Child. Empl. Comm., III. Rep.," p. vi.)
"The little masters generally have very irregular hours. They lose two or three days, and then work all night to make it up.... They always employ
their own children, if they have any." (1. c, p. vii.) "The want of regularity in coming to work, encouraged by the possibility and practice of
making up for this by working longer hours." (1. c, p. xviii.) "In Birmingham ... an enormous amount of time is lost ... idling part of the time,
slaving the rest." (1. c, p. xi.)

[2051 "Child. Empl. Comm., IV., Rep.," p. xxxii., "The extension of the railway system is said to have contributed greatly to this custom of
giving sudden orders, and the consequent hurry, neglect of meal-times, and late hours of the workpeople." (1. c, p. xxxi.)

[2061 "Ch. Empl. Comm, IV. Rep.," pp. xxxv., n. 235, 237.

[2071 "Ch. Empl. Comm. IV. Rep.," p. 127, n. 56.

[2081 With respect to the loss of trade by non-completion of shipping orders in time, I remember that this was the pet argument of the factory
masters in 1832 and 1833. Nothing that can he advanced now on this subject, could have the force that it had then, before steam had halved all
distances and established new regulations for transit. It quite failed at that time of proof when put to the test, and again it will certainly fail
should it have to be tried." ("Reports of lnsp. of Fact, 31 Oct, 1862," pp. 54, 55.)

[208al "Ch. Empl. Comm. IV. Rep.," p. xviii, n. 118.

[208bl John Bellers remarked as far back as 1699: "The uncertainty of fashions does increase necessitous poor. It has two great mischiefs in it.
1st, The journeymen are miserable in winter for want of work, the mercers and master-weavers not daring to lay out their stocks to keep the
journeymen employed before the spring comes, and they know what the fashion will then be; 2ndly, In the spring the journeymen are not
sufficient, but the master-weavers must draw in many prentices, that they may supply the trade of the kingdom in a quarter or half a year, which
robs the plough of hands, drains the country of labourers, and in a great part stocks the city with beggars, and starves some in winter that are
ashamed to beg." ("Essays about the Poor, Manufactures, &c," p. 9.)

[2091 "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep.," p. 171, n. 34.

[2101 The evidence of some Bradford export-houses is as follows: "Under these circumstances, it seems clear that no boys need be worked
longer than from 8 a.m. to 7 or 7.30 p.m., in making up. It is merely a question of extra hands and extra outlay. If some masters were not so
greedy, the boys would not work late; an extra machine costs only £16 or £18; much of such over- time as does occur is to be referred to an
insufficiency of appliances, and a want of space." "Ch. Empl, Comm. V. Rep.," p. 171, n. 35, 36, 38.

[2111 1- c. A London manufacturer, who in other respects looks upon the compulsory regulation of the hours of labour as a protection for the
workpeople against the manufacturers, and for the manufacturers themselves against the wholesale trade, states: "The pressure in our business is
caused by the shippers, who want, e.g., to send the goods by sailing vessel so as to reach their destination at a given season, and at the same time
want to pocket the difference in freight between a sailing vessel and a steamship, or who select the earlier of two steamships in order to be in the
foreign market before their competitors."

[2121 "This could be obviated," says a manufacturer, "at the expense of an enlargement of the works under the pressure of a General Act of
Parliament." 1. c, p. x., n. 38.

[2131 1- c, p. xv., n. 72. sqq.

[2141 "Rep. lnsp. Fact, 31st October, 1865," p. 127.

[2151 It has been found out by experiment, that with each respiration of average intensity made by a healthy average individual, about 25 cubic
inches of air are consumed, and that about 20 respirations are made in each minute. Hence the air inhaled in 24 hours by each individual is about
720,000 cubic inches, or 416 cubic feet. It is clear, however, that air which has been once breathed, can no longer serve for the same process
until it has been purified in the great workshop of Nature. According to the experiments of Valentin and Brunner, it appears that a healthy man

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (53 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

gives off about 1,300 cubic inches of carbonic acid per hour; this would give about 8 ounces of solid carbon thrown off from the lungs in 24
hours." Every man should have at least 800 cubic feet." (Huxley.)

[2161 According to the English Factory Act, parents cannot send their children under 14 years of age into Factories under the control of the Act,
unless at the same time they allow them to receive elementary education. The manufacturer is responsible for compliance with the Act. "Factory
education is compulsory, and it is a condition of labour." ("Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. 111.)

[2171 On the very advantageous results of combining gymnastics (and drilling in the case of boys) with compulsory education for factory
children and pauper scholars, see the speech of N. W. Senior at the seventh annual congress of "The National Association for the Promotion of
Social Science," in "Report of Proceedings, &c," Lond. 1863, pp. 63, 64, also the "Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," pp. 118, 119, 120, 126,
sqq.

[2181 "Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. 118. A silk manufacturer naively states to the Children's Employment Commissioners: "I am quite
sure that the true secret of producing efficient workpeople is to be found in uniting education and tabour from a period of childhood. Of course
the occupation must not be too severe, nor irksome, or unhealthy. But of the advantage of the union I have no doubt. I wish my own children
could have some work as well as play to give variety to their schooling." ("Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep.," p. 82, n. 36.)

[2191 Senior, 1. c, p. 66. How Modern Industry, when it has attained to a certain pitch, is capable, by the revolution it effects in the mode of
production and in the social conditions of production, of also revolutionising people's minds, is strikingly shown by a comparison of Senior's
speech in 1863, with his philippic against the Factory Act of 1833; or by a comparison, of the views of the congress above referred to, with the
fact that in certain country districts of England poor parents are forbidden, on pain of death by starvation, to educate their children. Thus, e.g.,
Mr. Snell reports it to be a common occurrence in Somersetshire that, when a poor person claims parish relief, he is compelled to take his
children from school. Mr. Wollarton, the clergyman at Feltham, also tells of cases where all relief was denied to certain families "because they
were sending their children to school!"

[2201 Wherever handicraft-machines, driven by men, compete directly or indirectly with more developed machines driven by mechanical power,
a great change takes place with regard to the tabourer who drives the machine. At first the steam-engine replaces this tabourer, afterwards he
must replace the steam-engine. Consequently the tension and the amount of tabour-power expended become monstrous, and especially so in the
case of the children who are condemned to this torture. Thus Mr. Longe; one of the commissioners, found in Coventry and the neighbourhood
boys of from 10 to 15 years employed in driving the ribbon-looms, not to mention younger children who had to drive smaller machines. "It is
extraordinarily fatiguing work. The boy is a mere substitute for steam power." ("Ch. Empl. Comm. V, Rep. 1866;" p. 1 14, n. 6.) As to the fatal
consequences of "this system of slavery," as the official report styles it, see 1. c, p. 1 14 sqq.

[2211 1. c, p. 3, n. 24.

[2221 1- c, P. 7, n. 60.

[2231 "in some parts of the Highlands of Scotland, not many years ago, every peasant, according to the Statistical Account, made his own shoes
of leather tanned by himself. Many a shepherd and cottar too, with his wife and children, appeared at Church in clothes which had been touched
by no hands but their own, since they were shorn from the sheep and sown in the flaxfield. In the preparation of these, it is added, scarcely a
single article had been purchased, except the awl, needle, thimble, and a very few parts of the iron-work employed in the weaving. The dyes,
toci, were chiefly extracted by the women from trees, shrubs and herbs." (Dugald Stewart's "Works," Hamilton's Ed., Vol. viii., pp. 327-328.)

[2241 In the celebrated "Livre des metiers" of Etienne Boileau, we find it prescribed that a journeyman on being admitted among the masters had
to swear "to love his brethren with brotherly love, to support them in their respective trades, not wilfully to betray the secrets of the trade, and
besides, in the interests of all, not to recommend his own-wares by calling the attention of the buyer to defects in the articles made by others."

[2251 "The bourgeoisie cannot exist without continually revolutionising the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production
and all the social relations. Conservation, in an unaltered form, of the old modes of production was on the contrary the first condition of
existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolution in production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting
uncertainty and agitation, distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and
venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air,
all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind." (F.
Engels und Karl Marx: "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei." Lond. 1848, p. 5.)

[2261

"You take my life

When you do take the means whereby I live."

Shakespeare.

[2271 A French workman, on his return from San-Francisco, writes as follows: "I never could have believed, that I was capable of working at the
various occupations I was employed on in California. I was firmly convinced that I was fit for nothing but letter-press printing.... Once in the
midst of this world of adventurers, who change their occupation as often as they do their shirt, egad, I did as the others. As mining did not turn
out remunerative enough, I left it for the town, where in succession I became typographer, slater, plumber, &c. In consequence of thus finding
out that I am fit to any sort of work, I feel less of a mollusk and more of a man." (A. Corbon, "De l'enseignement professionnel," 2eme ed., p.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (54 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
50.)

r2281 John Bellers, a very phenomenon in the history of Political Economy, saw most clearly at the end of the 17th century, the necessity for
abolishing the present system of education and division of labour, which beget hypertrophy and atrophy at the two opposite extremities of
society. Amongst other things he says this: "An idle learning being little better than the learning of idleness.... Bodily labour, it's a primitive
institution of God.... Labour being as proper for the bodies' health as eating is for its living; for what pains a man saves by ease, he will find in
disease.... Labour adds oil to the lamp of life, when thinking inflames it.... A childish silly employ" (a warning this, by presentiment, against the
Basedows and their modern imitators) "leaves the children's minds silly," ("Proposals for Raising a Colledge of Industry of all Useful Trades and
Husbandry." Lond., 1696, pp. 12, 14, 18.)

[2291 This sort of labour goes on mostly in small workshops, as we have seen in the lacemaking and straw-plaiting trades, and as could be shown
more in detail from the metal trades of Sheffield, Birmingham, &c.

f2301 "Ch. Empl. Comm, V. Rep.," p. xxv., n. 162, and II. Rep., p. xxxviii., n, 285, 289, p. xxv., xxvi., n. 191.

[231] "Factory labour may be as pure and as excellent as domestic labour, and perhaps more so' " ("Rep. Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," p.
129.)

[2321 "Rep. Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. 27-32.

[2331 Numerous instances will be found in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact."

[2341 "Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep.," p. x., n. 35.

[2351 Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep.," p. ix., n. 28.

[2361 1- c., p. xxv., n. 165-167. As to the advantages of large scale, compared with small scale, industries, see "Ch. Empl. Comm., III. Rep.," p.
13, n. 144, p. 25, n. 121, p. 26, n. 125, p. 27, n. 140, &c.

[2371 The trades proposed to be brought under the Act were the following: Lace-making, stocking-weaving, straw-plaiting, the manufacture of
wearing apparel with its numerous sub-divisions, artificial flower-making, shoemaking, hat-making, glove-making, tailoring, all metal works,
from blast furnaces down to needleworks, &c, paper-mills, glassworks, tobacco factories, India-rubber works, braid-making (for weaving),
hand-carpetmaking, umbrella and parasol making, the manufacture of spindles and spools, letterpress printing, book-binding, manufacture of
stationery (including paper bags, cards, coloured paper, &c), rope-making, manufacture of jet ornaments, brick-making, silk manufacture by
hand, Coventry weaving, salt works, tallow chandiers, cement works, sugar refineries, biscuit-making, various industries connected with timber,
and other mixed trades.

[2381 1. c, p. xxv., n. 169.

[2391 Here (from "The Tory Cabinet to "Nassau W. Senior") the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edition. —

Ed.

[2401 The Factory Acts Extension Act was passed on August 12, 1867. it regulates all foundries, smithies, and metal manufactories, including
machine shops; furthermore glass-works, paper mills, gutta-percha and India-rubber works, tobacco manufactories, letter- press printing and
book-binding works, and, lastly, all workshops in which more than 50 persons are employed. The Hours of Labour Regulation Act, passed on
August 17, 1867, regulates the smaller workshops and the so-called domestic industries.

I shall revert to these Acts and to the new Mining Act of 1872 in Volume II.

[2411 Senior, "Social Science Congress," pp. 55-58.

[2421 The "personnel" of this staff consisted of 2 inspectors, 2 assistant inspectors and 41 sub-inspectors. Eight additional sub-inspectors were
appointed in 1871. The total cost of administering the Acts in England, Scotland, and Ireland amounted for the year 1871-72 to no more than
£25,347, inclusive of the law expenses incurred by prosecutions of offending masters.

[2431 Robert Owen, the father of Co-operative Factories and Stores, but who, as before remarked, in no way shared the illusions of his followers
with regard to the bearing of these isolated elements of transformation, not only practically made the factory system the sole foundation of his
experiments, but also declared that system to be theoretically the startingpoint of the social revolution. Herr Vissering, Professor of Political
Economy in the University of Leyden, appears to have a suspicion of this when, in his "Handboek van Practische Staatshuishoudkunde,
1860-62," which reproduces all the platitudes of vulgar economy, he strongly supports handicrafts against the factory system.

[Added in the 4th German edition — The "hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments" (S. 314) (present volume, p. 284)
which English legislation called into life by means of the mutually conflicting Factory Acts, the Factory Acts Extension Act and the
Workshops' Act, finally became intolerable, and thus all legislative enactments on this subject were codified in the Factory and Workshop
Act of 1878. Of course no detailed critique of this English industrial code now in effect can be presented here. The following remarks will
have to suffice. The Act comprises:

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (55 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

1) Textile Mills. Here everything remains about as it was: children more than 10 years of age may work 5 1/2 hours a day; or 6 hours and
Saturday off; young persons and women, 10 hours on 5 days, and at most 6 1/2 on Saturday.

2) Non-Textile Factories. Here the regulations are brought closer than before to those of No. 1, but there are still several exceptions
which favour the capitalists and which in certain cases may be expanded by special permission of the Home Secretary.

3) Workshops, defined approximately as in the former Act; as for the children, young workers and women employed there, the
workshops are about on a par with the non-textile factories, but again conditions are easier in details.

4) Workshops in which no children or young workers are employed, but only persons of both sexes above the age of 18; this category
enjoy still easier conditions.

5) Domestic Workshops, where only members of the family are employed, in the family dwelling: still more elastic regulations and
simultaneously the restriction that the inspector may, without special permission of the ministry or a court, enter only rooms not used also
for dwelling purposes; and lastly unrestricted freedom for straw-plaiting and lace and glove-making by members of the family. With all its
defects this Act, together with the Swiss Federal Factory Law of March 23, 1877, is still by far the best piece of legislation in this field. A
comparison of it with the said Swiss federal law is of particular interest because it clearly demonstrates the merits and demerits of the two
legislative methods — the English, "historical" method, which intervenes when occasion requires, and the continental method, which is
built up on the traditions of the French Revolution and generalises more. Unfortunately, due to insufficient inspection personnel, the
English code is still largely a dead letter with regard to its application to workshops. — F. E.]

[2441 "You divide the people into two hostile camps of clownish boors and emasculated dwarfs. Good heavens! a nation divided into agricultural
and commercial interests, calling itself sane; nay, styling itself enlightened and civilised, not only in spite of, but in consequence of this
monstrous and unnatural division." (David Urquhart, 1. c, p. 119.) This passage shows, at one and the same time, the strength and the weakness
of that kind of criticism which knows how to judge and condemn the present, but not how to comprehend it.

[2451 See Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physiologic," 7. Auflage, 1862, and especially the "Einleitung in die
Naturgesetze des Feldbaus," in the 1st Volume. To have developed from the point of view of natural science, the negative, i.e., destructive side
of modern agriculture, is one of Liebig's immortal merits. His summary, too, of the history of agriculture, although not free from gross errors,
contains flashes of light. It is, however, to be regretted that he ventures on such haphazard assertions as the following: "By greater pulverising
and more frequent ploughing, the circulation of air in the interior of porous soil is aided, and the surface exposed to the action of the atmosphere
is increased and renewed; but it is easily seen that the increased yield of the land cannot be proportional to the labour spent on that land, but
increases in a much smaller proportion. This law," adds Liebig, "was first enunciated by John Stuart Mill in his 'Principles of Pol. Econ.,' Vol. 1,
p. 17, as follows: That the produce of land increases, caeteris paribus, in a diminishing ratio to the increase of the labourers employed' (Mill
here introduces in an erroneous form the law enunciated by Ricardo's school, for since the 'decrease of the labourers employed,' kept even pace
in England with the advance of agriculture, the law discovered in, and applied to, England, could have no application to that country, at all
events), 'is the universal law of agricultural industry.' This is very remarkable, since Mill was ignorant of the reason for this taw." (Liebig, 1. c,
Bd. I., p. 143 and Note.) Apart from Liebig's wrong interpretation of the word "labour," by which word he understands something quite different
from what Political Economy does, it is, in any case, "very remarkable" that he should make Mr. John Stuart Mill the first propounder of a theory
which was first published by James Anderson in A. Smith's days, and was repeated in various works down to the beginning of the 19th century;
a theory which Malthus, that master in plagiarism (the whole of his population theory is a shameless plagiarism), appropriated to himself in
1815; which West developed at the same time as, and independently of, Anderson; which in the year 1817 was connected by Ricardo with the
general theory of value, then made the round of the world as Ricardo's theory, and in 1820 was vulgarised by James Mill, the father of John
Stuart Mill; and which, finally, was reproduced by John Stuart Mill and others, as a dogma already quite commonplace, and known to every
schoolboy. It cannot be denied that John Stuart Mill owes his, at all events, "remarkable" authority almost entirely to such quid-pro-quos.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Sixteen: Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (56 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part V:

The Production of Absolute and of

Relative Surplus-Value



CHAPTER SIXTEEN:

ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE



In considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter V .) by treating it in the abstract, apart from its
historical forms, as a process between man and Nature. We there stated, "If we examine the whole
labour-process, from the point of view of its result, it is plain that both the instruments and the subject of
labour are means of production, and that the labour itself is productive labour." And in Note 2, same
page, we further added: "This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour-process alone,
what is productive labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist process of
production." We now proceed to the further development of this subject.

So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the same labourer unites in himself all the
functions, that later on become separated. When an individual appropriates natural objects for his
livelihood, no one controls him but himself. Afterwards he is controlled by others. A single man cannot
operate upon Nature without calling his own muscles into play under the control of his own brain. As in
the natural body head and hand wait upon each other, so the labour-process unites the labour of the hand
with that of the head. Later on they part company and even become deadly foes. The product ceases to be
the direct product of the individual, and becomes a social product, produced in common by a collective
labourer, i.e., by a combination of workmen, each of whom takes only a part, greater or less, in the
manipulation of the subject of their labour. As the co-operative character of the labour-process becomes
more and more marked, so, as a necessary consequence, does our notion of productive labour, and of its
agent the productive labourer, become extended. In order to labour productively, it is no longer necessary
for you to do manual work yourself; enough, if you are an organ of the collective labourer, and perform
one of its subordinate functions. The first definition given above of productive labour, a definition
deduced from the very nature of the production of material objects, still remains correct for the collective
labourer, considered as a whole. But it no longer holds good for each member taken individually.

On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour becomes narrowed. Capitalist production is
not merely the production of commodities, it is essentially the production of surplus-value. The labourer
produces, not for himself, but for capital. It no longer suffices, therefore, that he should simply produce.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

He must produce surplus-value. That labourer alone is productive, who produces surplus-value for the
capitalist, and thus works for the self-expansion of capital. If we may take an example from outside the
sphere of production of material objects, a schoolmaster is a productive labourer when, in addition to
belabouring the heads of his scholars, he works like a horse to enrich the school proprietor. That the latter
has laid out his capital in a teaching factory, instead of in a sausage factory, does not alter the relation.
Hence the notion of a productive labourer implies not merely a relation between work and useful effect,
between labourer and product of labour, but also a specific, social relation of production, a relation that
has sprung up historically and stamps the labourer as the direct means of creating surplus- value. To be a
productive labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but a misfortune. In Book IV. which treats of the
history of the theory, it will be more clearly seen, that the production of surplus-value has at all times
been made, by classical political economists, the distinguishing characteristic of the productive labourer.
Hence their definition of a productive labourer changes with their comprehension of the nature of
surplus-value. Thus the Physiocrats insist that only agricultural labour is productive, since that alone,
they say, yields a surplus-value. And they say so because, with them, surplus-value has no existence
except in the form of rent.

The prolongation of the working-day beyond the point at which the labourer would have produced just an
equivalent for the value of his labour-power, and the appropriation of that surplus-labour by capital, this
is production of absolute surplus-value. It forms the general groundwork of the capitalist system, and the
starting-point for the production of relative surplus-value. The latter pre-supposes that the working-day is
already divided into two parts, necessary labour, and surplus-labour. In order to prolong the
surplus-labour, the necessary labour is shortened by methods whereby the equivalent for the wages is
produced in less time. The production of absolute surplus-value turns exclusively upon the length of the
working-day; the production of relative surplus-value, revolutionises out and out the technical processes
of labour, and the composition of society. It therefore pre-supposes a specific mode, the capitalist mode
of production, a mode which, along with its methods, means, and conditions, arises and develops itself
spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal subjection of labour to capital. In the course of
this development, the formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour to capital.

It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms, in which surplus-labour is not extorted by
direct compulsion from the producer, nor the producer himself yet formally subjected to capital. In such
forms capital has not yet acquired the direct control of the labour-process. By the side of independent
producers who carry on their handicrafts and agriculture in the traditional old-fashioned way, there
stands the usurer or the merchant, with his usurer's capital or merchant's capital, feeding on them like a
parasite. The predominance, in a society, of this form of exploitation excludes the capitalist mode of
production; to which mode, however, this form may serve as a transition, as it did towards the close of
the Middle Ages. Finally, as is shown by modern "domestic industry," some intermediate forms are here
and there reproduced in the background of Modern Industry, though their physiognomy is totally
changed.

If, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to capital suffices for the production of absolute
surplus-value, if, e.g., it is sufficient that handicraftsman who previously worked on their own account,
or as apprentices of a master, should become wage labourers under the direct control of a capitalist; so,
on the other hand, we have seen, how the methods of producing relative surplus-value, are, at the same
time, methods of producing absolute surplus-value. Nay, more, the excessive prolongation of the
working-day turned out to be the peculiar product of Modern Industry. Generally speaking, the
specifically capitalist mode of production ceases to be a mere means of producing relative surplus-value,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

so soon as that mode has conquered an entire branch of production; and still more so, so soon as it has
conquered all the important branches. It then becomes the general, socially predominant form of
production. As a special method of producing relative surplus-value, it remains effective only, first, in so
far as it seizes upon industries that previously were only formally subject to capital, that is, so far as it is
propagandist; secondly, in so far as the industries that have been taken over by it, continue to be
revolutionised by changes in the methods of production.

From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and relative surplus-value appears illusory.
Relative surplus-value is absolute, since it compels the absolute prolongation of the working-day beyond
the labour-time necessary to the existence of the labourer himself. Absolute surplus-value is relative,
since it makes necessary such a development of the productiveness of labour, as will allow of the
necessary labour-time being confined to a portion of the working-day. But if we keep in mind the
behaviour of surplus-value, this appearance of identity vanishes. Once the capitalist mode of production
is established and become general, the difference between absolute and relative surplus-value makes
itself felt, whenever there is a question of raising the rate of surplus-value. Assuming that labour-power
is paid for at its value, we are confronted by this alternative: given the productiveness of labour and its
normal intensity, the rate of surplus-value can be raised only by the actual prolongation of the
working-day; on the other hand, given the length of the working-day, that rise can be effected only by a
change in the relative magnitudes of the components of the working-day, viz., necessary labour and
surplus-labour; a change which, if the wages are not to fall below the value of labour-power, presupposes
a change either in the productiveness or in the intensity of the labour.

If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary means of subsistence for himself and his race,
he has no time left in which to work gratis for others. Without a certain degree of productiveness in his
labour, he has no such superfluous time at his disposal; without such superfluous time, no surplus-labour,
and therefore no capitalists, no slave-owners, no feudal lords, in one word, no class of large proprietors.

in

Thus we may say that surplus-value rests on a natural basis; but this is permissible only in the very
general sense, that there is no natural obstacle absolutely preventing one man from disburdening himself
of the labour requisite for his own existence, and burdening another with it, any more, for instance, than
unconquerable natural obstacle prevent one man from eating the flesh of another. [2] No mystical ideas
must in any way be connected, as sometimes happens, with this historically developed productiveness of
labour. It is only after men have raised themselves above the rank of animals, when therefore their labour
has been to some extent socialised, that a state of things arises in which the surplus-labour of the one
becomes a condition of existence for the other. At the dawn of civilisation the productiveness acquired
by labour is small, but so too are the wants which develop with and by the means of satisfying them.
Further, at that early period, the portion of society that lives on the labour of others is infinitely small
compared with the mass of direct producers. Along with the progress in the productiveness of labour, that
small portion of society increases both absolutely and relatively. £3] Besides, capital with its
accompanying relations springs up from an economic soil that is the product of a long process of
development. The productiveness of labour that serves as its foundation and starting-point, is a gift, not
of nature, but of a history embracing thousands of centuries.

Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the form of social production, the
productiveness of labour is fettered by physical conditions. These are all referable to the constitution of
man himself (race, &c), and to surrounding nature. The external physical conditions fall into two great

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

economic classes, (1) Natural wealth in means of subsistence, i.e., a fruitful soil, waters teeming with
fish, &c, and (2), natural wealth in the instruments of labour, such as waterfalls, navigable rivers, wood,
metal, coal, &c. At the dawn of civilisation, it is the first class that turns the scale; at a higher stage of
development, it is the second. Compare, for example, England with India, or in ancient times, Athens and
Corinth with the shores of the Black Sea.

The fewer the number of natural wants imperatively calling for satisfaction, and the greater the natural
fertility of the soil and the favourableness of the climate, so much less is the labour-time necessary for
the maintenance and reproduction of the producer. So much greater therefore can be the excess of his
labours for others over his labour for himself. Diodorus long ago remarked this in relation to the ancient
Egyptians. "It is altogether incredible how little trouble and expense the bringing up of their children
causes them. They cook for them the first simple food at hand; they also give them the lower part of the
papyrus stem to eat, so far as it can be roasted in the fire, and the roots and stalks of marsh plants, some
raw, some boiled and roasted. Most of the children go without shoes and unclothed, for the air is so mild.
Hence a child, until he is grown up, costs his parents not more, on the whole, than twenty drachmas. It is
this, chiefly, which explains why the population of Egypt is so numerous, and, therefore, why so many
great works can be undertaken." [4] Nevertheless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to the
extent of its population than to the large proportion of it that was freely disposable. Just as the individual
labourer can do more surplus-labour in proportion as his necessary labour-time is less, so with regard to
the working population. The smaller the part of it which is required for the production of the necessary
means of subsistence, so much the greater is the part that can be set to do other work.

Capitalist production once assumed, then, all other circumstances remaining the same, and given the
length of the working day, the quantity of surplus-labour will vary with the physical conditions of labour,
especially with the fertility of the soil. But it by no means follows from this that the most fruitful soil is
the most fitted for the growth of the capitalist mode of production. This mode is based on the dominion
of man over nature. Where nature is too lavish, she "keeps him in hand, like a child in leading-strings."
She does not impose upon him any necessity to develop himself. [51 It is not the tropics with their
luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate zone, that is the mother-country of capital. It is not the mere
fertility of the soil, but the differentiation of the soil, the variety of its natural products, the changes of the
seasons, which form the physical basis for the social division of labour, and which, by changes in the
natural surroundings, spur man on to the multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, his means and
modes of labour. It is the necessity of bringing a natural force under the control of society, of
economising, of appropriating or subduing it on a large scale by the work of man's hand, that first plays
the decisive part in the history of industry. Examples are, the irrigation works in Egypt, [61 Lombardy,
Holland, or in India and Persia where irrigation by means of artificial canals, not only supplies the soil
with the water indispensable to it, but also carries down to it, in the shape of sediment from the hills,
mineral fertilisers. The secret of the flourishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily under the dominion
of the Arabs lay in their irrigation works. \1]

Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possibility, never the reality, of surplus-labour, nor,
consequently, of surplus-value and a surplus-product. The result of difference in the natural conditions of
labour is this, that the same quantity of labour satisfies, in different countries, a different mass of
requirements, [81 consequently, that under circumstances in other respects analogous, the necessary
labour-time is different. These conditions affect surplus-labour only as natural limits, i.e., by fixing the
points at which labour for others can begin. In proportion as industry advances, these natural limits



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

recede. In the midst of our West European society, where the labourer purchases the right to work for his
own livelihood only by paying for it in surplus-labour, the idea easily takes root that it is an inherent
quality of human labour to furnish a surplus-product. £91 But consider, for example, an inhabitant of the
eastern islands of the Asiatic Archipelago, where sago grows wild in the forests. "When the inhabitants
have convinced themselves, by boring a hole in the tree, that the pith is ripe, the trunk is cut down and
divided into several pieces, the pith is extracted, mixed with water and filtered: it is then quite fit for use
as sago. One tree commonly yields 300 lbs., and occasionally 500 to 600 lbs. There, then, people go into
the forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with us they cut fire-wood." f 101 Suppose now such an
eastern bread-cutter requires 12 working hours a week for the satisfaction of all his wants. Nature's direct
gift to him is plenty of leisure time. Before he can apply this leisure time productively for himself, a
whole series of historical events is required; before he spends it in surplus-labour for strangers,
compulsion is necessary. If capitalist production were introduced, the honest fellow would perhaps have
to work six days a week, in order to appropriate to himself the product of one working day. The bounty
of Nature does not explain why he would then have to work 6 days a week, or why he must furnish 5
days of surplus-labour. It explains only why his necessary labour-time would be limited to one day a
week. But in no case would his surplus-product arise from some occult quality inherent in human labour.

Thus, not only does the historically developed social productiveness of labour, but also its natural
productiveness, appear to be productiveness of the capital with which that labour is incorporated.

Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus-value. He treats it as a thing inherent in the
capitalist mode of production, which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of social production.
Whenever he discusses the productiveness of labour, he seeks in it, not the cause of surplus-value, but the
cause that determines the magnitude of that value. On the other hand, his school has openly proclaimed
the productiveness of labour to be the originating cause of profit (read: Surplus-value). This at all events
is a progress as against the mercantilists who, on their side, derived the excess of the price over the cost
of production of the product, from the act of exchange, from the product being sold above its value.
Nevertheless, Ricardo's school simply shirked the problem, they did not solve it. In fact these bourgeois
economists instinctively saw, and rightly so, that it is very dangerous to stir too deeply the burning
question of the origin of surplus-value. But what are we to think of John Stuart Mill, who, half a century
after Ricardo, solemnly claims superiority over the mercantilists, by clumsily repeating the wretched
evasions of Ricardo's earliest vulgarisers?

Mill says: "The cause of profit is that labour produces more than is required for its support." So far,
nothing but the old story; but Mill wishing to add something of his own, proceeds: "To vary the form of
the theorem; the reason why capital yields a profit, is because food, clothing, materials and tools, last
longer than the time which was required to produce them." He here confounds the duration of
labour- time with the duration of its products. According to this view, a baker whose product lasts only a
day, could never extract from his workpeople the same profit, as a machine maker whose products
endure for 20 years and more. Of course it is very true, that if a bird's nest did not last longer than the
time it takes in building, birds would have to do without nests.

This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes his own superiority over the mercantilists. "We
thus see," he proceeds, "that profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the productive
power of labour; and the general profit of the country is always what the productive power of labour
makes it, whether any exchange takes place or not. If there were no division of employments, there
would be no buying or selling, but there would still be profit." For Mill then, exchange, buying and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

selling, those general conditions of capitalist production, are but an incident, and there would always be
profits even without the purchase and sale of labour-power!

"If," he continues, "the labourers of the country collectively produce twenty per cent more than their
wages, profits will be twenty per cent, whatever prices may or may not be." This is, on the one hand, a
rare bit of tautology; for if labourers produce a surplus-value of 20% for the capitalist, his profit will be
to the total wages of the labourers as 20: 100. On the other hand, it is absolutely false to say that "profits
will be 20%." They will always be less, because they are calculated upon the sum total of the capital
advanced. If, for example, the capitalist have advanced £500, of which £400 is laid out in means of
production and £100 in wages, and if the rate of surplus-value be 20%, the rate of profit will be 20:500,
/.e., 4% and not 20%.

Then follows a splendid example of Mill's method of handling the different historical forms of social
production. "I assume, throughout, the state of things which, where the labourers and capitalists are
separate classes, prevails, with few exceptions, universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the
whole expenses, including the entire remuneration of the labourer." Strange optical illusion to see
everywhere a state of things which as yet exists only exceptionally on our earth, fill But let us finish —
Mill is willing to concede, "that he should do so is not a matter of inherent necessity." On the contrary:
"the labourer might wait, until the production is complete, for all that part of his wages which exceeds
mere necessaries: and even for the whole, if he has funds in hand sufficient for his temporary support.
But in the latter case, the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist in the concern, by supplying a
portion of the funds necessary for carrying it on." Mill might have gone further and have added, that the
labourer who advances to himself not only the necessaries of life but also the means of production, is in
reality nothing but his own wage-labourer. He might also have said that the American peasant proprietor
is but a serf who does enforced labour for himself instead of for his lord.

After thus proving clearly, that even if capitalist production had no existence, still it would always exist,
Mill is consistent enough to show, on the contrary, that it has no existence, even when it does exist. "And
even in the former case" (when the workman is a wage labourer to whom the capitalist advances all the
necessaries of life, he the labourer), "may be looked upon in the same light," (i.e., as a capitalist), "since,
contributing his labour at less than the market-price, (!) he may be regarded as lending the difference (?)
to his employer and receiving it back with interest, &c." |T21 In reality, the labourer advances his labour
gratuitously to the capitalist during, say one week, in order to receive the market price at the end of the
week, &c, and it is this which, according to Mill, transforms him into a capitalist. On the level plain,
simple mounds look like hills; and the imbecile flatness of the present bourgeoisie is to be measured by
the altitude of its great intellects.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "The very existence of the master-capitalists, as a distinct class, is dependent on the productiveness of
industry." (Ramsay, 1. c, p. 206.) "If each man's labour were but enough to produce his own food, there
could be no property." (Ravenstone, 1. c. p. 14, 15.)

\2] According to a recent calculation, there are yet at least 4,000,000 cannibals in those parts of the earth
which have already been explored.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

[31 "Among the wild Indians in America, almost everything is the labourer's, 99 parts of a hundred are to
be put upon the account of labour. In England, perhaps, the labourer has not 2/3." (The Advantages of the
East India Trade, &c, p. 73.)

[41 Diodorus, 1. c, 1. 1., c. 80.

[51 "The first (natural wealth) as it is most noble and advantageous, so doth it make the people careless,
proud, and given to all excesses; whereas the second enforceth vigilancy, literature, arts and policy."
(England's Treasure by Foreign Trade. Or the Balance of our Foreign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure.
Written by Thomas Mun of London, merchant, and now published for the common good by his son John
Mun. London, 1669, p. 181, 182.) "Nor can I conceive a greater curse upon a body of people, than to be
thrown upon a spot of land, where the productions for subsistence and food were, in great measure,
spontaneous, and the climate required or admitted little care for raiment and covering... there may be an
extreme on the other side. A soil incapable of produce by labour is quite as bad as a soil that produces
plentifully without any labour." (An Inquiry into the Present High Price of Provisions. Lond. 1767, p.
10.)

[61 The necessity for predicting the rise and fall of the Nile created Egyptian astronomy, and with it the
dominion of the priests, as directors of agriculture. "Le solstice est le moment de l'annee ou commence la
crue du Nil, et celui que les Egyptiens ont du observer avec le plus d'attention.... C'etait cette annee
tropique qu'il leur importait de marquer pour se diriger dans leurs operations agricoles. lis durent done
chercher dans le ciel un signe apparent de son retour." (Cuvier: Discours sur les revolutions du globe, ed.
Hoefer, Paris, 1863, p. 141.)

[71 One of the material bases of the power of the state over the small disconnected producing organisms
in India, was the regulation of the water supply. The Mahometan rulers of India understood this better
than their English successors. It is enough to recall to mind the famine of 1866, which cost the lives of
more than a million Hindus in the district of Orissa, in the Bengal presidency.

[81 "There are no two countries which furnish an equal number of the necessaries of life in equal plenty,
and with the same quantity of labour. Men's wants increase or diminish with the severity or
temperateness of the climate they live in; consequently, the proportion of trade which the inhabitants of
different countries are obliged to carry on through necessity cannot be the same, nor is it practicable to
ascertain the degree of variation farther than by the degrees of Heat and Cold; from whence one may
make this general conclusion, that the quantity of labour required for a certain number of people is
greatest in cold climates, and least in hot ones; for in the former men not only want more clothes, but the
earth more cultivating than in the latter." (An Essay on the Governing Causes of the Natural Rate of
Interest. Lond. 1750. p. 60.) The author of this epoch-making anonymous work is J. Massy. Hume took
his theory of interest from it.

[9J "Chaque travail doit (this appears also to be part of the droits et devoirs du citoyen) laisser un
excedant." Proudhon.

[101 F. Schouw: "Die Erde, die Pflanze und der Mensch," 2. Ed. Leipz. 1854, p. 148.

fill In earlier editions of Capital the quotation from John Stuart Mill, "I assume throughout... of the
labourer," had been given incorrectly, the words "where the labourers and capitalists are separate classes"



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

having been left out. Marx, in a letter dated November 28, 1878, pointed this out to Danielson, the
Russian translator of Capital, adding:

"The next two sentences, viz. 'Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which as yet
exists only exceptionally on our earth. But let us finish'- should be deleted and the following sentence
substituted:

"Mr. Mill is good enough to believe that this state of things is not an absolute necessity, even in that
economic system in which labourers and capitalists are separate classes.'"

The substance of this note has been taken from the Volksaugabe. The quotation from Mill is from his
Principles of Political Economy, Book II, Chap XV, 5.

[12] J. St. Mill. Principles of Pol. Econ. Lond. 1868, p. 252-53 passim.



Transcribed by Allan Thurrott

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Seventeen: Changes of Magnitude in the price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part V:

The Production of Absolute and of

Relative Surplus-Value



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN:

CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE IN THE PRICE OF LABOUR-POWER AND

IN SURPLUS VALUE



Contents

Section 1 - Length of the Working-Day and Intensity of Labour Constant. Productiveness of Labour

Variable

Section 2 - Working-Day Constant. Productiveness of Labour Constant. Intensity of Labour Variable

Section 3 - Productiveness and Intensity of Labour Constant. Length of the Working-Day Variable

Section 4 - Simultaneous Variations in the Duration, Productiveness, and Intensity of Labour

A. Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with a Simultaneous Lengthening of the Working-Day

B. Increasing Intensity and Productiveness of Labour with Simultaneous Shortening of the Working-Day



The value of labour-power is determined by the value of the necessaries of life habitually required by the
average labourer. The quantity of these necessaries is known at any given epoch of a given society, and
can therefore be treated as a constant magnitude. What changes, is the value of this quantity. There are,
besides, two other factors that enter into the determination of the value of labour-power. One, the
expenses of developing that power, which expenses vary with the mode of production; the other, its
natural diversity, the difference between the labour-power of men and women, of children and adults.
The employment of these different sorts of labour-power, an employment which is, in its turn, made
necessary by the mode of production, makes a great difference in the cost of maintaining the family of
the labourer, and in the value of the labour-power of the adult male. Both these factors, however, are
excluded in the following investigation. £1J

I assume (1) that commodities are sold at their value; (2) that the price of labour-power rises occasionally
above its value, but never sinks below it.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (1 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

On this assumption we have seen that the relative magnitudes of surplus-value and of price of
labour-power are determined by three circumstances; (1) the length of the working-day, or the extensive
magnitude of labour; (2) the normal intensity of labour, its intensive magnitude, whereby a given
quantity of labour is expended in a given time; (3) the productiveness of labour,whereby the same
quantum of labour yields, in a given time, a greater or less quantum of product, dependent on the degree
of development in the conditions of production. Very different combinations are clearly possible,
according as one of the three factors is constant and two variable, or two constant and one variable, or
lastly, all three simultaneously variable. And the number of these combinations is augmented by the fact
that, when these factors simultaneously vary, the amount and direction of their respective variations may
differ. In what follows the chief combinations alone are considered.



SECTION 1

LENGTH OF THE WORKING-DAY AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT.
PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR VARIABLE.



On these assumptions the value of labour-power, and the magnitude of surplus-value, are determined by
three laws.

( 1.) A working day of given length always creates the same amount of value, no matter how the
productiveness of labour, and, with it, the mass of the product, and the price of each single commodity
produced, may vary.

If the value created by a working-day of 12 hours be, say, six shillings, then, although the mass of the
articles produced varies with the productiveness of labour, the only result is that the value represented by
six shillings is spread over a greater or less number of articles.

(2 .) Surplus-value and the value of labour-power vary in opposite directions. A variation in the
productiveness of labour, its increase or diminution, causes a variation in the opposite direction in the
value of labour-power, and in the same direction in surplus-value.

The value created by a working day of 12 hours is a constant quantity, say, six shillings. This constant
quantity is the sum of the surplus-value plus the value of the labour-power, which latter value the
labourer replaces by an equivalent. It is self-evident, that if a constant quantity consists of two parts,
neither of them can increase without the other diminishing. Let the two parts at starting be equal; 3
shillings value of labour-power, 3 shillings surplus-value. Then the value of the labour-power cannot rise
from three shillings to four, without the surplus- value falling from three shillings to two; and the
surplus-value cannot rise from three shillings to four, without the value of labour-power falling from
three shillings to two. Under these circumstances, therefore, no change can take place in the absolute
magnitude, either of the surplus-value, or of the value of labour-power, without a simultaneous change in
their relative magnitudes, i.e., relatively to each other. It is impossible for them to rise or fall
simultaneously.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (2 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

Further, the value of labour-power cannot fall, and consequently surplus-value cannot rise, without a rise
in the productiveness of labour. For instance, in the above case, the value of the labour-power cannot
sink from three shillings to two, unless an increase in the productiveness of labour makes it possible to
produce in 4 hours the same quantity of necessaries as previously required 6 hours to produce. On the
other hand, the value of the labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four, without a decrease in
the productiveness of labour, whereby eight hours become requisite to produce the same quantity of
necessaries, for the production of which six hours previously sufficed. It follows from this, that an
increase in the productiveness of labour causes a fall in the value of labour-power and a consequent rise
in surplus-value, while, on the other hand, a decrease in such productiveness causes a rise in the value of
labour-power, and a fall in surplus-value.

In formulating this law, Ricardo overlooked one circumstance; although a change in the magnitude of the
surplus-value or surplus-labour causes a change in the opposite direction in the magnitude of the value of
labour-power, or in the quantity of necessary labour, it by no means follows that they vary in the same
proportion. They do increase or diminish by the same quantity. But their proportional increase or
diminution depends on their original magnitudes before the change in the productiveness of labour took
place. If the value of the labour-power be 4 shillings, or the necessary labour-time 8 hours, and the
surplus-value be 2 shillings, or the surplus-labour 4 hours, and if, in consequence of an increase in the
productiveness of labour, the value of the labour-power fall to 3 shillings, or the necessary labour to 6
hours, the surplus-value will rise to 3 shillings, or the surplus-labour to 6 hours. The same quantity, 1
shilling or 2 hours, is added in one case and subtracted in the other. But the proportional change of
magnitude is different in each case. While the value of the labour-power falls from 4 shillings to 3, i.e.,
by 1/4 or 25%, the surplus-value rises from 2 shillings to 3, i.e., by 1/2 or 50%. It therefore follows that
the proportional increase or diminution in surplus-value, consequent on a given change in the
productiveness of labour, depends on the original magnitude of that portion of the working day which
embodies itself in surplus- value; the smaller that portion, the greater is the proportional change; the
greater that portion, the less is the proportional change.

(3.) Increase or diminution in surplus-value is always consequent on, and never the cause of, the
corresponding diminution or increase in the value of labour-power. [2]

Since the working-day is constant in magnitude, and is represented by a value of constant magnitude,
since, to every variation in the magnitude of surplus-value, there corresponds an inverse variation in the
value of labour-power, and since the value of labour-power cannot change, except in consequence of a
change in the productiveness of labour, it clearly follows, under these conditions, that every change of
magnitude in surplus-value arises from an inverse change of magnitude in the value of labour-power. If,
then, as we have already seen, there can be no change of absolute magnitude in the value of
labour-power, and in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a change in their relative magnitudes, so now it
follows that no change in their relative magnitudes is possible, without a previous change in the absolute
magnitude of the value of labour-power.

According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of surplus-value, presupposes a movement in the
value of labour-power, which movement is brought about by a variation in the productiveness of labour.
The limit of this change is given by the altered value of labour-power. Nevertheless, even when
circumstances allow the law to operate, subsidiary movements may occur. For example: if in
consequence of the increased productiveness of labour, the value of labour-power falls from 4 shillings to



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (3 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

3, or the necessary labour-time from 8 hours to 6, the price of labour-power may possibly not fall below
3s. 8d., 3s. 6d., or 3s. 2d., and the surplus-value consequently not rise above 3s. 4d., 3s. 6d., or 3s. lOd.
The amount of this fall, the lowest limit of which is 3 shillings (the new value of labour-power), depends
on the relative weight, which the pressure of capital on the one side, and the resistance of the labourer on
the other, throws into the scale.

The value of labour-power is determined by the value of a given quantity of necessaries. It is the value
and not the mass of these necessaries that varies with the productiveness of labour. It is, however,
possible that, owing to an increase of productiveness, both the labourer and the capitalist may
simultaneously be able to appropriate a greater quantity of these necessaries, without any change in the
price of labour-power or in surplus-value. If the value of labour-power be 3 shillings, and the necessary
labour-time amount to 6 hours, if the surplus-value likewise be 3 shillings, and the surplus-labour 6
hours, then if the productiveness of labour were doubled without altering the ratio of necessary labour to
surplus-labour, there would be no change of magnitude in surplus-value and price of labour-power. The
only result would be that each of them would represent twice as many use-values as before; these
use-values being twice as cheap as before. Although labour-power would be unchanged in price, it would
be above its value. If, however, the price of labour-power had fallen, not to Is. 6d., the lowest possible
point consistent with its new value, but to 2s. lOd. or 2s. 6d., still this lower price would represent an
increased mass of necessaries. In this way it is possible with an increasing productiveness of labour, for
the price of labour-power to keep on falling, and yet this fall to be accompanied by a constant growth in
the mass of the labourer's means of subsistence. But even in such case, the fall in the value of
labour-power would cause a corresponding rise of surplus-value, and thus the abyss between the
labourer's position and that of the capitalist would keep widening. [3J

Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three laws we have above stated. But he falls into the
following errors: (1) he looks upon the special conditions under which these laws hold good as the
general and sole conditions of capitalist production. He knows no change, either in the length of the
working-day, or in the intensity of labour; consequently with him there can be only one variable factor,
viz., the productiveness of labour; (2), and this error vitiates his analysis much more than (1), he has not,
any more than have the other economists, investigated surplus-value as such, i.e., independently of its
particular forms, such as profit, rent, &c. He therefore confounds together the laws of the rate of
surplus-value and the laws of the rate of profit. The rate of profit is, as we have already said, the ratio of
the surplus-value to the total capital advanced; the rate of surplus-value is the ratio of the surplus-value to
the variable part of that capital. Assume that a capital C of £500 is made up of raw material, instruments
of labour, &c. (c) to the amount of £400; and of wages (v) to the amount of £100; and further, that the
surplus-value (s) = £100. Then we have rate of surplus-value s/v = £100/£100 = 100%. But the rate of
profit s/c = £ 100/£500 = 20%. It is, besides, obvious that the rate of profit may depend on circumstances
that in no way affect the rate of surplus-value. I shall show in Book III. that, with a given rate of
surplus-value, we may have any number of rates of profit, and that various rates of surplus-value may,
under given conditions, express themselves in a single rate of profit.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (4 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

SECTION 2

WORKING-DAY CONSTANT. PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR CONSTANT. INTENSITY
OF LABOUR VARIABLE



Increased intensity of labour means increased expenditure of labour in a given time. Hence a
working-day of more intense labour is embodied in more products than is one of less intense labour, the
length of each day being the same. Increased productiveness of labour also, it is true, will supply more
products in a given working-day. But in this latter case, the value of each single product falls, for it costs
less labour than before; in the former case, that value remains unchanged, for each article costs the same
labour as before. Here we have an increase in the number of products, unaccompanied by a fall in their
individual prices: as their number increases, so does the sum of their prices. But in the case of increased
productiveness, a given value is spread over a greater mass of products. Hence the length of the
working-day being constant, a day's labour of increased intensity will be incorporated in an increased
value, and, the value of money remaining unchanged, in more money. The value created varies with the
extent to which the intensity of labour deviates from its normal intensity in the society. A given
working-day, therefore, no longer creates a constant, but a variable value; in a day of 12 hours of
ordinary intensity, the value created is, say 6 shillings, but with increased intensity, the value created may
be 7, 8, or more shillings. It is clear that, if the value created by a day's labour increases from, say, 6 to 8
shillings then the two parts into which this value is divided, viz., price of labour-power and
surplus-value, may both of them increase simultaneously, and either equally or unequally. They may
both simultaneously increase from 3 shillings to 4. Here, the rise in the price of labour-power does not
necessarily imply that the price has risen above the value of labour-power. On the contrary, the rise in
price may be accompanied by a fall in value. This occurs whenever the rise in the price of labour-power
does not compensate for its increased wear and tear.

We know that, with transitory exceptions, a change in the productiveness of labour does not cause any
change in the value of labour-power, nor consequently in the magnitude of surplus-value, unless the
products of the industries affected are articles habitually consumed by the labourers. In the present case
this condition no longer applies. For when the variation is either in the duration or in the intensity of
labour, there is always a corresponding change in the magnitude of the value created, independently of
the nature of the article in which that value is embodied.

If the intensity of labour were to increase simultaneously and equally in every branch of industry, then
the new and higher degree of intensity would become the normal degree for the society, and would
therefore cease to be taken account of. But still, even then, the intensity of labour would be different in
different countries, and would modify the international application of the law of value. The more intense
working-day of one nation would be represented by a greater sum of money than would the less intense
day of another nation. \4]



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (5 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

SECTION 3

PRODUCTIVENESS AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT. LENGTH OF THE
WORKING-DAY VARIABLE



The working-day may vary in two ways. It may be made either longer or shorter. From our present data,
and within the limits of the assumptions made on [previously] we obtain the following laws:

( 1.) The working-day creates a greater or less amount of value in proportion to its length — thus, a
variable and not a constant quantity of value.

(2. ) Every change in the relation between the magnitudes of surplus value and of the value of
labour-power arises from a change in the absolute magnitude of the surplus-labour, and consequently of
the surplus-value.

(3.) The absolute value of labour-power can change only in consequence of the reaction exercised by the
prolongation of surplus-labour upon the wear and tear of labour-power. Every change in this absolute
value is therefore the effect, but never the cause, of a change in the magnitude of surplus-value.

We begin with the case in which the working-day is shortened.

( 1.) A shortening of the working-day under the conditions given above, leaves the value of labour-power,
and with it, the necessary labour-time, unaltered. It reduces the surplus-labour and surplus- value. Along
with the absolute magnitude of the latter, its relative magnitude also falls, i.e., its magnitude relatively to
the value of labour-power whose magnitude remains unaltered. Only by lowering the price of
labour-power below its value could the capitalist save himself harmless.

All the usual arguments against the shortening of the working-day, assume that it takes place under the
conditions we have here supposed to exist; but in reality the very contrary is the case: a change in the
productiveness and intensity of labour either precedes, or immediately follows, a shortening of the
working-day. [5]

(2.) Lengthening of the working-day. Let the necessary labour-time be 6 hours, or the value of
labour-power 3 shillings; also let the surplus-labour be 6 hours or the surplus-value 3 shillings. The
whole working-day then amounts to 12 hours and is embodied in a value of 6 shillings. If, now, the
working-day be lengthened by 2 hours and the price of labour-power remain unaltered, the surplus-value
increases both absolutely and relatively. Although there is no absolute change in the value of
labour-power, it suffers a relative fall. Under the conditions assumed in 1. there could not be a change of
relative magnitude in the value of labour-power without a change in its absolute magnitude. Here, on the
contrary, the change of relative magnitude in the value of labour-power is the result of the change of
absolute magnitude in surplus-value.

Since the value in which a day's labour is embodied, increases with the length of that day, it is evident
that the surplus-value and the price of labour-power may simultaneously increase, either by equal or
unequal quantities. This simultaneous increase is therefore possible in two cases, one, the actual
lengthening of the working-day, the other, an increase in the intensity of labour unaccompanied by such

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (6 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

lengthening.

When the working-day is prolonged, the price of labour-power may fall below its value, although that
price be nominally unchanged or even rise. The value of a day's labour-power is, as will be remembered,
estimated from its normal average duration, or from the normal duration of life among the labourers, and
from corresponding normal transformations of organised bodily matter into motion, £61 in conformity
with the nature of man. Up to a certain point, the increased wear and tear of labour-power, inseparable
from a lengthened working-day, may be compensated by higher wages. But beyond this point the wear
and tear increases in geometrical progression, and every condition suitable for the normal reproduction
and functioning of labour-power is suppressed. The price of labour-power and the degree of its
exploitation cease to be commensurable quantities.



SECTION 4

SIMULTANEOUS VARIATIONS IN THE DURATION, PRODUCTIVENESS, AND INTENSITY
OF LABOUR



It is obvious that a large number of combinations are here possible. Any two of the factors may vary and
the third remain constant, or all three may vary at once. They may vary either in the same or in different
degrees, in the same or in opposite directions, with the result that the variations counteract one another,
either wholly or in part. Nevertheless the analysis of every possible case is easy in view of the results
given in I., II., and III. The effect of every possible combination may be found by treating each factor in
turn as variable, and the other two constant for the time being. We shall, therefore, notice, and that
briefly, but two important cases.



A. Diminishing productiveness of labour with a simultaneous lengthening of the working-day.

In speaking of diminishing productiveness of labour, we here refer to diminution in those industries
whose products determine the value of labour-power; such a diminution, for example, as results from
decreasing fertility of the soil, and from the corresponding dearness of its products. Take the
working-day at 12 hours and the value created by it at 6 shillings, of which one half replaces the value of
the labour-power, the other forms the surplus-value. Suppose, in consequence of the increased dearness
of the products of the soil, that the value of labour-power rises from 3 shillings to 4, and therefore the
necessary labour-time from 6 hours to 8. If there be no change in the length of the working-day, the
surplus-labour would fall from 6 hours to 4, the surplus-value from 3 shillings to 2. If the day be
lengthened by 2 hours, i.e., from 12 hours to 14, the surplus-labour remains at 6 hours, the surplus-value
at 6 shillings, but the surplus-value decreases compared with the value of labour-power, as measured by
the necessary labour-time. If the day be lengthened by 4 hours, viz., from 12 hours to 16, the proportional
magnitudes of surplus-value and value of labour-power, of surplus-labour and necessary labour, continue



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (7 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

unchanged, but the absolute magnitude of surplus-value rises from 3 shillings to 4, that of the
surplus-labour from 6 hours to 8, an increment of 33 1/3 %. Therefore, with diminishing productiveness
of labour and a simultaneous lengthening of the working-day, the absolute magnitude of surplus-value
may continue unaltered, at the same time that its relative magnitude diminishes; its relative magnitude
may continue unchanged, at the same time that its absolute magnitude increases; and, provided the
lengthening of the day be sufficient, both may increase.

In the period between 1799 and 1815 the increasing price of provisions led in England to a nominal rise
in wages, although the real wages, expressed in the necessaries of life, fell. From this fact West and
Ricardo drew the conclusion, that the diminution in the productiveness of agricultural labour had brought
about a fall in the rate of surplus-value, and they made this assumption of a fact that existed only in their
imaginations, the starting-point of important investigations into the relative magnitudes of wages, profits,
and rent. But, as a matter of fact, surplus-value had at that time, thanks to the increased intensity of
labour, and to the prolongation of the working-day, increased both in absolute and relative magnitude.
This was the period in which the right to prolong the hours of labour to an outrageous extent was
established; [71 the period that was especially characterised by an accelerated accumulation of capital
here, by pauperism there. [8]



B. Increasing intensity and productiveness of labour with simultaneous shortening of the working-day.

Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour, both have a like effect. They both augment the
mass of articles produced in a given time. Both, therefore, shorten that portion of the working-day which
the labourer needs to produce his means of subsistence or their equivalent. The minimum length of the
working-day is fixed by this necessary but contractile portion of it. If the whole working-day were to
shrink to the length of this portion, surplus-labour would vanish, a consummation utterly impossible
under the regime of capital. Only by suppressing the capitalist form of production could the length of the
working-day be reduced to the necessary labour-time. But, even in that case, the latter would extend its
limits. On the one hand, because the notion of "means of subsistence" would considerably expand, and
the labourer would lay claim to an altogether different standard of life. On the other hand, because a part
of what is now surplus-labour, would then count as necessary labour; I mean the labour of forming a
fund for reserve and accumulation.

The more the productiveness of labour increases, the more can the working-day be shortened; and the
more the working-day is shortened, the more can the intensity of labour increase. From a social point of
view, the productiveness increases in the same ratio as the economy of labour, which, in its turn, includes
not only economy of the means of production, but also the avoidance of all useless labour. The capitalist
mode of production, while on the one hand, enforcing economy in each individual business, on the other
hand, begets, by its anarchical system of competition, the most outrageous squandering of labour-power
and of the social means of production, not to mention the creation of a vast number of employments, at
present indispensable, but in themselves superfluous.

The intensity and productiveness of labour being given, the time which society is bound to devote to
material production is shorter, and as a consequence, the time at its disposal for the free development,
intellectual and social, of the individual is greater, in proportion as the work is more and more evenly
divided among all the able-bodied members of society, and as a particular class is more and more



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (8 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

deprived of the power to shift the natural burden of labour from its own shoulders to those of another
layer of society. In this direction, the shortening of the working-day finds at last a limit in the
generalisation of labour. In capitalist society spare time is acquired for one class by converting the whole
life-time of the masses into labour-time.



Footnotes

fJJ Note in the 3rd German edition. — The case considered at pages 300-302 is here of course omitted.
— F.E.

\2] To this third law MacCulloch has made, amongst others, this absurd addition, that a rise in
surplus-value, unaccompanied by a fall in the value of labour-power, can occur through the abolition of
taxes payable by the capitalist. The abolition of such taxes makes no change whatever in the quantity of
surplus-value that the capitalist extorts at first-hand from the labourer. It alters only the proportion in
which that surplus-value is divided between himself and third persons. It consequently makes no
alteration whatever in the relation between surplus-value and value of labour-power. MacCulloch's
exception therefore proves only his misapprehension of the rule, a misfortune that as often happens to
him in the vulgarisation of Ricardo, as it does to J. B. Say in the vulgarisation of Adam Smith.

\3] "When an alteration takes place in the productiveness of industry, and that either more or less is
produced by a given quantity of labour and capital, the proportion of wages may obviously vary, whilst
the quantity, which that proportion represents, remains the same, or the quantity may vary, whilst the
proportion remains the same." ("Outlines of Political Economy, &c," p. 67.)

[41 "All things being equal, the English manufacturer can turn out a considerably larger amount of work
in a given time than a foreign manufacturer, so much as to counterbalance the difference of the
working-days, between 60 hours a week here, and 72 or 80 elsewhere." (Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st
Oct., 1855, p. 65.) The most infallible means for reducing this qualitative difference between the English
and Continental working hour would be a law shortening quantitatively the length of the working-day in
Continental factories.

[52 "There are compensating circumstances ... which the working of the Ten Hours' Act has brought to
light. "(Rep.of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct. 1848," p. 7.)

\6] "The amount of labour which a man had undergone in the course of 24 hours might be approximately
arrived at by an examination of the chemical changes which had taken place in his body, changed forms
in matter indicating the anterior exercise of dynamic force." (Grove: "On the Correlation of Physical
Forces.")

[7] "Corn and labour rarely march quite abreast; but there is an obvious limit, beyond which they cannot
be separated. With regard to the unusual exertions made by the labouring classes in periods of dearness,
which produce the fall of wages noticed in the evidence" (namely, before the Parliamentary Committee
of Inquiry, 1814-15), "they are most meritorious in the individuals, and certainly favour the growth of
capital. But no man of humanity could wish to see them constant and unremitted. They are most
admirable as a temporary relief; but if they were constantly in action, effects of a similar kind would

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (9 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

result from them, as from the population of a country being pushed to the very extreme limits of its
food." (Malthus: "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815, p. 48, note.) All honour to
Malthus that he lays stress on the lengthening of the hours of labour, a fact to which he elsewhere in his
pamphlet draws attention, while Ricardo and others, in face of the most notorious facts, make
invariability in the length of the working-day the groundwork of all their investigations. But the
conservative interests, which Malthus served, prevented him from seeing that an unlimited prolongation
of the working-day, combined with an extraordinary development of machinery, and the exploitation of
women and children, must inevitably have made a great portion of the working-class "supernumerary,"
particularly whenever the war should have ceased, and the monopoly of England in the markets of the
world should have come to an end. It was, of course, far more convenient, and much more in conformity
with the interests of the ruling classes, whom Malthus adored like a true priest, to explain this
"over-population" by the eternal laws of Nature, rather than by the historical laws of capitalist
production.

£8} "A principal cause of the increase of capital, during the war, proceeded from the greater exertions,
and perhaps the greater privations of the labouring classes, the most numerous in every society. More
women and children were compelled by necessitous circumstances, to enter upon laborious occupations,
and former workmen were, from the same cause, obliged to devote a greater portion of their time to
increase production." (Essays on Pol. Econ., in which are illustrated the principal causes of the present
national distress. Lond., 1830, p. 248.)



Transcribed by Alan Thurrott

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Eighteen: Various Formula for the Rate of Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (10 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eighteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part V:

The Production of Absolute and of

Relative Surplus-Value



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN:

VARIOUS FORMULA FOR THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE



We have seen that the rate of surplus-value is represented by the following formulae:

Surplus-value (s) Surplus-value Surplus-labor



Variable Capital (v) Value of labor-power Necessary labor

The two first of these formulae represent, as a ratio of values, that which, in the third, is represented as a
ratio of the times during which those values are produced. These formulae, supplementary the one to the
other, are rigorously definite and correct. We therefore find them substantially, but not consciously,
worked out in classical Political Economy. There we meet with the following derivative formulae.

Surplus-labor Surplus-value Surplus-product
II. == ==

Working-day Value of the Product Total Product

One and the same ratio is here expressed as a ratio of labor-times, of the values in which those
labor-times are embodied, and of the products in which those values exist. It is of course understood that,
by "Value of the Product", is meant only the value newly created in a working-day, the constant part of
the value of the product being excluded.

In all of these formulae (II.), the actual degree of exploitation of labor, or the rate of surplus-value, is
falsely expressed. Let the working-day be 12 hours. Then, making the same assumptions as in former
instances, the real degree of exploitation of labor will be represented in the following proportions.

6 hours surplus-labor Surplus-value of 3 sh.



== 100



6 hours necessary labor Variable Capital of 3 sh

From formulae II. we get very differently,

6 hours surplus-labor Surplus-value of 3 sh.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch18.htm (1 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:18:22]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eighteen



== 50



Working-day of 12 hours



Value created of 6 sh



These derivative formulae express, in reality, only the proportion in which the working-day, or the value
produced by it, is divided between capitalist and laborer. If they are to be treated as direct expressions of
the degree of self-expansion of capital, the following erroneous law would hold good: Surplus-labor or
surplus-value can never reach 100%. £1} Since the surplus-labor is only an aliquot part of the
working-day, or since surplus-value is only an aliquot part of the value created, the surplus-labor must
necessarily be always less than the working-day, or the surplus-value always less than the total value
created. In order, however, to attain the ratio of 100: 100 they must be equal. In order that the
surplus-labor may absorb the whole day (i.e., an average dy of any week or year), the necessary labor
must sink to zero. But if the necessary labor vanish, so too does the surplus-labor, since it is only a
function of the former. The ratio

Surplus-labor Surplus-value
or



Working-day



Value created



can therefore never reach the limit 100/100, still less rise to 100+x/100. But not so the rate of
surplus-value, the real degree of exploitation of labor. Take, e.g., the estimate of L. de Lavergne,
according to which the English agricultural laborer gets only 1/4, the capitalist (farmer) on the other hand
3/4 of the product [2J or its value, apart from the question of how the booty is subsequently divided
between the capitalist, the landlord, and others. According to this, this surplus-labor of the English
agricultural laborer is to his necessary labor as 3: 1, which gives a rate of exploitation of 300%.

The favorite method of treating the working-day as constant in magnitude became, through the use of
formulae II., a fixed usage, because in them surplus-labor is always compared with a working-day of
given length. The same holds good when the repartition of the value produced is exclusively kept insight.
The working-day that has already been realized in given value, must necessarily be a day of given length.

The habit of representing surplus-value and value of labor-power as fractions of the value created — a
habit that originates in the capitalist mode of production itself, and whose import will hereafter be
disclosed — conceals the very transaction that characterizes capital, namely the exchange of variable
capital for living labor-power, and the consequent exclusion of the laborer from the product. Instead of
the real fact, we have false semblance of an association, in which laborer and capitalist divide the product
in proportion to the different elements which they respectively contribute towards its formation. [3]

Moreover, the formulae II. can at any time be reconverted into formulae I. If, for instance, we have

Surplus-labor of 6 hours



Working-day of 12 hours

then the necessary labor-time being 12 hours less the surplus-labor of 6 hours, we get the following
result,

Surplus-labor of 6 hours 100



Necessary labor of 6 hours



100



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch18.htm (2 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:18:22]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eighteen

There is a third formula which I have occassionally already anticipated; it is

Surplus-value Surplus-labor Unpaid labor
III. == == .



Value of labor-power Necessary labor Paid labor

After the investigations we have given above, it is no longer possible to be misled, by the formula

Unpaid labor



r

Paid labor



into concluding, that the capitalist pays for labor and not for labor-power. This formula is only a popular
expression for

Surplus -labor



Necessary labor

The capitalist pays the value, so far as price coincides with value, of the labor-power, and receives in
exchange the disposal of the living labor-power itself. His usufruct is spread over two periods. During
one the laborer produces a value that is only equal to the value of his labor-power; he produces its
equivalent. This the capitalist receives in return for his advance of the price of the labor-power, a product
ready made in the market. During the other period, the period of surplus-labor, the usufruct of the
labor-power creates a value for the capitalist, that costs him no equivalent. [4] This expenditure of
labor-power comes to him gratis. In this sense it is that surplus-labor can be called unpaid labor.

Capital, therefore, it not only, as Adam Smith says, the command over labor. It is essentially the
command over unpaid labor. All surplus-value, whatever particular form (profit, interest, or rent), it may
subsequently crystallize into, is in substance the materialization of unpaid labor. The secret of the
self-expansion of capital resolves itself into having the disposal of a definite quantity of other people's
unpaid labor.



Footnotes

JJJ Thus, e.g., in "Dritter Brief an v. Kirchmann von Rodbertus. Widerlegung der Ricardo'schen Lehre
von der Grundrente und Begrundung einer neuen Rententheorie". Berlin, 1851. 1 shall return to this letter
later on; in spite of its erroneous theory of rent, it sees through the nature of capitalist production.

NOTE ADDED IN THE 3RD GERMAN EDITION: It may be seen from this how favorably Marx
judged his predecessors, whenever he found in them real progress, or new and sound ideas. The
subsequent publications of Robertus' letters to Rud. Meyer has shown that the above acknowledgement
by Marx wants restricting to some extent. In those letters this passage occurs:

"Capital must be rescued not only from labor, but from itself, and that will be best effected, by treating
the acts of the industrial capitalist as economic and political functions, that have been delegated to him
with his capital, and by treating his profit as a form of salary, because we still know no other social
organization. But salaries may be regulated, and may also be reduced if they take too much from wages.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch18.htm (3 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:18:22]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eighteen

The irruption of Marx into Society, as I may call his book, must be warded off.... Altogether, Marx's
book is not so much an investigation into capital, as a polemic against the present form of capital, a form
which he confounds with the concept itself of capital."

("Briefe, &c, von Dr. Robertus-Jagetzow, herausgg. von Dr. Rud. Meyer", Berlin, 1881, 1, Bd. P.lll,
46. Breif von Rodbertus.) To such ideological commonplaces did the bold attack by Robertus in his
"social letters" finally dwindle down. — F.E.

\2] That part of the product which merely replaces the constant capital advanced is of course left out in
this calculation. Mr. L. de Lavergne, a blind admirer of England, is inclined to estimate the share of the
capitalist too low, rather than too high.

[3] All well-developed forms of capitalist production being forms of cooperation, nothing is, of course,
easier, than to make abstraction from their antagonistic character, and to transform them by a word into
some form of free association, as is done by A. de Laborde in "De l'Espirit d Association dans tout les
interets de la communaute". Paris 1818. H. Carey, the Yankee, occassionally performs this conjuring
trick with like success, even with the relations resulting from slavery.

[4J Although the Physiocrats could not penetrate the mystery of surplus-value, yet this much was clear to
them, viz., that it is "une richesse independante et disponible qu'il (the possessor) n'a point achetee et
qu'il vend." (Turgot: "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses", p. 11.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Nineteen: The Transformation of the Value (and Respective Price) of Labour-Power into

Wages

Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch18.htm (4 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:18:22]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VI:
Wages



CHAPTER NINETEEN:

THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE VALUE (AND RESPECTIVE PRICE)

OF LABOUR-POWER INTO WAGES



On the surface of bourgeois society the wage of the labourer appears as the price of labour, a certain
quantity of money that is paid for a certain quantity of labour. Thus people speak of the value of labour
and call its expression in money its necessary or natural price. On the other hand they speak of the
market-prices of labour, i.e., prices oscillating above or below its natural price.

But what is the value of a commodity? The objective form of the social labour expended in its
production. And how do we measure the quantity of this value? By the quantity of the labour contained
in it. How then is the value, e.g., of a 12 hour working-day to be determined?. By the 12 working-hours
contained in a working-day of 12 hours, which is an absurd tautology. £1}

In order to be sold as a commodity in the market, labour must at all events exist before it is sold. But,
could the labourer give it an independent objective existence, he would sell a commodity and not labour.
[21

Apart from these contradictions, a direct exchange of money, i.e., of realized labour, with living labour
would either do away with the law of value which only begins to develop itself freely on the basis of
capitalist production, or do away with capitalist production itself, which rests directly on wage-labour.
The working-day of 12 hours embodies itself, e.g., in a money-value of 6s. Either equivalents are
exchanged, and then the labourer receives 6s, for 12 hours' labour; the price of his labour would be equal
to the price of his product. In this case he produces no surplus-value for the buyer of his labour, the 6s.
are not transformed into capital, the basis of capitalist production vanishes. But it is on this very basis
that he sells his labour and that his labour is wage-labour. Or else he receives for 12 hours' labour less
than 6s., i.e., less than 12 hours' labour. Twelve hours' labour are exchanged against 10, 6, &tc, hours'
labour. This equalization of unequal quantities not merely does away with the determination of value.
Such a self-destructive contradiction cannot be in any way even enunciated or formulated as a law. £31

It is of no avail to deduce the exchange of more labour against less, from their difference of form, the one
being realized, the other living. £4£ This is the more absurd as the value of a commodity is determined



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (1 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

not by the quantity of labour actually realized in it, but by the quantity of living labour necessary for its
production. A commodity represents, say, 6 working-hours. If an invention is made by which it can be
produced in 3 hours, the value, even of the commodity already produced, falls by half. It represents now
3 hours of social labour instead of the 6 formerly necessary. It is the quantity of labour required for its
production, not the realized form of that labour, by which the amount of the value of a commodity is
determined.

That which comes directly face to face with the possessor of money on the market, is in fact not labour,
but the labourer. What the latter sells is his labour-power. As soon as his labour actually begins, it has
already ceased to belong to him; it can therefore no longer be sold by him. Labour is the substance, and
the immanent measure of value, but has itself no value. [51

In the expression "value of labour," the idea of value is not only completely obliterated, but actually
reversed. It is an expression as imaginary as the value of the earth. These imaginary expressions, arise,
however, from the relations of production themselves. They are categories for the phenomenal forms of
essential relations. That in their appearance things often represent themselves in inverted form is pretty
well known in every science except Political Economy. [6[

Classical Political Economy borrowed from every-day life the category "price of labour" without further
criticism, and then simply asked the question, how is this price determined? It soon recognized that the
change in the relations of demand and supply explained in regard to the price of labour, as of all other
commodities, nothing except its changes i.e., the oscillations of the market-price above or below a certain
mean. If demand and supply balance, the oscillation of prices ceases, all other conditions remaining the
same. But then demand and supply also cease to explain anything. The price of labour, at the moment
when demand and supply are in equilibrium, is its natural price, determined independently of the relation
of demand and supply. And how this price is determined is just the question. Or a larger period of
oscillations in the market-price is taken, e.g., a year, and they are found to cancel one the other, leaving a
mean average quantity, a relatively constant magnitude. This had naturally to be determined otherwise
than by its own compensating variations. This price which always finally predominates over the
accidental market-prices of labour and regulates them, this "necessary price" (Physiocrats) or "natural
price" of labour (Adam Smith) can, as with all other commodities, be nothing else than its value
expressed in money. In this way Political Economy expected to penetrate athwart the accidental prices of
labour, to the value of labour. As with other commodities, this value was determined by the cost of
production. But what is the cost of production-of the labourer, i.e., the cost of producing or reproducing
the labourer himself? This question unconsciously substituted itself in Political Economy for the original
one; for the search after the cost of production of labour as such turned in a circle and never left the spot.
What economists therefore call value of labour, is in fact the value of labour-power, as it exists in the
personality of the labourer, which is as different from its function, labour, as a machine is from the work
it performs. Occupied with the difference between the market-price of labour and its so-called value,
with the relation of this value to the rate of profit, and to the values of the commodities produced by
means of labour, &tc, they never discovered that the course of the analysis had led not only from the
market-prices of labour to its presumed value, but had led to the resolution of this value of labour itself
into the value of labour-power. Classical economy never arrived at a consciousness of the results of its
own analysis; it accepted uncritically the categories "value of labour," "natural price of labour," &tc.,. as
final and as adequate expressions for the value-relation under consideration, and was thus led, as will be
seen later, into inextricable confusion and contradiction, while it offered to the vulgar economists a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (2 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

secure basis of operations for their shallowness, which on principle worships appearances only.

Let us next see how value (and price) of labour-power, present themselves in this transformed condition
as wages.

We know that the daily value of labour-power is calculated upon a certain length of the labourer's life, to
which, again, corresponds a certain length of working-day. Assume the habitual working-day as 12
hours, the daily value of labour-power as 3s., the expression in money of a value that embodies 6 hours
of labour. If the labourer receives 3s., then he receives the value of his labour-power functioning through
12 hours. If, now, this value of a day's labour-power is expressed as the value of a day's labour itself, we
have the formula: Twelve hours' labour has a value of 3s. The value of labour-power thus determines the
value of labour, or, expressed in money, its necessary price. If, on the other hand, the price of
labour-power differs from its value, in like manner the price of labour differs from its so-called value.

As the value of labour is only an irrational expression for the value of labour-power, it follows, of course,
that the value of labour must always be less than the value it produces, for the capitalist always makes
labour-power work longer than is necessary for the reproduction of its own value. In the above example,
the value of the labour-power that functions through 12 hours is 3s., a value for the reproduction of
which 6 hours are required. The value which the labour-power produces is, on the other hand, 6s.,
because it, in fact, functions during 12 hours, and the value it produces depends, not on its own value, but
on the length of time it is in action. Thus, we have a result absurd at first sight that labour which creates a
value of 6s. possesses a value of 3s. [7]

We see, further: The value of 3s. by which a part only of the working-day-i.e., 6 hours' labour-is paid for,
appears as the value or price of the whole working-day of 12 hours, which thus includes 6 hours unpaid
for. The wage-form thus extinguishes every trace of the division of the working-day into necessary
labour and surplus-labour, into paid and unpaid labour. All labour appears as paid labour. In the corvee,
the labour of the worker for himself, and his compulsory labour for his lord, differ in space and time in
the clearest possible way. In slave labour, even that part of the working-day in which the slave is only
replacing the value of his own means of existence, in which, therefore, in fact, he works for himself
alone, appears as labour for his master. All the slave's labour appears as unpaid labour. £8} In wage
labour, on the contrary, even surplus-labour, or unpaid labour, appears as paid. There the
property-relation conceals the labour of the slave for himself; here the money-relation conceals the
unrequited labour of the wage labourer.

Hence, we may understand the decisive importance of the transformation of value and price of
labour-power into the form of wages, or into the value and price of labour itself. This phenomenal form,
which makes the actual relation invisible, and, indeed, shows the direct opposite of that relation, forms
the basis of all the juridical notions of both labourer and capitalist, of all the mystifications of the
capitalistic mode of production, of all its illusions as to liberty, of all the apologetic shifts of the vulgar
economists.

If history took a long time to get at the bottom of the mystery of wages, nothing, on the other hand, is
more easy to understand than the necessity, the raison d' etre, of this phenomenon.

The exchange between capital and labour at first presents itself to the mind in the same guise as the
buying and selling of all other commodities. The buyer gives a certain sum of money, the seller an article
of a nature different from money. The jurist's consciousness recognizes in this, at most, a material

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (3 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

difference, expressed in the juridically equivalent formula: "Do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut des, facio ut
facias." [91

Furthermore, exchange-value and use-value, being intrinsically incommensurable magnitudes, the
expressions "value of labour," "price of labour," do not seem more irrational than the expressions "value
of cotton," "price of cotton." Moreover, the labourer is paid after he has given his labour. In its function
of means of payment, money realizes subsequently the value or price of the article supplied-i.e., in this
particular case, the value or price of the labour supplied. Finally, the use-value supplied by the labourer
to the capitalist is not, in fact, his labour-power, but its function, some definite useful labour, the work of
tailoring, shoemaking, spinning, &tc. That this same labour is, on the other hand, the universal
value-creating element, and thus possesses a property by which it differs from all other commodities, is
beyond the cognizance of the ordinary mind.

Let us put ourselves in the place of the labourer who receives for 12 hours' labour, say the value
produced by 6 hours' labour, say 3s. For him, in fact, his 12 hours' labour is the means of buying the 3s.
The value of his labour-power may vary, with the value of his usual means of subsistence, from 3 to 4
shillings, or from 3 to 2 shillings; or, if the value of his labour-power remains constant, its price may, in
consequence of changing relations of demand and supply, rise to 4s. or fall to 2s. He always gives 12
hours of labour. Every change in the amount of the equivalent that he receives appears to him, therefore,
necessarily as a change in the value or price of his 12 hours' work. This circumstance misled Adam
Smith, who treated the working-day as a constant quantity, [101 to the assertion that the value of labour is
constant, although the value of the means of subsistence may vary, and the same working-day, therefore,
may represent itself in more or less money for the labourer.

Let us consider, on the other hand, the capitalist. He wishes to receive as much labour as possible for as
little money as possible. Practically, therefore, the only thing that interests him is the difference between
the price of labour-power and the value which its function creates. But, then, he tries to buy all
commodities as cheaply as possible, and always accounts for his profit by simple cheating, by buying
under, and selling over the value. Hence, he never comes to see that, if such a thing as the value of labour
really existed, and he really paid this value, no capital would exist, his money would not be turned into
capital.

Moreover, the actual movement of wages presents phenomena which seem to prove that not the value of
labour-power is paid, but the value of its function, of labour itself. We may reduce these phenomena to
two great classes: 1.) Change of wages with the changing length of the working-day. One might as well
conclude that not the value of a machine is paid, but that of its working, because it costs more to hire a
machine for a week than for a day. 2.) The individual difference in the wages of different labourers who
do the same kind of work. We find this individual difference, but are not deceived by it, in the system of
slavery, where, frankly and openly, without any circumlocution, labour-power itself is sold. Only, in the
slave system, the advantage of a labour-power above the average, and the disadvantage of a
labour-power below the average, affects the slave-owner; in the wage-labour system, it affects the
labourer himself, because his labour-power is, in the one case, sold by himself, in the other, by a third
person.

For the rest, in respect to the phenomenal form, "value and price of labour," or "wages," as contrasted
with the essential relation manifested therein, viz., the value and price of labour-power, the same
difference holds that holds in respect to all phenomena and their hidden substratum. The former appear



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (4 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

directly and spontaneously as current modes of thought; the latter must first be discovered by science.
Classical Political Economy nearly touches the true relation of things, without, however, consciously
formulating it. This it cannot, so long as it sticks in its bourgeois skin.



Footnotes

f 1 1 "Mr.Ricardo ingeniously enough avoids a difficulty which, on a first view, threatens to encumber his
doctrine — that value depends on the quantity of labour employed in production. If this principle is
rigidly adhered to, it follows that the value of labour depends on the quantity of labour employed in
producing it — which is evidently absurd. By a dexterous turn, therefore, Mr. Ricardo makes the value of
labour depend on the quantity of labour required to produce wages; or, to give him the benefit of his own
language, he maintains, that the value of labour is to be estimated by the quantity of labour required to
produce wages; by which he means the quantity of labour required to produce the money or commodities
given to the labourer. This is similar to saying, that the value of cloth is estimated, not by the quantity of
labour bestowed on its production, but by the quantity of labour bestowed on the production of the silver,
for which the cloth is exchanged." — "A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, &tc, of Value," pp. 50, 51.

\2] "If you call labour a commodity, it is not like a commodity which is first produced in order to
exchange, and then brought to market where it must exchange with other commodities according to the
respective quantities of each which there may be in the market at the time; labour is created the moment
it is brought to market; nay, it is brought to market before it is created." — "Observations on Certain
Verbal Disputes," &tc, pp. 75, 76.

[31 "Treating labour as a commodity, and capital, the produce of labour, as another, then, if the values of
these two commodities were regulated by equal quantities of labour, a given amount of labour would ...
exchange for that quantity of capital which had been produced by the same amount of labour; antecedent
labour would ... exchange for the same amount as present labour. But the value of labour in relation to
other commodities ... is determined not by equal quantities of labour." — E. G. Wakefield in his edition
of Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations," Vol. I., London, 1836, p. 231, note.

[41 "There has to be a new agreement" (a new edition of the social contract!) "that whenever there is an
exchange of work done for work to be done, the latter" (the capitalist) "is to receive a higher value than
the former" (the worker). — Simonde (de Sismondi), "De la Richesse Commerciale," Geneva, 1803, Vol
I, p. 37.

[51 "Labour the exclusive standard of value ... the creator of all wealth, no commodity." Thomas
Hodgskin, "Popul. Polit. Econ.," p. 186.

[61 On the other hand, the attempt to explain such expressions as merely poetic license only shows the
impotence of the analysis. Hence, in answer to Proudhon's phrase; "Labour is called value, not as being a
commodity itself, but in view of the values supposed to be potentially embodied in it. The value of labour
is a figurative expression," &tc. I have remarked: "In labour, commodity, which is a frightful reality, he
(Proudhon) sees nothing but a grammatical ellipsis. The whole of existing society, then, based upon
labour commodity, is henceforth based upon a poetic license, on a figurative expression. Does society
desire to eliminate all the inconveniences which trouble it, it has only to eliminate all the ill-sounding

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (5 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

terms. Let it change the language, and for that it has only to address itself to the Academy and ask it for a
new edition of its dictionary." (Karl Marx, "Misere de la Philosophie," pp. 34, 35.) It is naturally still
more convenient to understand by value nothing at all. Then one can without difficulty subsume
everything under this category. Thus, e.g., J. B. Say: "What is value?" Answer: "That which a thing is
worth"; and what is "price"? Answer: "The value of a thing expressed in money." And why has
agriculture a value? Answer: "Because one sets a price on it." Therefore value is what a thing is worth,
and the land has its "value," because its value is "expressed in money." This is, anyhow, a very simple
way of explaining the why and the wherefore of things.

\1] Cf. "Zur Kritik &tc", p. 40, where I state that, in the portion of that work that deals with Capital, this
problem will be solved: "How does production, on the basis of exchange-value determined simply by
labour-time, lead to the result that the exchange-value of labour is less than the exchange- value of its
product?"

[8] The "Morning Star", a London Free-trade organ, naif to silliness, protested again and again during the
American Civil War, with all the moral indignation of which man is capable, that the Negro in the
"Confederate States" worked absolutely for nothing. It should have compared the daily cost of such a
Negro with that of the free workman in the East-end of London.

[91 1 give in order that you may give; I give in order that you may produce; I produce so that you may
give; I produce so that you may produce.

f 101 Adam Smith only accidentally alludes to the variation of the working-day when he is referring to
piece-wages.



Transcribed by Bill McDorman
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty: Time-Wages
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (6 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VI:
Wages



CHAPTER TWENTY:
TIME-WAGES



Wages themselves again take many forms, a fact not recognizable in the ordinary economic treatises
which, exclusively interested in the material side of the question, neglect every difference of form. An
exposition of all these forms however, belongs to the special study of wage labour, not therefore to this
work. Still the two fundamental forms must be briefly worked out here.

The sale of labour-power, as will be remembered, takes place for a definite period of time. The converted
form under which the daily, weekly, &tc, value of labour-power presents itself, is hence that of time
wages, therefore day-wages, &tc.

Next it is to be noted that the laws set forth, in the 17th chapter, on the changes in the relative magnitudes
of price of labour-power and surplus-value, pass by a simple transformation of form, into laws of wages.
Similarly the distinction between the exchange-value of labour power, and the sum of the necessaries of
life into which this value is converted, now reappears as the distinction between nominal and real wages.
It would be useless to repeat here, with regard to the phenomenal form, what has been already worked
out in the substantial form. We limit ourselves therefore to a few points characteristic of time- wages.

The sum of money £1} which the labourer receives for his daily or weekly labour, forms the amount of
his nominal wages, or of his wages estimated in value. But it is clear that according to the length of the
working-day, that is, according to the amount of actual labour daily supplied, the same daily or weekly
wage may represent very different prices of labour, i.e., very different sums of money for the same
quantity of labour. [2] We must, therefore, in considering time-wages, again distinguish between the

sum-total of the daily or weekly wages, &tc, and the price of labour. How then, to find this price, i.e.,
the money- value of a given quantity of labour? The average price of labour is found, when the average
daily value of the labour-power is divided by the average number of hours in the working-day. If, e.g.,
the daily value of labour-power is 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 working-hours, and if the
working-day is 12 hours, the price of 1 working hour is 3/12 shillings = 3d. The price of the
working-hour thus found serves as the unit measure for the price of labour.

It follows, therefore, that the daily and weekly wages, &tc, may remain the same, although the price of
labour falls constantly. If, e.g., the habitual working-day is 10 hours and the daily value of the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

labour-power 3s., the price of the working-hour is 3 3/5d. It falls to 3s. as soon as the working-day rises
to 12 hours, to 2 2/5d as soon as it rises to 15 hours. Daily or weekly wages remain, despite all this,
unchanged. On the contrary, the daily or weekly wages may rise, although the price of labour remains
constant or even falls. If, e.g., the working-day is 10 hours, and the daily value of labour-power 3
shillings, the price of one working-hour is 3 3/5d. If the labourer, in consequence of increase of trade,
works 12 hours, the price of labour remaining the same, his daily wage now rises to 3 shillings 7i5/d.
without any variation in the price of labour. The same result might follow if, instead of the extensive
amount of labour, its intensive amount increased. [3] The rise of the nominal daily or weekly wages may
therefore be accompanied by a price of labour that remains stationary or falls. The same holds as to the
income of the labourer's family, as soon as the quantity of labour expended by the head of the family is
increased by the labour of the members of his family. There are, therefore, methods of lowering the price
of labour independent of the reduction of the nominal daily or weekly wages. [4]

As a general law it follows that, given the amount of daily or weekly labour, &tc, the daily or weekly
wages depend on the price of labour which itself varies either with the value of labour-power, or with the
difference between its price and its value. Given, on the other hand, the price of labour, the daily or
weekly wages depend on the quantity of the daily or weekly labour.

The unit-measure for time-wages, the price of the working-hour, is the quotient of the value of a day's
labour-power, divided by the number of hours of the average working-day. Let the latter be 12 hours, and
the daily value of labour-power 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 hours of labour. Under these
circumstances the price of a working hour is 3d.; the value produced in it is 6d. If the labourer is now
employed less than 12 hours (or less than 6 days in the week), e.g., only 6 or 8 hours, he receives, with
this price of labour, only 2s. or Is. 6d. a day. [5\ As on our hypothesis he must work on the average 6
hours daily, in order to produce a day's wage corresponding merely to the value of his labour power, as
according to the same hypothesis he works only half of every hour for himself, and half for the capitalist,
it is clear that he cannot obtain for himself the value of the product of 6 hours if he is employed less than
12 hours. In previous chapters we saw the destructive consequences of over-work; here we find the
sources of the sufferings that result to the labourer from his insufficient employment.

If the hour's wage is fixed so that the capitalist does not bind himself to pay a day's or a week's wage, but
only to pay wages for the hours during which he chooses to employ the labourer, he can employ him for
a shorter time than that which is originally the basis of the calculation of the hour-wage, or the
unit-measure of the price of labour. Since this unit is determined by the ratio

daily value of labour-power



working-day of a given number of hours'



it, of course, loses all meaning as soon as the working-day ceases to contain a definite number of hours.
The connection between the paid and the unpaid labour is destroyed. The capitalist can now wring from
the labour a certain quantity of surplus-labour without allowing him the labour-time necessary for his
own subsistence. He can annihilate all regularity of employment, and according to his own convenience,
caprice, and the interest of the moment, make the most enormous over-work alternate with relative or
absolute cessation of work. He can, under the pretense of paying "the normal price of labour,"
abnormally lengthen the working-day without any corresponding compensation to the labourer. Hence
the perfectly rational revolt in 1860 of the London labourers, employed in the building trades, against the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

attempt of the capitalists to impose on them this sort of wage by the hour. The legal limitation of the
working-day puts an end to such mischief, although not, of course, to the diminution of employment
caused by the competition of machinery, by changes in the quality of the labourers employed, and by
crises partial or general.

With an increasing daily or weekly wage the price of labour may remain nominally constant, and yet may
fall below its normal level. This occurs every time that, the price of labour (reckoned per working-hour)
remaining constant, the working-day is prolonged beyond its customary length. If in the fraction:

daily value of labour power

working-day

the denominator increases, the numerator increases yet more rapidly. The value of labour-power, as
dependent on its wear and tear, increases with the duration of its functioning, and in more rapid
proportion than the increase of that duration. In many branches of industry where time-wage is the
general rule without legal limits to the working-time, the habit has, therefore, spontaneously grown up of
regarding the working day as normal only up to a certain point, e.g., up to the expiration of the tenth hour
("normal working-day," "the day's work," "the regular hours of work"). Beyond this limit the
working-time is over-time, and is, taking the hour as unit-measure, paid better ("extra pay"), although
often in a proportion ridiculously small. £61 The normal working-day exists here as a fraction of the
actual working-day, and the latter, often during the whole year, lasts longer than the former. £71 The
increase in the price of labour with the extension of the working-day beyond a certain normal limit, takes
such a shape in various British industries that the low price of labour during the so-called normal time
compels the labourer to work during the better paid over-time, if he wishes to obtain a sufficient wage at
all. £8£ Legal limitation of the working-day puts an end to these amenities. £91

It is a fact generally known that, the longer the working-days, in any branch of industry, the lower are the
wages, f 101 A- Redgrave, factory inspector, illustrates this by a comparative review of the 20 years from
1839-1859, according to which wages rose in the factories under the 10 Hours Law, whilst they fell in
the factories in which the work lasted 14 to 15 hours daily, fill

From the law, "the price of labour being given, the daily or weekly wage depends on the quantity of
labour expended," it follows, first of all, that the lower the price of labour, the greater must be the
quantity of labour, or the longer must be the working-day for the labourer to secure even a miserable
average wage. The lowness of the price of labour acts here as a stimulus to the extension of the
labour- time. f!21

On the other hand, the extension of the working-time produces, in its turn, a fall in the price of labour,
and with this a fall in the day's or week's wages.

The determination of the price of labour by:

daily value of labour power



working day of a given number of hours

shows that a mere prolongation of the working-day lowers the price of labour, if no compensation steps

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

in. But the same circumstances which allow the capitalist in the long run to prolong the working-day,
also allow him first, and compel him finally, to nominally lower the price of labour until the total price of
the increased number of hours is lowered, and, therefore, the daily or weekly wage. Reference to two
circumstances is sufficient here. If one man does the work of 1 1/2 or 2 men, the supply of labour
increases, although the supply of labour-power on the market remains constant. The competition thus
created between the labourers allows the capitalist to beat down the price of labour, whilst the falling
price of labour allows him, on the other hand, to screw up still further the working-time, f 131 Soon,
however, this command over abnormal quantities of unpaid labour, i.e., quantities in excess of the
average social amount, becomes a source of competition amongst the capitalists themselves. A part of the
price of the commodity consists of the price of labour. The unpaid part of the labour-price need not be
reckoned in the price of the commodity. It may be presented to the buyer. This is the first step to which
competition leads. The second step to which it drives is to exclude also from the selling price of the
commodity at least a part of the abnormal surplus-value created by the extension of the working-day. In
this way, an abnormally low selling price of the commodity arises, at first sporadically, and becomes
fixed by degrees; a lower selling price which henceforward becomes the constant basis of a miserable
wage for an excessive working-time, as originally it was the product of these very circumstances. This
movement is simply indicated here, as the analysis of competition does not belong to this part of our
subject. Nevertheless, the capitalist may, for a moment, speak for himself. "In Birmingham there is so
much competition of masters one against another that many are obliged to do things as employers that
they would otherwise be ashamed of; and yet no more money is made, but only the public gets the
benefit." |T41 The reader will remember the two sorts of London bakers, of whom one sold the bread at
its full price (the "full-priced" bakers), the other below its normal price ("the under-priced," "the
undersellers"). The "full-priced" denounced their rivals before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry:
"They only exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for
12 hours' wages.... The unpaid labour of the men was made ... the source whereby the competition was
carried on, and continues so to this day.... The competition among the master bakers is the cause of the
difficulty in getting rid of night-work. An underseller, who sells his bread below the cost-price according
to the price of flour, must make it up by getting more out of the labour of the men.... If I got only 12
hours' work out of my men, and my neighbor got 18 or 20, he must beat me in the selling price. If the
men could insist on payment for over-work, this would be set right.... A large number of those employed
by the undersellers are foreigners and youths, who are obliged to accept almost any wages they can
obtain." J151

This jeremiad is also interesting because it shows how the appearance only of the relations of production
mirrors itself in the brain of the capitalist. The capitalist does not know that the normal price of labour
also includes a definite quantity of unpaid labour, and that this very unpaid labour is the normal source of
his gain. The category of surplus labour-time does not exist at all for him, since it is included in the
normal working-day, which he thinks he has paid for in the day's wages. But over- time does exist for
him, the prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits corresponding with the usual price of labour.
Face to face with his underselling competitor, he even insists upon extra pay for this over-time. He again
does not know that this extra pay includes unpaid labour, just as well as does the price of the customary
hour of labour. For example, the price of one hour of the 12 hours' working-day is 3d., say the
value-product of half a working-hour, whilst the price of the over-time working-hour is 4d., or the
value-product of 2/3 of a working hour. In the first case the capitalist appropriates to himself one-half, in
the second, one-third of the working-hour without paying for it.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty



Footnotes

T 1 1 The value of money itself is here always supposed constant.

[21 "The price of labour is the sum paid for a given quantity of labour." (Sir Edward West, "Price of Corn
and Wages of Labour," London, 1836, p. 67.) West is the author of the anonymous "Essay on the
Application of Capital to Land." by a Fellow of the University College of Oxford, London, 1815. An
epoch-making work in the history of Political Economy.

\3] "The wages of labour depend upon the price of labour and the quantity of labour performed.... An
increase in the wages of labour does not necessarily imply an enhancement of the price of labour. From
fuller employment, and greater exertions, the wages of labour may be considerably increased, while the
price of labour may continue the same." (West, op. cit., pp. 67, 68, 112.) The main question: "How is the
price of labour determined?" West, however, dismisses with mere banalities.

[41 This is perceived by the fanatical representative of the industrial bourgeoisie of the 18th century, the
author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" often quoted by us, although he puts the matter in a
confused way: "It is the quantity of labour and not the price of it" (he means by this the nominal daily or
weekly wages) "that is determined by the price of provisions and other necessaries: reduce the price of
necessaries very low, and of course you reduce the quantity of labour in proportion. Master
manufacturers know that there are various ways of raising and felling the price of labour, besides that of
altering its nominal amount." (op. cit., pp. 48, 61.) In his "Three Lectures on the Rate of Wages,"
London, 1830, in which N. W. Senior uses West's work without mentioning it, he says: "The labourer is
principally interested in the amount of wages" (p. 14), that is to say, the labourer is principally interested
in what he receives, the nominal sum of his wages, not in that which he gives, the amount of labour!

[51 The effect of such an abnormal lessening of employment is quite different from that of a general
reduction of the working-day, enforced by law. The former has nothing to do with the absolute length of
the working-day, and may occur just as well in a working-day of 15, as of 6 hours. The normal price of
labour is in the first case calculated on the labourer working 15 hours, in the second case on his working

6 hours a day on the average. The result is therefore the same, if he in the one case is employed only for

7 1/2, in the other only for 3 hours.

[61 "The rate of payment for overtime (in lace-making) is so small, from 1/2 d. and 3/4 d. to 2d. per hour,
that it stands in painful contrast to the amount of injury produced to the health and stamina of the
workpeople.... The small amount thus earned is also often obliged to be spent in extra nourishment."
("Child.Empl.Com., II. Rep.," p. xvi., n. 1 17.)

[71 E.g., in paper- staining before the recent introduction into this trade of the Factory Act. "We work on
with no stoppage for meals, so that the day's work of 10 1/2 hours is finished by 4:30 p.m., and all after
that is over-time, and we seldom leave off working before 6 p.m., so that we are really working over-time
the whole year round." (Mr. Smith's "Evidence in Child. Empl. Com., 1. Rep.," p. 125.)

[81 E.g., in the Scotch bleaching- works. "In some parts of Scotland this trade" (before the introduction of
the Factory Act in 1862) "was carried on by a system of over-time, i.e., ten hours a day were the regular

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty

hours of work, for which a nominal wage of Is. 2d. per day was paid to a man, there being every day
over-time for three or four hours, paid at the rate of 3d. per hour. The effect of this system ... a man could
not earn more than 8s. per week when working the ordinary hours ... without over-time they could not
earn a fair day's wages." ("Rept. of Insp. of Factories," April 30th, 1863, p. 10.) "The higher wages, for
getting adult males to work longer hours, are a temptation too strong to be resisted." ("Rept. of Insp. of
Fact.," April 30th, 1848, p. 5.) The book-binding trade in the city of London employs very many young
girls from 14 to 15 years old, and that under indentures which prescribe certain definite hours of labour.
Nevertheless, they work in the last week of each month until 10, 11, 12, or 1 o'clock at night, along with
the older labourers, in a very mixed company. "The masters tempt them by extra pay and supper," which
they eat in neighboring public houses. The great debauchery thus produced among these "young
immortals" ("Children's Employment Comm., V. Rept.," p. 44, n. 191) is compensated by the fact that
among the rest many Bibles and religious books are bound by them.

[9J See "Reports of Insp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1863, p. 10. With very accurate appreciation of the state of
things, the London labourers employed in the building trades declared, during the great strike and
lock-out of 1860, that they would only accept wages by the hour under two conditions: (1), that, with the
price of the working-hour, a normal working day of 9 and 10 hours respectively should be fixed, and that
the price of the hour for the 10 hours, working-day should be higher than that for the hour of the 9 hours
working-day; (2), that every hour beyond the normal working-day should be reckoned as over-time and
proportionally more highly paid.

f 101 "It is a very notable thing, too, that where long hours are the rule, small wages are also so." ("Report
of Insp. of Fact.," 31st. Oct., 1863, p. 9.) "The work which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is, for the
most part, excessively prolonged." ("Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, p. 15.)

rill "Report of Inspectors of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, pp. 31, 32.

fl21 The hand nail-makers in England, e.g., have, on account of the low price of labour, to work 15 hours
a day in order to hammer out their miserable weekly wage. "It's a great many hours in a day (6 a.m. to 8
p.m.), and he has to work hard all the time to get II d. or Is., and there is the wear of the tools, the cost of
firing, and something for waste iron to go out of this, which takes off altogether 2 l/2d. or 3d."
("Children's Employment Com., III. Report," p. 136, n. 671.) The women earn by the same working-time
a week's wage of only 5 shillings. (1. c, p. 137, n. 674.)

f 131 If a factory-hand, e.g., refused to work the customary long hours, "he would very shortly be replaced
by somebody who would work any length of time, and thus be thrown out of employment." ("Reports of
Inspectors of Factories," 30th April, 1848. Evidence, p. 39, n. 58.) "If one man performs the work of
two... the rate of profits will generally be raised ... in consequence of the additional supply of labour
having diminished its price." (Senior, 1. c, p. 15.)

f 141 "Children's Employment Com., Ill Rep.," Evidence, p. 66, n. 22.

f 151 "Report, &tc, Relative to the Grievances Complained of by the Journeymen Bakers." London, 1862,
p. 411, and ib. Evidence, notes 479, 359, 27. Anyhow the full-priced bakers, as was mentioned above,
and as their spokesman, Bennett, himself admits, make their men "generally begin work at 1 1 p.m. ... up
to 8 o'clock the next morning.... They are then engaged all day long ... as late as 7 o'clock in the
evening." (1. c, p. 22.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty



Transcribed by Bill McDorman
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-One: Piece-Wages
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch20.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:30]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VI:
Wages



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE:
PIECE-WAGES



Wages by the piece are nothing else than a converted form of wages by time, just as wages by time are a
converted form of the value or price of labour-power.

In piece-wages it seems at first sight as if the use-value bought from the labourer was, not the function of
his labour-power, living labour, but labour already realized in the product, and as if the price of this
labour was determined, not as with time-wages, by the fraction



daily value of labour-power



the working day of a given number of hours
but by the capacity for work of producer. JJJ



The confidence that trusts in this appearance ought to receive a first severe shock from the fact that both
forms of wages exist side by side, simultaneously, in the same branches of industry; e.g., "the
compositors of London, as a general rule, work by the piece, time-work being the exception, while those
in the country work by the day, the exception being work by the piece. The shipwrights of the port of
London work by the job or piece, while those of all other parts work by the day." [2]

In the same saddlery shops of London, often for the same work, piece-wages are paid to the French,
time-wages to the English. In the regular factories in which throughout piece-wages predominate,
particular kinds of work are unsuitable to this form of wage, and are therefore paid by time. J3] But it is,
moreover, self-evident that the difference of form in the payment of wages alters in no way their essential
nature, although the one form may be more favorable to the development of capitalist production than the
other.

Let the ordinary working-day contain 12 hours of which 6 are paid, 6 unpaid. Let its value-product be 6
shillings, that of one hour's labour therefore 6d. Let us suppose that, as the result of experience, a
labourer who works with the average amount of intensity and skill, who, therefore, gives in fact only the
time socially necessary to the production of an article, supplies in 12 hours 24 pieces, either distinct



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

products or measurable parts of a continuous whole. Then the value of these 24 pieces, after, subtraction
of the portion of constant capital contained in them, is 6 shillings, and the value of a single piece 3d. The
labourer receives 1 l/2d. per piece, and thus earns in 12 hours 3 shillings. Just as, with time-wages, it
does not matter whether we assume that the labourer works 6 hours for himself and 6 hours for the
capitalist, or half of every hour for himself, and the other half for the capitalist, so here it does not matter
whether we say that each individual piece is half paid, and half unpaid for, or that the price of 12 pieces
is the equivalent only of the value of the labour-power, whilst in the other 12 pieces surplus-value is
incorporated.

The form of piece-wages is just as irrational as that of time-wages. Whilst in our example two pieces of a
commodity, after subtraction of the value of the means of production consumed in them, are worth 6d. as
being the product of one hour, the labourer receives for them a price of 3d. Piece-wages do not, in fact,
distinctly express any relation of value. It is not, therefore, a question of measuring the value of the piece
by the working-time incorporated in it, but on the contrary, of measuring the working-time the labourer
has expended by the number of pieces he has produced. In time-wages, the labour is measured by its
immediate duration; in piece-wages, by the quantity of products in which the labour has embodied itself
during a given time. [4J The price of labour time itself is finally determined by the equation: value of a
day's labour = daily value of labour-power. Piece-wage is, therefore, only a modified form of time-wage.

Let us now consider a little more closely the characteristic peculiarities of piece- wages.

The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work itself, which must be of average perfection if the
piece-price is to be paid in full. Piece-wages become, from this point of view, the most fruitful source of
reductions of wages and capitalistic cheating.

They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the intensity of labour. Only the working-time which
is embodied in a quantum of commodities determined beforehand, and experimentally fixed, counts as
socially necessary working-time, and is paid as such. In the larger workshops of the London tailors,
therefore, a certain piece of work, a waistcoat, e.g., is called an hour, or half an hour, the hour at 6d. By
practice it is known how much is the average product of one hour. With new fashions, repairs, &tc, a
contest arises between master and labourer as to whether a particular piece of work is one hour, and so
on, until here also experience decides. Similarly in the London furniture workshops, &tc. If the labourer
does not possess the average capacity, if he cannot in consequence supply a certain minimum of work per
day, he is dismissed. [51

Since the quality and intensity of the work are here controlled by the form of wage itself,
superintendence of labour becomes in great part superfluous. Piece- wages therefore lay the foundation of
the modern "domestic labour," described above, as well as of a hierarchically organized system of
exploitation and oppression. The latter has two fundamental forms. On the one hand, piece-wages
facilitate the interposition of parasites between the capitalist and the wage-labourer, the "sub-letting of
labour. " The gain of these middlemen comes entirely from the difference between the labour-price which
the capitalist pays, and the part of that price which they actually allow to reach the labourer. [6\ In
England this system is characteristically called the "sweating system." On the other hand, piece-wage
allows the capitalist to make a contract for so much per piece with the head labourer-in manufactures
with the chief of some group, in mines with the extractor of the coal, in the factory with the actual
machine-worker — at a price for which the head labourer himself undertakes the enlisting and payment
of his assistant work people. The exploitation of the labourer by capital is here effected through the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

exploitation of the labourer by the labourer. [71

Given piece-wage, it is naturally the personal interest of the labourer to strain his labour-power as
intensely as possible; this enables the capitalist to raise more easily the normal degree of intensity of
labour. [81 It is moreover now the personal interest of the labourer to lengthen the working-day, since
with it his daily or weekly wages rise. [91 This gradually brings on a reaction like that already described
in time-wages, without reckoning that the prolongation of the working-day, even if the piece wage
remains constant, includes of necessity a fall in the price of the labour.

In time-wages, with few exceptions, the same wage holds for the same kind of work, whilst in
piece-wages, though the price of the working time is measured by a certain quantity of product, the day's
or week's wage will vary with the individual differences of the labourers, of whom one supplies in a
given time the minimum of product only, another the average, a third more than the average. With regard
to actual receipts there is, therefore, great variety according to the different skill, strength, energy,
staying-power, &tc, of the individual labourers. flQl Of course this does not alter the general relations
between capital and wage-labour. First, the individual differences balance one another in the workshop as
a whole, which thus supplies in a given working-time the average product, and the total wages paid will
be the average wages of that particular branch of industry. Second, the proportion between wages and
surplus-value remains unaltered, since the mass of surplus labour supplied by each particular labourer
corresponds with the wage received by him. But the wider scope that piece-wage gives to individuality
tends to develop on the one hand that individuality, and with it the sense of liberty, independence, and
self-control of the labourers, and on the other, their competition one with another. Piece-work has,
therefore, a tendency, while raising individual wages above the average, to lower this average itself. But
where a particular rate of piece-wage has for a long time been fixed by tradition, and its lowering,
therefore, presented especial difficulties, the masters, in such exceptional cases, sometimes had recourse
to its compulsory transformation into time-wages. Hence, e.g., in 1860 a great strike among the
ribbon-weavers of Coventry, fill Piece-wage is finally one of the chief supports of the hour-system
described in the preceding chapter. fl21

From what has been shown so far, it follows that piece-wage is the form of wages most in harmony with
the capitalist mode of production. Although by no means new — it figures side by side with time-wages
officially in the French and English labour statutes of the 14th century — it only conquers a larger field
for action during the period of manufacture, properly so-called. In the stormy youth of modern industry,
especially from 1797 to 1815, it served as a lever for the lengthening of the working-day, and the
lowering of wages. Very important materials for the fluctuation of wages during that period are to be
found in the Blue books: "Report and Evidence from the Select Committee on Petitions respecting the
Corn Laws" (Parliamentary Session of 1813-14), and "Report from the Lords' Committee, on the State of
the Growth, Commerce, and Consumption of Grain, and all Laws relating thereto" (Session of 1814-15).
Here we find documentary evidence of the constant lowering of the price of labour from the beginning of
the anti-Jacobin War. In the weaving industry, e.g., piece-wages had fallen so low that, in spite of the
very great lengthening of the working-day, the daily wages were then lower than before. "The real
earnings of the cotton weaver are now far less than they were; his superiority over the common labourer,
which at first was very great, has now almost entirely ceased. Indeed... the difference in the wages of
skillful and common labour is far less now than at any former period." fl31 How little the increased
intensity and extension of labour through piece-wages benefited the agricultural proletariat, the following
passage borrowed from a work on the side of the landlords and farmers shows: "By far the greater part of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

agricultural operations is done by people who are hired for the day or on piece-work. Their weekly wages
are about 12s., and although it may be assumed that a man earns on piece-work under the greater
stimulus to labour, Is. or perhaps 2s. more than on weekly wages, yet it is found, on calculating his total
income, that his loss of employment, during the year, outweighs this gain... Further, it will generally be
found that the wages of these men bear a certain proportion to the price of the necessary means of
subsistence, so that a man with two children is able to bring up his family without recourse to parish
relief." f!41 Malthus at that time remarked with reference to the facts published by Parliament: "I confess
that I see, with misgiving, the great extension of the practice of piece-wage. Really hard work during 12
or 14 hours of the day, or for any longer time, is too much for any human being." fl51

In the workshops under the Factory Acts, piece-wages become the general rule, because capital can there
only increase the efficacy of the working-day by intensifying labour. fl61

With the changing productiveness of labour the same quantum of product represents a varying
working-time. Therefore, piece-wage also varies, for it is the money expression of a determined
working-time. In our example above, 24 pieces were produced in 12 hours, whilst the value of the
product of the 12 hours was 6s., the daily value of the labour-power 3s., the price of the labour-hour 3d.,
and the wage for one piece l/2d. In one piece half-an-hour's labour was absorbed. If the same
working-day now supplies, in consequence of the doubled productiveness of labour, 48 pieces instead of
24, and all other circumstances remain unchanged, then the piece-wage falls from 1 l/2d. to 3/4d., as
every piece now only represents 1/4, instead of 1/2 of a working-hour. 24 by 1 l/2d. = 3s., and in like
manner 48 by 3/4d. = 3s. In other words, piece-wage is lowered in the same proportion as the number of
the pieces produced in the same time rises, |171 and, therefore, as the working time spent on the same
piece falls. This change in piece-wage, so far purely nominal, leads to constant battles between capitalist
and labour. Either because the capitalist uses it as a pretext for actually lowering the price of labour, or
because increased productive power of labour is accompanied by an increased intensity of the same. Or
because the labourer takes seriously the appearance of piece-wages (viz., that his product is paid for, and
not his labour-power) and therefore revolts against a lowering of wages, unaccompanied by a lowering in
the selling price of the commodity. "The operatives. ..carefully watch the price of the raw material and the
price of manufactured goods, and are thus enabled to form an accurate estimate of their master's profits."
£181

The capitalist rightly knocks on the head such pretensions as gross errors as to the nature of wage-labour.
fl91 He cries out against this usurping attempt to lay taxes on the advance of industry, and declares
roundly that the productiveness of labour does not concern the labourer at all. r201



Footnotes

T 1 1 "The system of piece-work illustrates an epoch in the history of the working-man; it is halfway
between the position of the mere day-labourer depending upon the will of the capitalist and the
co-operative artisan, who in the not distant future promises to combine the artisan and the capitalist in his
own person. Piece-workers are in fact their own masters, even whilst working upon the capital of the
employer." (John Watts: "Trade Societies and Strikes, Machinery and Co-operative Societies."
Manchester, 1865, pp. 52, 53.) I quote this little work because it is a very sink of all long-ago-rotten,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

apologetic commonplaces. This same Mr. Watts earlier traded in Owenism and published in 1842
another pamphlet: "Facts and Fictions of Political Economists," in which among other things he declares
that "property is robbery." That was long ago.

\2] T. J. Dunning: "Trades' Unions and Strikes," Lond., 1860, p. 22.

[31 How the existence, side by side and simultaneously, of these two forms of wage favors the masters'
cheating: "A factory employs 400 people, the half of which work by the piece, and have a direct interest
in working longer hours. The other 200 are paid by the day, work equally long with the others, and get no
more money for their over-time.... The work of these 200 people for half an hour a day is equal to one
person's work for 50 hours, or 5/6's of one person's labour in a week, and is a positive gain to the
employer." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1860," p. 9.) "Over-working to a very considerable
extent still prevails; and, in most instances, with that security against detection and punishment which the
law itself affords. I have in many former reports shown ... the injury to workpeople who are not
employed on piece-work, but receive weekly wages." (Leonard Horner in "Reports of Insp. of Fact.,"
30th April, 1859, pp. 8, 9.)

\4] "Wages can be measured in two ways: either by the duration of the labour, or by its product."
("Abrege elementaire des principes de l'economie politique." Paris, 1796, p. 32.) The author of this
anonymous work: G. Gamier.

\5] "So much weight of cotton is delivered to him" (the spinner), "and he has to return by a certain time,
in lieu of it, a given weight of twist or yarn, of a certain degree of fineness, and he is paid so much per
pound for all that he so returns. If his work is defective in quality, the penalty falls on him, if less in
quantity than the minimum fixed for a given time, he is dismissed and an abler operative procured." (Ure,
I.e., p. 317.)

[6] "It is when work passes through several hands, each of which is to take its share of profits, while only
the last does the work, that the pay which reaches the workwoman is miserably disproportioned."
("Child. Emp. Comm. II Report," p. lxx., n. 424.)

[71 Even Watts, the apologetic, remarks: "It would be a great improvement to the system of piece-work,
if all the men employed on a job were partners in the contract, each according to his abilities, instead of
one man being interested in over-working his fellows for his own benefit." (1. c, p. 53.) On the vileness
of this system, cf. "Child. Emp. Comm., Rep. III.," p. 66, n. 22, p. 11, n. 124, p. xi, n. 13, 53, 59, &tc.

[81 This spontaneous result is often artificially helped along, e.g., in the Engineering Trade of London, a
customary trick is "the selecting of a man who possesses superior physical strength and quickness, as the
principal of several workmen, and paying him an additional rate, by the quarter or otherwise, with the
understanding that he is to exert himself to the utmost to induce the others, who are only paid the
ordinary wages, to keep up to him ... without any comment this will go far to explain many of the
complaints of stinting the action, superior skill, and working-power, made by the employers against the
men" (in Trades-Unions. Dunning, 1. c, pp. 22, 23). As the author is himself a labourer and secretary of a
Trades' Union, this might be taken for exaggeration. But the reader may compare the "highly
respectable" "Cyclopedia of Agriculture" of J. C. Morton, Art., the article "Labourer," where this method
is recommended to the farmers as an approved one.

[91 "All those who are paid by piece-work ... profit by the transgression of the legal limits of work. This

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

observation as to the willingness to work over-time is especially applicable to the women employed as
weavers and reelers." ("Rept. of Insp. of Fact., 30th April, 1858," p. 9.) "This system" (piece-work), "so
advantageous to the employer ... tends directly to encourage the young potter greatly to over- work
himself during the four or five years during which he is employed in the piece-work system, but at low
wages.... This is ... another great cause to which the bad constitutions of the potters are to be attributed."
("Child. Empl. Comm. 1. Rept.," p. xiii.)

f 101 "Where the work in any trade is paid for by the piece at so much per job ... wages may very
materially differ in amount.... But in work by the day there is generally an uniform rate ... recognized by
both employer and employed as the standard of wages for the general run of workmen in the trade."
(Dunning, 1. c, p. 17.)

fill "The work of the journeyman-artisans will be ruled by the day or by the piece. These master-artisans
know about how much work a journeyman-artisan can do per day in each craft, and often pay them in
proportion to the work wich they do; the journey men, therefore, work as much as they can, in their own
interest, without any further inspection." (Cantillon, "Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en general,"
Amst. Ed., 1756, pp. 185 and 202. The first edition appeared in 1755.) Cantillon, from whom Quesnay,
Sir James Steuart & A. Smith have largely drawn, already here represents piece-wage as simply a
modified form of time-wage. The French edition of Cantillon professes in its title to be a translation from
the English, but the English edition: "The Analysis of Trade, Commerce, &tc," by Philip Cantillon, late
of the city of London, Merchant, is not only of later date (1759), but proves by its contents that it is a
later and revised edition: e.g., in the French edition, Hume is not yet mentioned, whilst in the English, on
the other hand, Petty hardly figures any longer. The English edition is theoretically less important, but it
contains numerous details referring specifically to English commerce, bullion trade, &tc, that are
wanting in the French text. The words on the title-page of the English edition, according to which the
work is "taken chiefly from the manuscript of a very ingenious gentleman, deceased, and adapted, &tc,"
seem, therefore, a pure fiction, very customary at that time.

fl21 "How often have we seen, in some workshops, many more workers recruited than the work actually
called for? On many occasions, workers are recruited in anticipation of future work, which may never
materialize. Because they are paid by piece-wages, it is said that no risk is incurred, since any loss of
time will be charged against the unemployed." (H. Gregoir: "Les Typographes devant le Tribunal
correctionnel de Bruxelles," Brusseles, 1865, p. 9.)

f 131 "Remarks on the Commercial Policy of Great Britain," London, 1815.

f 141 "A Defense of the Landowners and Farmers of Great Britain," 1814, pp. 4, 5.

f 151 Malthus, "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815.

f 161 "Those who are paid by piece-work ... constitute probably four-fifths of the workers in the
factories." "Report of Insp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1858.

f 171 "The productive power of his spinning-machine is accurately measured, and the rate of pay for work
done with it decreases with, though not as, the increase of its productive power." (Ure, 1. c, p. 317.) This
last apologetic phrase Ure himself again cancels. The lengthening of the mule causes some increase of
labour, he admits. The labour does therefore not diminish in the same ratio as its productivity increases.
Further: "By this increase the productive power of the machine will be augmented one-fifth. When this

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-One

event happens the spinner will not be paid at the same rate for work done as he was before, but as that
rate will not be diminished in the ratio of one-fifth, the improvement will augment his money earnings
for any given number of hours' work," but "the foregoing statement requires a certain modification.... The
spinner has to pay something additional for juvenile aid out of his additional sixpence, accompanied by
displacing a portion of adults" (1. c, p. 321), which has in no way a tendency to raise wages.

f 181 H. Fawcett: "The Economic Position of the British labourer." Cambridge and London, 1865, p. 178.

f 191 In the "London Standard" of October 26, 1861, there is a report of proceedings of the firm of John
Bright & Co., before the Rochdale magistrates "to prosecute for intimidation the agents of the Carpet
Weavers Trades' Union. Bright's partners had introduced new machinery which would turn out 240 yards
of carpet in the time and with the labour (!) previously required to produce 160 yards. The workmen had
no claim whatever to share in the profits made by the investment of their employer's capital in
mechanical improvements. Accordingly, Messrs. Bright proposed to lower the rate of pay from 1 l/2d.
per yard to Id., leaving the earnings of the men exactly the same as before for the same labour. But there
was a nominal reduction, of which the operatives, it is asserted, had not fair warning beforehand."

r201 "Trades' Unions, in their desire to maintain wages, endeavor to share in the benefits of improved
machinery." (Quelle horreur!) "... the demanding higher wages, because labour is abbreviated, is in other
words the endeavor to establish a duty on mechanical improvements." ("On Combination of Trades,"
new ed., London, 1834, p. 42.)



Transcribed by Bill McDorman
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Two: National Differences of Wages
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch21.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:18:35]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VI:
Wages



CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO:
NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES



In the 17th chapter we were occupied with the manifold combinations which may bring about a change
in magnitude of the value of labour-power — this magnitude being considered either absolutely or
relatively, i.e., as compared with surplus-value; whilst on the other hand, the quantum of the means of
subsistence in which the price of labour is realized might again undergo fluctuations independent of, or
different from, the changes of this price. £1J As has been already said, the simple translation of the value,
or respectively of the price, of labour-power into the exoteric form of wages transforms all these laws
into laws of the fluctuations of wages. That which appears in these fluctuations of wages within a single
country as a series of varying combinations, may appear in different countries as contemporaneous
difference of national wages. In the comparison of the wages in different nations, we must therefore take
into account all the factors that determine changes in the amount of the value of labour-power; the price
and the extent of the prime necessaries of life as naturally and historically developed, the cost of training
the labourers, the part played by the labour of women and children, the productiveness of labour, its
extensive and intensive magnitude. Even the most superficial comparison requires the reduction first of
the average day-wage for the same trades, in different countries, to a uniform working-day. After this
reduction to the same terms of the day-wages, time-wage must again be translated into piece-wage, as the
latter only can be a measure both of the productivity and the intensity of labour.

In every country there is a certain average intensity of labour below which the labour for the production
of a commodity requires more than the socially necessary time, and therefore does not reckon as labour
of normal quality. Only a degree of intensity above the national average affects, in a given country, the
measure of value by the mere duration of the working-time. This is not the case on the universal market,
whose integral parts are the individual countries. The average intensity of labour changes from country to
country; here it is greater, there less. These national averages form a scale, whose unit of measure is the
average unit of universal labour. The more intense national labour, therefore, as compared with the less
intense, produces in the same time more value, which expresses itself in more money.

But the law of value in its international application is yet more modified by the fact that on the
world-market the more productive national labour reckons also as the more intense, so long as the more
productive nation is not compelled by competition to lower the selling price of its commodities to the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (1 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two

level of their value.

In proportion as capitalist production is developed in a country, in the same proportion do the national
intensity and productivity of labour there rise above the international level. £2£ The different quantities of
commodities of the same kind, produced in different countries in the same working-time, have, therefore,
unequal international values, which are expressed in different prices, i.e., in sums of money varying
according to international values. The relative value of money will, therefore, be less in the nation with
more developed capitalist mode of production than in the nation with less developed. It follows, then,
that the nominal wages, the equivalent of labour-power expressed in money, will also be higher in the
first nation than in the second; which does not at all prove that this holds also for the real wages, i.e., for
the means of subsistence placed at the disposal of the labourer.

But even apart from these relative differences of the value of money in different countries, it will be
found, frequently, that the daily or weekly, &tc, wage in the first nation is higher than in the second,
whilst the relative price of labour, i.e., the price of labour as compared both with surplus-value and with
the value of the product, stands higher in the second than in the first. £31

J. W. Cowell, member of the Factory Commission of 1833, after careful investigation of the spinning
trade, came to the conclusion that "in England wages are virtually lower to the capitalist, though higher
to the operative than on the Continent of Europe." £41 The English Factory Inspector, Alexander
Redgrave, in his report of Oct. 31st, 1866, proves by comparative statistics with continental states, that in
spite of lower wages and much longer working-time, continental labour is, in proportion to the product,
dearer than English. An English manager of a cotton factory in Oldenburg declares that the working time
there lasted from 5:30 a.m. to 8 p.m., Saturdays included, and that the workpeople there, when under
English overlookers, did not supply during this time quite so much product as the English in 10 hours,
but under German overlookers much less. Wages are much lower than in England, in many cases 50%,
but the number of hands in proportion to the machinery was much greater, in certain departments in the
proportion of 5:3.

Mr. Redgrave gives very full details as to the Russian cotton factories. The data were given him by an
English manager until recently employed there. On this Russian soil, so fruitful of all infamies, the old
horrors of the early days of English factories are in full swing. The managers are, of course, English, as
the native Russian capitalist is of no use in factory business. Despite all over-work, continued day and
night, despite the most shameful under-payment of the workpeople, Russian manufacture manages to
vegetate only by prohibition of foreign competition.

I give, in conclusion, a comparative table of Mr. Redgrave's, on the average number of spindles per
factory and per spinner in the different countries of Europe. He himself remarks that he had collected
these figures a few years ago, and that since that time the size of the factories and the number of spindles
per labourer in England has increased. He supposes, however, an approximately equal progress in the
continental countries mentioned, so that the numbers given would still have their value for purposes of
comparison.



AVERAGE NUMBER OF
SPINDLES PER FACTORY



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (2 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two



England, average of spindles per factory


12,600


France, average of spindles per factory


1,500


Prussia, average of spindles per factory


1,500


Belgium, average of spindles per factory


4,000


Saxony, average of spindles per factory


4,500


Austria, average of spindles per factory


7,000


Switzerland, average of spindles per factory


8,000


AVERAGE NUMBER OF
PERSONS EMPLOYED TO SPINDLES


France


one person to 14 spindles


Russia


one person to 28 spindles


Prussia


one person to 37 spindles


Bavaria


one person to 46 spindles


Austria


one person to 49 spindles


Belgium


one person to 50 spindles


Saxony


one person to 50 spindles


Switzerland


one person to 55 spindles


Smaller States of Germany


one person to 55 spindles


Great Britain


one person to 74 spindles



"This comparison," says Mr. Redgrave, "is yet more unfavorable to Great Britain, inasmuch as there is so
large a number of factories in which weaving by power is carried on in conjunction with spinning"
(whilst in the table the weavers are not deducted), "and the factories abroad are chiefly spinning
factories; if it were possible to compare like with like, strictly, I could find many cotton spinning
factories in my district in which mules containing 2,200 spindles are minded by one man (the minder)
and two assistants only, turning off daily 220 lbs. of yarn, measuring 400 miles in length." [5\

It is well known that in Eastern Europe, as well as in Asia, English companies have undertaken the
construction of railways, and have, in making them, employed side by side with the native labourers, a
certain number of English working-men. Compelled by practical necessity, they thus have had to take
into account the national difference in the intensity of labour, but this has brought them no loss. Their
experience shows that even if the height of wages corresponds more or less with the average intensity of
labour, the relative price of labour varies generally in the inverse direction.

In an "Essay on the Rate of Wages," [6\ one of his first economic writings, H. Carey tries to prove that
the wages of the different nations are directly proportional to the degree of productiveness of the national
working-days, in order to draw from this international relation the conclusion that wages everywhere rise
and fall in proportion to the productiveness of labour. The whole of our analysis of the production of
surplus-value shows the absurdity of this conclusion, even if Carey himself had proved his premises
instead of, after his usual uncritical and superficial fashion, shuffling to and fro a confused mass of
statistical materials. The best of it is that he does not assert that things actually are as they ought to be
according to his theory. For State intervention has falsified the natural economic relations. The different



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (3 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two

national wages must be reckoned, therefore, as if that part of each that goes to the State in the form of
taxes, came to the labourer himself. Ought not Mr. Carey to consider further whether those "State
expenses" are not the "natural" fruits of capitalistic development? The reasoning is quite worthy of the
man who first declared the relations of capitalist production to be eternal laws of nature and reason,
whose free, harmonious working is only disturbed by the intervention of the State, in order afterwards to
discover that the diabolical influence of England on the world-market (an influence which, it appears,
does not spring from the natural laws of capitalist production) necessitates State intervention, i.e., the
protection of those laws of nature and reason by the State, alias the System of Protection. He discovered
further that the theorems of Ricardo and others, in which existing social antagonisms and contradictions
are formulated, are not the ideal product of the real economic movement, but on the contrary, that the
real antagonisms of capitalist production in England and elsewhere are the result of the theories of
Ricardo and others! Finally he discovered that it is, in the last resort, commerce that destroys the inborn
beauties and harmonies of the capitalist mode of production. A step further and he will, perhaps, discover
that the one evil in capitalist production is capital itself. Only a man with such atrocious want of the
critical faculty and such spurious erudition deserved, in spite of his Protectionist heresy, to become the
secret source of the harmonious wisdom of a Bastiat, and of all the other Free-trade optimists of today.



Footnotes

fJJ "It is not accurate to say that wages" (he deals here with their money expression) "are increased,
because they purchase more of a cheaper article." (David Buchanan in his edition of Adam Smith's
"Wealth of Nations," 1814, Vol. 1, p. 417, note.)

\2] We shall inquire, in another place, what circumstances in relation to productivity may modify this law
for individual branches of industry.

£31 James Anderson remarks in his polemic against Adam Smith: "It deserves, likewise, to be remarked,
that although the apparent price of Labour is usually lower in poor countries, where the produce of the
soil, and grain in general, is cheap; yet it is in fact for the most part really higher than in other countries.
For it is not the wages that is given to the labourer per day that constitutes the real price of labour,
although it is its apparent price. The real price is that which a certain quantity of work performed actually
costs the employer; and considered in this light, labour is in almost all cases cheaper in rich countries
than in those that are poorer, although the price of grain and other provisions is usually much lower in the
last than in the first.... Labour estimated by the day is much lower in Scotland than in England.... Labour
by the piece is generally cheaper in England." (James Anderson, "Observations on the Means of Exciting
a Spirit of National Industry," &tc, Edin. 1777, pp. 350, 351.) On the contrary, lowness of wages
produces, in its turn, dearness of labour. "Labour being dearer in Ireland than it is in England ... because
the wages are so much lower." (N. 2079 in "Royal Commission on Railways, Minutes," 1867.)

[4_l(Ure, op. cit., p. 314.)

[51 ("Reports of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1866, pp. 31-37, passim.)

\6] "Essay on the Rate of Wages, with an Examination of the Causes of the Differences in the Condition
of the Labouring Population throughout the World," Philadelphia, 1835.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (4 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Two



Transcribed by Bill McDorman
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-Three: Simple Reproduction
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch22.htm (5 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:18:37]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VII:

The Accumulation of Capital



CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE:
SIMPLE REPRODUCTION



The conversion of a sum of money into means of production and labour-power, is the first step taken by
the quantum of value that is going to function as capital. This conversion takes place in the market,
within the sphere of circulation. The second step, the process of production, is complete so soon as the
means of production have been converted into commodities whose value exceeds that of their component
parts, and, therefore, contains the capital originally advanced, plus a surplus-value. These commodities
must then be thrown into circulation. They must be sold, their value realised in money, this money afresh
converted into capital, and so over and over again. This circular movement, in which the same phases are
continually gone through in succession, forms the circulation of capital.

The first condition of accumulation is that the capitalist must have contrived to sell his commodities, and
to reconvert into capital the greater part of the money so received. In the following pages we shall
assume that capital circulates in its normal way. The detailed analysis of the process will be found in
Book II.

The capitalist who produces surplus-value — i.e., who extracts unpaid labour directly from the labourers,
and fixes it in commodities, is, indeed, the first appropriator, but by no means the ultimate owner, of this
surplus-value. He has to share it with capitalists, with landowners, &c, who fulfil other functions in the
complex of social production. Surplus-value, therefore, splits up into various parts. Its fragments fall to
various categories of persons, and take various forms, independent the one of the other, such as profit,
interest, merchants' profit, rent, &c. It is only in Book III. that we can take in hand these modified forms
of surplus-value.

On the one hand, then, we assume that the capitalist sells at their value the commodities he has produced,
without concerning ourselves either about the new forms that capital assumes while in the sphere of
circulation, or about the concrete conditions of reproduction hidden under these forms. On the other
hand, we treat the capitalist producer as owner of the entire surplus-value, or, better perhaps, as the
representative of all the sharers with him in the booty. We, therefore, first of all consider accumulation
from an abstract point of view — i.e., as a mere phase in the actual process of production.

So far as accumulation takes place, the capitalist must have succeeded in selling his commodities, and in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (1 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

reconverting the sale-money into capital. Moreover, the breaking-up of surplus-value into fragments
neither alters its nature nor the conditions under which it becomes an element of accumulation. Whatever
be the proportion of surplus-value which the industrial capitalist retains for himself, or yields up to
others, he is the one who, in the first instance, appropriates it. We, therefore, assume no more than what
actually takes place. On the other hand, the simple fundamental form of the process of accumulation is
obscured by the incident of the circulation which brings it about, and by the splitting up of surplus-value.
An exact analysis of the process, therefore, demands that we should, for a time, disregard all phenomena
that hide the pity of its inner mechanism.

Whatever the form of the process of production in a society, it must be a continuous process, must
continue to go periodically through the same phases. A society can no more cease to produce than it can
cease to consumer When viewed, therefore, as a connected whole, and as flowing on with incessant
renewal, every social process of production is, at the same time, a process of reproduction.

The conditions of production are also those of reproduction. No society can go on producing, in other
words, no society can reproduce, unless it constantly reconverts a part of its products into means of
production, or elements of fresh products. All other circumstances remaining the same, the only mode by
which it can reproduce its wealth, and maintain it at one level, is by replacing the means of production —
i.e., the instruments of labour, the raw material, and the auxiliary substances consumed in the course of
the year-by an equal quantity of the same kind of articles; these must be separated from the mass of the
yearly products, and thrown afresh into the process of production. Hence, a definite portion of each year's
product belongs to the domain of production. Destined for productive consumption from the very first,
this portion exists, for the most part, in the shape of articles totally unfitted for individual consumption.

If production be capitalistic in form, so, too, will be reproduction. Just as in the former the labour-process
figures but as a means towards the self-expansion of capital, so in the latter it figures but as a means of
reproducing as capital — i.e., as self-expanding value — the value advanced. It is only because his
money constantly functions as capital that the economic guise of a capitalist attaches to a man. If, for
instance, a sum of £100 has this year been converted into capital, and produced a surplus-value of £20, it
must continue during next year, and subsequent years, to repeat the same operation. As a periodic
increment of the capital advanced, or periodic fruit of capital in process, surplus-value acquires the form
of a revenue flowing out of capital. £1}

If this revenue serve the capitalist only as a fund to provide for his consumption, and be spent as
periodically as it is gained, then, caeteris paribus, simple reproduction will take place. And although this
reproduction is a mere repetition of the process of production on the old scale, yet this mere repetition, or
continuity, gives a new character to the process, or, rather, causes the disappearance of some apparent
characteristics which it possessed as an isolated discontinuous process.

The purchase of labour-power for a fixed period is the prelude to the process of production; and this
prelude is constantly repeated when the stipulated term comes to an end, when a definite period of
production, such as a week or a month, has elapsed. But the labourer is not paid until after he has
expended his labour-power, and realised in commodities not only its value, but surplus- value. He has,
therefore, produced not only surplus-value, which we for the present regard as a fund to meet the private
consumption of the capitalist, but he has also produced, before it flows back to him in the shape of
wages, the fund out of which he himself is paid, the variable capital; and his employment lasts only so
long as he continues to reproduce this fund. Hence, that formula of the economists, referred to in Chapter



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (2 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

XVIII,, which represents wages as a share in the product itself. [2J What flows back to the labourer in the
shape of wages is a portion of the product that is continuously reproduced by him. The capitalist, it is
true, pays him in money, but this money is merely the transmuted form of the product of his labour.
While he is converting a-portion of the means of production into products, a portion of his former
product is being turned into money. It is his labour of last week, or of last year, that pays for his
labour-power this week or this year. The illusion begotten by the intervention of money vanishes
immediately, if, instead of taking a single capitalist and a single labourer, we take the class of capitalists
and the class of labourers as a whole. The capitalist class is constantly giving to the labouring class
order-notes, in the form of money, on a portion of the commodities produced by the latter and
appropriated by the former. The labourers give these order-notes back just as constantly to the capitalist
class, and in this way get their share of their own product. The transaction is veiled by the
commodity-form of the product and the money-form of the commodity.

Variable capital is therefore only a particular historical form of appearance of the fund for providing the
necessaries of life, or the labour-fund which the labourer requires for the maintenance of himself and
family, and which, whatever be the system of social production, he must himself produce and reproduce.
If the labour-fund constantly flows to him in the form of money that pays for his labour, it is because the
product he has created moves constantly away from him in the form of capital. But all this does not alter
the fact, that it is the labourer's own labour, realised in a product, which is advanced to him by the
capitalist. [3] Let us take a peasant liable to do compulsory service for his lord. He works on his own
land, with his own means of production, for, say, 3 days a week. The 3 other days he does forced work
on the lord's domain. He constantly reproduces his own labour-fund, which never, in his case, takes the
form of a money payment for his labour, advanced by another person. But in return, his unpaid forced
labour for the lord, on its side, never acquires the character of voluntary paid labour. If one fine morning
the lord appropriates to himself the land, the cattle, the seed, in a word, the, means of production of this
peasant, the latter will thenceforth be obliged to sell his labour-power to the lord. He will, ceteris
paribus, labour 6 days a week as before, 3 for himself, 3 for his lord, who thenceforth becomes a
wages-paying capitalist. As before, he will use up the means of production as means of production, and
transfer their value to the product. As before, a definite portion of the product will be devoted to
reproduction. But from the moment that the forced labour is changed into wage-labour, from that
moment the labour-fund, which the peasant himself continues as before to produce and reproduce, takes
the form of a capital advanced in the form of wages by the lord. The bourgeois economist whose narrow
mind is unable to separate the form of appearance from the thing that appears, shuts his eyes to the fact,
that it is but here and there on the face of the earth, that even now-a-days the labour-fund crops up in the
form of capital. [41

Variable capital, it is true, only then loses its character of a value advanced out of the capitalist's funds,
\5] when we view the process of capitalist production in the flow of its constant renewal. But that process
must have had a beginning of some kind. From our present standpoint it therefore seems likely that the
capitalist, once upon a time, became possessed of money, by some accumulation that took place
independently of the unpaid labour of others, and that this was, therefore, how he was enabled to frequent
the market as a buyer of labour-power. However this may be, the mere continuity of the process, the
simple reproduction, brings about some other wonderful changes, which affect not only the variable, but
the total capital.

If a capital of £1,000 beget yearly a surplus-value of £200, and if this surplus-value be consumed every



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (3 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

year, it is clear that at the end of 5 years the surplus-value consumed will amount to 5 x £200 or the
£1,000 originally advanced. If only a part, say one half, were consumed, the same result would follow at
the end of 10 years, since 10 x £100= £1,000. General Rule: The value of the capital advanced divided by
the surplus-value annually consumed, gives the number of years, or reproduction periods, at the
expiration of which the capital originally advanced has been consumed by the capitalist and has
disappeared. The capitalist thinks, that he is consuming the produce of the unpaid labour of others, i.e.,
the surplus-value, and is keeping intact his original capital; but what he thinks cannot alter facts. After
the lapse of a certain number of years, the capital value he then possesses is equal to the sum total of the
surplus-value appropriated by him during those years, and the total value he has consumed is equal to
that of his original capital. It is true, he has in hand a capital whose amount has not changed, and of
which a part, viz., the buildings, machinery, &c, were already there when the work of his business
began. But what we have to do with here, is not the material elements, but the value, of that capital.
When a person gets through all his property, by taking upon himself debts equal to the value of that
property, it is clear that his property represents nothing but the sum total of his debts. And so it is with
the capitalist; when he has consumed the equivalent of his original capital, the value of his present capital
represents nothing but the total amount of the surplus-value appropriated by him without payment. Not a
single atom of the value of his old capital continues to exist.

Apart then from all accumulation, the mere continuity of the process of production, in other words simple
reproduction, sooner or later, and of necessity, converts every capital into accumulated capital, or
capitalised surplus-value. Even if that capital was originally acquired by the personal labour of its
employer, it sooner or later becomes value appropriated without an equivalent, the unpaid labour of
others materialised either in money or in some other object. We saw in Chapt. IV.-VI. that in order to
convert money into capital something more is required than the production and circulation of
commodities. We saw that on the one side the possessor of value or money, on the other, the possessor of
the value-creating substance; on the one side, the possessor of the means of production and subsistence,
on the other, the possessor of nothing but labour-power, must confront one another as buyer and seller.
The separation of labour from its product, of subjective labour-power from the objective conditions of
labour, was therefore the real foundation in fact, and the starting-point of capitalist production.

But that which at first was but a starting-point, becomes, by the mere continuity of the process, by simple
reproduction, the peculiar result, constantly renewed and perpetuated, of capitalist production. On the
one hand, the process of production incessantly converts material wealth into capital, into means of
creating more wealth and means of enjoyment for the capitalist. On the other hand, the labourer, on
quitting the process, is what he was on entering it, a source of wealth, but devoid of all means of making
that wealth his own. Since, before entering on the process, his own labour has already been alienated
from himself by the sale of his labour-power, has been appropriated by the capitalist and incorporated
with capital, it must, during the process, be realised in a product that does not belong to him. Since the
process of production is also the process by which the capitalist consumes labour-power, the product of
the labourer is incessantly converted, not only into commodities, but into capital, into value that sucks up
the value-creating power, into means of subsistence that buy the person of the labourer, into means of
production that command the producers. [61 The labourer therefore constantly produces material,
objective wealth, but in the form of capital, of an alien power that dominates and exploits him: and the
capitalist as constantly produces labour-power, but in the form of a subjective source of wealth, separated
from the objects in and by which it can alone be realised; in short he produces the labourer, but as a
wage-labourer. [7J This incessant reproduction, this perpetuation of the labourer, is the sine qua non of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (4 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

capitalist production.

The labourer consumes in a two-told way. While producing he consumes by his labour the means of
production, and converts them into products with a higher value than that of the capital advanced This is
his productive consumption. It is at the same time consumption of his labour-power by the capitalist who
bought it. On the other hand, the labourer turns the money paid to him for his labour-power, into means
of subsistence: this is his individual consumption. The labourer's productive consumption, and his
individual consumption, are therefore totally distinct. In the former, he acts as the motive power of
capital, and belongs to the capitalist. In the latter, he belongs to himself, and performs his necessary vital
functions outside the process of production. The result of the one is, that the capitalist lives; of the other,
that the labourer lives.

When treating of the working-day, we saw that the labourer is often compelled to make his individual
consumption a mere incident of production. In such a case, he supplies himself with necessaries in order
to maintain his labour-power, just as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine and oil to the wheel.
His means of consumption, in that case, are the mere means of consumption required by a means of
production; his individual consumption is directly productive consumption. This, however, appears to be
an abuse not essentially appertaining to capitalist production. [81

The matter takes quite another aspect, when we contemplate, not the single capitalist, and the single
labourer, but the capitalist class and the labouring class, not an isolated process of production, but
capitalist production in full swing, and on its actual social scale. By converting part of his capital into
labour-power, the capitalist augments the value of his entire capital. He kills two birds with one stone. He
profits, not only by what he receives from but by what be gives to, the labourer. The capital given in
exchange for labour-power is converted into necessaries, by the consumption of which the muscles,
nerves, bones, and brains of existing labourers are reproduced, and new labourers are begotten. Within
the limits of what is strictly necessary, the individual consumption of the working-class is, therefore, the
reconversion of the means of subsistence given by capital in exchange for labour-power, into fresh
labour-power at the disposal of capital for exploitation. It is the production and reproduction of that
means of production so indispensable to the capitalist: the labourer himself. The individual consumption
of the labourer, whether it proceed within the workshop or outside it, whether it be part of the process of
production or not, forms therefore a factor of the production and reproduction of capital; just as cleaning
machinery does, whether it be done while the machinery is working or while it is standing. The fact that
the labourer consumes his means of subsistence for his own purposes, and not to please the capitalist, has
no bearing on the matter. The consumption of food by a beast of burden is none the less a necessary
factor in the process of production, because the beast enjoys what it eats. The maintenance and
reproduction of the working-class is, and must ever be, a necessary condition to the reproduction of
capital. But the capitalist may safely leave its fulfilment to the labourer's instincts of self-preservation
and of propagation. All the capitalist cares for, is to reduce the labourer's individual consumption as far
as possible to what is strictly necessary, and he is far away from imitating those brutal South Americans,
who force their labourers to take the more substantial, rather than the less substantial, kind of food. [91

Hence both the capitalist and his ideological representative, the political economist, consider that part
alone of the labourer's individual consumption to be productive, which is requisite for the perpetuation of
the class, and which therefore must take place in order that the capitalist may have labour-power to
consume; what the labourer consumes for his own pleasure beyond that part, is unproductive
consumption. flOl If the accumulation of capital were to cause a rise of wages and an increase in the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (5 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

labourer's consumption, unaccompanied by increase in the consumption of labour-power by capital, the
additional capital would be consumed unproductively. fill In reality, the individual consumption of the
labourer is unproductive as regards himself, for it reproduces nothing but the needy individual; it is
productive to the capitalist and to the State, since it is the production of the power that creates their
wealth. [12]

From a social point of view, therefore, the working-class, even when not directly engaged in the
labour-process, is just as much an appendage of capital as the ordinary instruments of labour. Even its
individual consumption is, within certain limits, a mere factor in the process of production. That process,
however, takes good care to prevent these self-conscious instruments from leaving it in the lurch, for it
removes their product, as fast as it is made, from their pole to the opposite pole of capital. Individual
consumption provides, on the one hand, the means for their maintenance and reproduction: on the other
hand, it secures by the annihilation of the necessaries of life, the continued re-appearance of the workman
in the labour-market. The Roman slave was held by fetters: the wage-labourer is bound to his owner by
invisible threads. The appearance of independence is kept up by means of a constant change of
employers, and by the fictio juris of a contract.

In former times, capital resorted to legislation, whenever necessary, to enforce its proprietary rights over
the free labourer. For instance, down to 1815, the emigration of mechanics employed in machine making
was, in England, forbidden, under grievous pains and penalties.

The reproduction of the working-class carries with it the accumulation of skill, that is handed down from
one generation to another. f!31 To what extent the capitalist reckons the existence of such a skilled class
among the factors of production that belong to him by right, and to what extent he actually regards it as
the reality of his variable capital, is seen so soon as a crisis threatens him with its loss. In consequence of
the civil war in the United States and of the accompanying cotton famine, the majority of the cotton
operatives in Lancashire were, as is well known, thrown out of work. Both from the working-class itself,
and from other ranks of society, there arose a cry for State aid, or for voluntary national subscriptions, in
order to enable the "superfluous" hands to emigrate to the colonies or to the United States. Thereupon,
The Times published on the 24th March, 1863, a letter from Edmund Potter, a former president of the
Manchester Chamber of Commerce. This letter was rightly called in the House of Commons, the
manufacturers' manifesto, f 141 We cull here a few characteristic passages, in which the proprietary rights
of capital over labour-power are unblushingly asserted.

"He" (the man out of work) "may be told the supply of cotton-workers is too large ... and ... must ... in
fact be reduced by a third, perhaps, and that then there will be a healthy demand for the remaining
two-thirds.... Public opinion... urges emigration.... The master cannot willingly see his labour supply
being removed; he may think, and perhaps justly, that it is both wrong and unsound.... But if the public
funds are to be devoted to assist emigration, he bas a right to be heard, and perhaps to protest." Mr. Potter
then shows how useful the cotton trade is, how the "trade has undoubtedly drawn the surplus-population
from Ireland and from the agricultural districts," how immense is its extent, how in the year 1860 it
yielded 5/13 ths of the total English exports, how, after a few years, it will again expand by the extension
of the market, particularly of the Indian market, and by calling forth a plentiful supply of cotton at 6d. per
lb. He then continues: "Some time ...,one, two, or three years, it may be, will produce the quantity.... The
question I would put then is this — Is the trade worth retaining? Is it worth while to keep the machinery
(he means the living labour machines) in order, and is it not the greatest folly to think of parting with
that? I think it is. I allow that the workers are not a property, not the property of Lancashire and the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (6 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

masters; but they are the strength of both; they are the mental and trained power which cannot be.
replaced for a generation; the mere machinery which they work might much of it be beneficially
replaced, nay improved, in a twelvemonth fl51 Encourage or allow (!) the working-power to emigrate,
and what of the capitalist?... Take away the cream of the workers, and fixed capital will depreciate in a
great degree, and the floating will not subject itself to a struggle with the short supply of inferior
labour.... We are told the workers wish it" (emigration). "Very natural it is that they should do so....
Reduce, compress the cotton trade by taking away its working power and reducing their wages
expenditure, say one-fifth, or five millions, and what then would happen to the class above, the small
shopkeepers; and what of the rents, the cottage rents.... Trace out the effects upwards to the small farmer,
the better householder, and ... the landowner, and say if there could be any suggestion more suicidal to all
classes of the country than by enfeebling a nation by exporting the best of its manufacturing population,
and destroying the value of some of its most productive capital and enrichment .... I advise a loan (of five
or six millions sterling), ... extending it may be over two or three years, administered by special
commissioners added to the Boards of Guardians in the cotton districts, under special legislative
regulations, enforcing some occupation or labour, as a means of keeping up at least the moral standard of
the recipients of the loan... can anything be worse for landowners or masters than parting with the best of
the workers, and demoralising and disappointing the rest by an extended depletive emigration, a
depletion of capital and value in an entire province?"

Potter, the chosen mouthpiece of the manufacturers, distinguishes two sorts of "machinery," each of
which belongs to the capitalist, and of which one stands in his factory, the other at night-time and on
Sundays is housed outside the factory, in cottages. The one is inanimate, the other living. The inanimate
machinery not only wears out and depreciates from day to day, but a great part of it becomes so quickly
superannuated, by constant technical progress, that it can be replaced with advantage by new machinery
after a few months. The living machinery, on the contrary gets better the longer it lasts, and in proportion
as the skill, handed from one generation to another, accumulates. The Times answered the cotton lord as
follows:

"Mr. Edmund Potter is so impressed with the exceptional and supreme importance of the cotton masters
that, in order to preserve this class and perpetuate their profession, he would keep half a million of the
labouring class confined in a great moral workhouse against their' will. Is the trade worth retaining?' asks
Mr. Potter. 'Certainly by all honest means it is,' we answer. 'Is it worth while keeping the machinery in
order?' again asks Mr. Potter. Here we hesitate. By the 'machinery' Mr. Potter means the human
machinery, for he goes on to protest that he does not mean to use them as an absolute property. We must
confess that we do not think it 'worth while,' or even possible, to keep the human machinery in order-that
is to shut it up and keep it oiled till it is wanted. Human machinery will rust under inaction, oil and rub it
as you may. Moreover, the human machinery will, as we have just seen, get the steam up of its own
accord, and burst or run amuck in our great towns, it might, as Mr. Potter says, require some time to
reproduce the workers, but, having machinists and capitalists at hand, we could always find thrifty, hard,
industrious men wherewith to improvise more master-manufacturers than we can ever want. Mr. Potter
talks of the trade reviving 'in one, two, or three years,' and he asks us not 'to encourage or allow (!) the
working power to emigrate.' \16\ He says that it is very natural the workers should wish to emigrate; but
he thinks that in spite of their desire, the nation ought to keep this half million of workers with their
700,000 dependents, shut up in the cotton districts; and as a necessary consequence, he must of course
think that the nation ought to keep down their discontent by force, and sustain them by alms — and upon
the chance that the cotton masters may some day want them.... The time is come when the great public



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (7 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

opinion of these islands must operate to save this 'working power' from those who would deal with it as
they would deal with iron, and coal, and cotton."

The Times ' article was only a jeu d'esprit. The "great public opinion" was, in fact, of Mr. Potter's opinion,
that the factory operatives are part of the movable fittings of a factory. Their emigration was prevented.
They were locked up in that "moral workhouse," the cotton districts, and they form, as before, "the
strength" of the cotton manufacturers of Lancashire.

Capitalist production, therefore, of itself reproduces the separation between labour-power and the means
of labour. It thereby reproduces and perpetuates the condition for exploiting the labourer. It incessantly
forces him to sell his labour-power in order to live, and enables the capitalist to purchase labour-power in
order that he may enrich himself. [171 It is no longer a mere accident, that capitalist and labourer
confront each other in the market as buyer and seller. It is the process itself that incessantly hurls back
the labourer on to the market as a vendor of his labour-power, and that incessantly converts his own
product into a means by which another man can purchase him. In reality, the labourer belongs to capital
before he has sold himself to capital. His economic bondage fl 81 is both brought about and concealed by
the periodic sale of himself, by his change of masters, and by the oscillations in the market-price of
labour-power. [191

Capitalist production, therefore, under its aspect of a continuous connected process, of a process of
reproduction, produces not only commodities, not only surplus-value, but it also produces and reproduces
the capitalist relation; on the one side the capitalist, on the other the wage-labourer. [201



Footnotes

£11 "Mais ces riches, qui consomment les produits du travail des autres, ne peuvent les obtenir que par
des echanges [purchases of commodities] . S'ils donnent cependant leur richesse acquise et accumulee en
retour contre ces produits nouveaux qui sont l'objet de leur fantaisie, ils semblent exposes a epuiser
bientot leur fonds de reserve; ils ne travaillent point, avor s-nous dit, et ils ne peuvent meme travailler; on
croirait done que chaque jour doit voir diminuer leurs vieilles richesses, et que lorsqu'il ne leur en restera
plus, rien ne sera offert en echange aux ouvriers qui travaillent exclusivement pour eux.... Mais dans
l'ordre social, la richesse a acquis la propriete de se reproduire par le travail d'autrui, et sans que son
proprietaire y concoure. La richesse, comme le travail, et par le travail, donne un fruit annuel qui peut
etre detruit chaque annee sans que le riche en devienne plus pauvre. Ce fruit est le revenu qui net du
capital" (Sismondi: "Nouv. Princ. d'Econ. Pol." Paris, 1819, 1. 1, pp. 81-82.)

[21 "Wages as well as profits are to be considered, each of them, as really a portion of the finished
product." (Ramsay, 1. c, p. 142.) "The share of the product which comes to the labourer in the form of
wages." (J. Mill, "Elements, &c." Translated by Parissot. Paris, 1823, p. 34.)

[31 "When capital is employed in advancing to the workman his wages, it adds nothing to the funds for
the maintenance of labour." (Cazenove in note to his edition of Malthus' "Definitions in Pol. Econ."
London, 1853, p. 22.)

[41 "The wages of labour are advanced by capitalists in the case of less than one fourth of the labourers of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (8 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

the earth." (Rich. Jones: "Textbook of Lectures on the Pol. Econ. of Nations." Hertford, 1852, p. 36.)

[51 "Though the manufacturer" (i.e., the labourer) "has his wages advanced to him by his master, he in
reality costs him no expense, the value of these wages being generally reserved, together with a profit, in
the improved value of the subject upon which his labour is bestowed." (A. Smith, 1. c, Book II.. ch. Ill,
p. 311.)

[61 "This is a remarkably peculiar property of productive labour. Whatever is productively consumed is
capital and it becomes capital by consumption." (James Mill, 1. c, p. 242.) James Mill, however, never
got on the track of this "remarkably peculiar property."

[71 "It is true indeed, that the first introducing a manufacture employs many poor, but they cease not to
be so, and the continuance of it makes many." ("Reasons for a Limited Exportation of Wool." London,
1677, p. 19.) "The farmer now absurdly asserts, that he keeps the poor. They are indeed kept in misery."
("Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor Rates: or a Comparative View of the Prices of labour and
Provisions." London, 1777, p. 31.)

[81 Rossi would not declaim so emphatically against this, had lie really penetrated the secret of
"productive consumption."

[9J "The labourers in the mines of S. America, whose daily task (the heaviest perhaps in the world)
consists in bringing to the surface on their shoulders a load of metal weighing from 180 to 200 pounds,
from a depth of 450 feet, live on broad and beans only; they themselves would prefer the bread alone for
food, but their masters, who have found out that the men cannot work so hard on bread, treat them like
horses, and compel them to eat beans; beans, however, are relatively much richer in bone-earth
(phosphate of lime) than is bread." (Liebig, 1. c, vol. 1., p. 194, note.)

riOl James Mill, I.e., p. 238.

fill "If the price of labour should rise so high that, notwithstanding the increase of capital, no more
could be employed, I should say that such increase of capital would be still unproductively consumed."
(Ricardo, 1. c, p. 163.)

fl21 "The only productive consumption, properly so called, is the consumption or destruction of wealth"
(he alludes to the means of production) "by capitalists with a view to reproduction.... The workman ... is
a productive consumer to the person who employs him, and to the State, but not, strictly speaking, to
himself." (Malthus'"Definitions, &c", p. 30.)

f 131 "The only thing, of which one can say, that it is stored up and prepared beforehand, is the skill of the
labourer.... The accumulation and storage of skilled labour, that most important operation, is, as regards
the great mass of labourers, accomplished without any capital whatever." (Th. Hodgskin: "Labour
Defended, &c," p. 13.)

f 141 "That letter might be looked upon as the manifesto of the manufacturers." (Ferrand: "Motion on the
Cotton Famine." H.o.C, 27th April, 1863.)

f 151 It will not be forgotten that this same capital sings quite another song, under ordinary circumstances,
when there is a question of reducing wages. Then the masters exclaim with one voice: "The factory



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (9 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low species of skilled
labour, and that there is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or
which, by a short training of the least expert, can be more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired ... The
master's machinery" (which we now learn can be replaced with advantage in 12 months,) "really plays a
far more important part in the business of production than the labour and skill of the operative" (who
cannot now be replaced under 30 years), "which six months' education can reach, and a common labourer
can learn." (See ante, p. 423.)

fl61 Parliament did not vote a single farthing in aid of emigration, but simply passed some Acts
empowering the municipal corporations to keep the operatives in a half-starved state, i.e., to exploit them
at less than the normal wages. On the other hand, when 3 years later, the cattle disease broke out,
Parliament broke wildly through its usages and voted, straight off, millions for indemnifying the
millionaire landlords, whose farmers in any event came off without loss, owing to the rise in the price of
meat. The bull-like bellow of the landed proprietors at the opening of Parliament, in 1866, showed that a
man can worship the cow Sabala without being a Hindu, and can change himself into an ox without
being a Jupiter.

f 171 "L'ouvrier demandait de la subsistence pour vivre, le chef demandait du travail pour gagner."
(Sismondi, 1. c, p. 91.)

f 181 A boorishly clumsy form of this bondage exists in the county of Durham. This Is one of the few
counties, in which circumstances do not secure to the farmer undisputed proprietary rights over the
agricultural labourer. The mining industry allows the latter some choice. In this county, the farmer,
contrary to the custom elsewhere, rents only such farms as have on them labourers' cottages. The rent of
the cottage is a part of the wages. These cottages are known as "hinds' houses." They are let to the
labourers in consideration of certain feudal services, under a contract called "bondage," which, amongst
other things, binds the labourer, during the time he is employed elsewhere, to leave some one, say his
daughter, &c, to supply his place. The labourer himself is called a "bondsman." The relationship here set
up also shows how individual consumption by the labourer becomes consumption on behalf of capital-or
productive consumption-from quite a new point of view: "It is curious to observe that the very dung of
the hind and bondsman is the perquisite of the calculating lord ... and the lord will allow no privy but his
own to exist in the neighbourhood, and will rather give a bit of manure here and there for a garden than
bate any part of his seigneurial right." ("Public Health, Report VII., 1864," p. 188.)

f 191 It will not be forgotten, that, with respect to the labour of children, &c, even the formality of a
voluntary sale disappears.

f201 "Capital pre-supposes wage-labour, and wage-labour pre-supposes capital. One is a necessary
condition to the existence of the other; they mutually call each other into existence. Does an operative in
a cotton-factory produce nothing but cotton goods? No, he produces capital. He produces values that give
fresh command over his labour, and that, by means of such command, create fresh values." (Karl Marx:
"Lohnarbeit und Kapital," in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung: No. 266, 7th April, 1849.) The articles
published under the above title in the N. Rh. Z. are parts of some lectures given by me on that subject, in
1847, in the German "Arheiter-Verein" at Brussels, the publication of which was interrupted by the
revolution of February.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (10 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Three

Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-Four: Conversion of Surplus- Value into Capital
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch23.htm (11 of 11) [23/08/2000 16:18:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VII:

The Accumulation of Capital



CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR:

CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL



Contents

Section 1 - Capitalist Production on a Progressively Increasing Scale. Transition of the Laws of Property

that Characterise Production of Commodities into Laws of Capitalist Appropriation

Section 2 - Erroneous Conception, by Political Economy, of Reproduction on a Progressively Increasing

Scale

Section 3 - Separation of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue. The Abstinence Theory

Section 4 - Circumstances that, Independently of the Proportional Division of Surplus-Value into Capital

and Revenue, Determine the Amount of Accumulation. Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power.

Productivity of Labour. Growing Difference in Amount Between Capital Employed and Capital

Consumed. Magnitude of Capital Advanced

Section 5 - The So-Called Labour-Fund



SECTION 1.

CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE. TRANSITION
OF THE LAWS OF PROPERTY THAT CHARACTERISE PRODUCTION OF COMMODITIES
INTO LAWS OF CAPITALIST APPROPRIATION



Hitherto we have investigated how surplus-value emanates from capital; we have now to see how capital
arises from surplus-value. Employing surplus-value as capital, reconverting it into capital, is called
accumulation of capital. \l]

First let us consider this transaction from the standpoint of the individual capitalist. Suppose a spinner to
have advanced a capital of £10,000, of which four-fifths (£8,000) are laid out in cotton, machinery, &c,
and one-fifth (£2,000) in wages. Let him produce 240,000 lbs. of yam annually, having a value of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (1 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

£2,000. The rate of surplus-value being 100%, the surplus-value lies in the surplus or net product of
40,000 lbs. of yarn, one-sixth of the gross product, with a value of £2,000 which will be realised by a
sale. £2,000 is £2,000. We can neither see nor smell in this sum of money a trace of surplus-value. When
we know that a given value is surplus-value, we know how its owner came by it; but that does not alter
the nature either of value or of money.

In order to convert this additional sum of £2,000 into capital, the master-spinner will, all circumstances
remaining as before, advance four-fifths of it (£1,600) in the purchase of cotton, &c, and one-fifth
(£400) in the purchase of additional spinners, who will find in the market the necessaries of life whose
value the master has advanced to them.

Then the new capital of £2,000 functions in the spinning-mill, and brings in, in its turn, a surplus-value of
£400.

The capital-value was originally advanced in the money-form. The surplus-value on the contrary is,
originally, the value of a definite portion of the gross product. If this gross product be sold, converted
into money, the capital- value regains its original form. From this moment the capital-value and the
surplus-value are both of them sums of money, and their reconversion into capital takes place in
precisely the same way. The one, as well as the other, is laid out by the capitalist in the purchase of
commodities that place him in a position to begin afresh the fabrication of his goods, and this time, on an
extended scale. But in order to be able to buy those commodities, he must find them ready in the market.

His own yams circulate, only because he brings his annual product to market, as all other capitalists
likewise do with their commodities. But these commodities, before coming to market, were part of the
general annual product, part of the total mass of objects of every kind, into which the sum of the
individual capitals, i.e., the total capital of society, had been converted in the course of the year, and of
which each capitalist had in hand only an aliquot part. The transactions in the market effectuate only the
interchange of the individual components of this annual product, transfer them from one hand to another,
but can neither augment the total annual production, nor alter the nature of the objects produced. Hence
the use that can be made of the total annual product, depends entirely upon its own composition, but in
no way upon circulation.

The annual production, must in the first place furnish all those objects (use- values) from which the
material components of capital, used up in the course of the year, have to be replaced. Deducting these
there remains the net or surplus-product, in which the surplus- value lies. And of what does this
surplus-product consist? Only of things destined to satisfy the wants and desires of the capitalist class,
things which, consequently, enter into the consumption-fund of the capitalists? Were that the case, the
cup of surplus-value would be drained to the very dregs, and nothing but simple reproduction would ever
take place.

To accumulate it is necessary to convert a portion of the surplus-product into capital. But we cannot,
except by a miracle, convert into capital anything but such articles as can be employed in the
labour-process (i.e., means of production), and such further articles as are suitable for the sustenance of
the labourer (i.e., means of subsistence). Consequently, a part of the annual surplus-labour must have
been applied to the production of additional means of production and subsistence, over and above the
quantity of these things required to replace the capital advanced. In one word, surplus-value is
convertible into capital solely because the surplus-product, whose value it is, already comprises the
material elements of new capital. \2]

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (2 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

Now in order to allow of these elements actually functioning as capital, the capitalist class requires
additional labour. If the exploitation of the labourers already employed do not increase, either extensively
or intensively, then additional labour-power must be found. For this the mechanism of capitalist
production provides beforehand, by converting the working-class into a class dependent on wages, a
class whose ordinary wages suffice, not only for its maintenance, but for its increase, it is only necessary
for capital to incorporate this additional labour-power, annually supplied by the working-class in the
shape of labourers of all ages, with the surplus means of production comprised in the annual produce,
and the conversion of surplus-value into capital is complete. From a concrete point of view,
accumulation resolves itself into the reproduction of capital on a progressively increasing scale. The
circle in which simple reproduction moves, alters its form, and, to use Sismondi's expression, changes
into a spiral. [3}

Let us now return to our illustration. It is the old story: Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, and so
on. The original capital of £10,000 brings in a surplus-value of £2,000, which is capitalised. The new
capital of £2,000 brings in a surplus-value of £400, and this, too, is capitalised, converted into a second
additional capital, which, in its turn, produces a further surplus-value of £80. And so the ball rolls on.

We here leave out of consideration the portion of the surplus-value consumed by the capitalist. Just as
little does it concern us, for the moment, whether the additional capital is joined on to the original capital,
or is separated from it to function independently; whether the same capitalist, who accumulated it,
employs it, or whether he hands it over to another. This only we must not forget, that by the side of the
newly-formed capital, the original capital continues to reproduce itself, and to produce surplus-value, and
that this is also true of all accumulated capital, and the additional capital engendered by it.

The original capital was formed by the advance of £10,000. How did the owner become possessed of it?
"By his own labour and that of his forefathers," answer unanimously the spokesmen of Political
Economy. [4] And, in fact, their supposition appears the only one consonant with the laws of the
production of commodities.

But it is quite otherwise with regard to the additional capital of £2,000. How that originated we know
perfectly well. There is not one single atom of its value that does not owe its existence to unpaid labour.
The means of production, with which the additional labour-power is incorporated, as well as the
necessaries with which the labourers are sustained, are nothing but component parts of the
surplus-product, of the tribute annually exacted from the working-class by the capitalist class. Though
the latter with a portion of that tribute purchases the additional labour-power even at its full price, so that
equivalent is exchanged for equivalent, yet the transaction is for all that only the old dodge of every
conqueror who buys commodities from the conquered with the money he has robbed them of.

If the additional capital employs the person who produced it, this producer must not only continue to
augment the value of the original capital, but must buy back the fruits of his previous labour with more
labour than they cost. When viewed as a transaction between the capitalist class and the working-class, it
makes no difference that additional labourers are employed by means of the unpaid labour of the
previously employed labourers. The capitalist may even convert the additional capital into a machine that
throws the producers of that capital out of work, and that replaces them by a few children. In every case
the working-class creates by the surplus-labour of one year the capital destined to employ additional
labour in the following year. [5} And this is what is called: creating capital out of capital.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (3 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

The accumulation of the first additional capital of £2,000 pre-supposes a value of £10,000 belonging to
the capitalist by virtue of his "primitive labour," and advanced by him. The second additional capital of
£400 pre-supposes, on the contrary, only the previous accumulation of the £2,000, of which the £400 is
the surplus-value capitalised. The ownership of past unpaid labour is thenceforth the sole condition for
the appropriation of living unpaid labour on a constantly increasing scale. The more the capitalist has
accumulated, the more is he able to accumulate.

In so far as the surplus-value, of which the additional capital, No. 1, consists, is the result of the purchase
of labour-power with part of the original capital, a purchase that conformed to the laws of the exchange
of commodities, and that, from a legal standpoint, pre-supposes nothing beyond the free disposal, on the
part of the labourer, of his own capacities, and on the part of the owner of money or commodities, of the
values that belong to him; in so far as the additional capital, No. 2, &c, is the mere result of No. 1, and,
therefore, a consequence of the above conditions; in so far as each single transaction invariably conforms
to the laws of the exchange of commodities, the capitalist buying labour-power, the labourer selling it,
and we will assume at its real value; in so far as all this is true, it is evident that the laws of appropriation
or of private property, laws that are based on the production and circulation of commodities, become by
their own inner and inexorable dialectic changed into their very opposite. The exchange of equivalents,
the original operation with which we started, has now become turned round in such a way that there is
only an apparent exchange. This is owing to the fact, first, that the capital which is exchanged for
labour-power is itself but a portion of the product of others' labour appropriated without an equivalent;
and, secondly, that this capital must not only be replaced by its producer, but replaced together with an
added surplus. The relation of exchange subsisting between capitalist and labourer becomes a mere
semblance appertaining to the process of circulation, a mere form, foreign to the real nature of the
transaction, and only mystifying it. The ever repeated purchase and sale of labour-power is now the mere
form; what really takes place is this — the capitalist again and again appropriates, without equivalent, a
portion of the previously materialised labour of others, and exchanges it for a greater quantity of living
labour. At first the rights of property seemed to us to be based on a man's own labour. At least, some
such assumption was necessary since only commodity-owners with equal rights confronted each other,
and the sole means by which a man could become possessed of the commodities of others, was by
alienating his own commodities; and these could be replaced by labour alone. Now, however, property
turns out to be the right, on the part of the capitalist, to appropriate the unpaid labour of others or its
product, and to be the impossibility, on the part of the labourer, of appropriating his own product. The
separation of property from labour has become the necessary consequence of a law that apparently
originated in their identity. [61

Therefore, [71 however much the capitalist mode of appropriation may seem to fly in the face of the
original laws of commodity production, it nevertheless arises, not from a violation, but, on the contrary,
from the application of these laws. Let us make this clear once more by briefly reviewing the consecutive
phases of motion whose culminating point is capitalist accumulation.

We saw, in the first place, that the original conversion of a sum of values into capital was achieved in
complete accordance with the laws of exchange. One party to the contract sells his labour-power, the
other buys it. The former receives the value of his commodity, whose use-value — labour — is thereby
alienated to the buyer. Means of production which already belong to the latter are then transformed by
him, with the aid of labour equally belonging to him, into a new product which is likewise lawfully his.

The value of this product includes: first, the value of the used-up means of production. Useful labour

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (4 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

cannot consume these means of production without transferring their value to the new product, but, to be
saleable, labour-power must be capable of supplying useful labour in the branch of industry in which it is
to be employed.

The value of the new product further includes: the equivalent of the value of the labour-power together
with a surplus- value. This is so because the value of the labour-power — sold for a definite length of
time, say a day, a week, etc. — is less than the value created by its use during that time. But the worker
has received payment for the exchange-value of his labour-power and by so doing has alienated its
use-value — this being the case in every sale and purchase.

The fact that this particular commodity, labour-power, possesses the peculiar use- value of supplying
labour, and therefore of creating value, cannot affect the general law of commodity production. If,
therefore, the magnitude of value advanced in wages is not merely found again in the product, but is
found there augmented by a surplus-value, this is not because the seller has been defrauded, for he has
really received the value of his commodity; it is due solely to the fact that this commodity has been used
up by the buyer.

The law of exchange requires equality only between the exchange-values of the commodities given in
exchange for one another. From the very outset it pre-supposes even a difference between their
use-values and it has nothing whatever to do with their consumption, which only begins after the deal is
closed and executed.

Thus the original conversion of money into capital is achieved in the most exact accordance with the
economic laws of commodity production and with the right of property derived from them. Nevertheless,
its result is:

(1) that the product belongs to the capitalist and not to the worker;

(2) that the value of this product includes, besides the value of the capital advanced, a surplus-value
which costs the worker labour but the capitalist nothing, and which none the less becomes the legitimate
property of the capitalist;

(3) that the worker has retained his labour-power and can sell it anew if he can find a buyer.

Simple reproduction is only the periodical repetition of this first operation; each time money is converted
afresh into capital. Thus the law is not broken; on the contrary, it is merely enabled to operate
continuously. "Several successive acts of exchange have only made the last represent the first"
(Sismondi, "Nouveaux Principes, etc.," p. 70).

And yet we have seen that simple reproduction suffices to stamp this first operation, in so far as it is
conceived as an isolated process, with a totally changed character. "Of those who share the national
income among themselves, the one side (the workers) acquire every year a fresh right to their share by
fresh work; the others (the capitalists) have already acquired, by work done originally, a permanent right
to their share" (Sismondi, 1. c, pp. 110, 11 1). It is indeed notorious that the sphere of labour is not the
only one in which primogeniture works miracles.

Nor does it matter if simple reproduction is replaced by reproduction on an extended scale, by
accumulation. In the former case the capitalist squanders the whole surplus-value in dissipation, in the
latter he demonstrates his bourgeois virtue by consuming only a portion of it and converting the rest into



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (5 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

money.

The surplus-value is his property; it, has never belonged to anyone else. If he advances it for the purposes
of production, the advances made come from his own funds, exactly as on the day when he first entered
the market. The fact that on this occasion the funds are derived from the unpaid labour of his workers
makes absolutely no difference. If worker B is paid out of the surplus-value which worker A produced,
then, in the first place, A furnished that surplus-value without having the just price of his commodity cut
by a half-penny, and, in the second place, the transaction is no concern of B's whatever. What B claims,
and has a right to claim, is that the capitalist should pay him the value of his labour-power. "Both were
still gainers: the worker because he was advanced the fruits of his labour" (should read: of the unpaid
labour of other workers) "before the work was done" (should read: before his own labour had borne
fruit); "the employer (le maitre), because the labour of this worker was worth more than his wages"
(should read: produced more value than the value of his wages). (Sismondi, 1. c, p. 135.)

To be sure, the matter looks quite different if we consider capitalist production in the uninterrupted flow
of its renewal, and if, in place of the individual capitalist and the individual worker, we view in their
totality, the capitalist class and the working-class confronting each other. But in so doing we should be
applying standards entirely foreign to commodity production.

Only buyer and seller, mutually independent, face each other in commodity production. The relations
between them cease on the day when the term stipulated in the contract they concluded expires. If the
transaction is repeated, it is repeated as the -result of a new agreement which has nothing to do with the
previous one and which only by chance brings the same seller together again with the same buyer.

If, therefore, commodity production, or one of its associated processes, is to be judged according to its
own economic laws, we must consider each act of exchange by itself, apart from any connexion with the
act of exchange preceding it and that following it. And since sales and purchases are negotiated solely
between particular individuals, it is not admissible to seek here for relations between whole social
classes.

However long a series of periodical reproductions and preceding accumulations the capital functioning
to-day may have passed through, it always preserves its original virginity. So long as the laws of
exchange are observed in every single act of exchange the mode of appropriation can be completely
revolutionised without in any way affecting the property rights which correspond to commodity
production. These same rights remain in force both at the outset, when the product belongs to its
producer, who, exchanging equivalent for equivalent, can enrich himself only by his own labour, and
also in the period of capitalism, when social wealth becomes to an ever-increasing degree the property of
those who are in a position to appropriate continually and ever afresh the unpaid labour of others.

This result becomes inevitable from the moment there is a free sale, by the labourer himself, of
labour-power as a commodity. But it is also only from then onwards that commodity production is
generalised and becomes the typical form of production; it is only from then onwards that, from the first,
every product is produced for sale and all wealth produced goes through the sphere of circulation. Only
when and where wage-labour is its basis does commodity production impose itself upon society as a
whole; but only then and there also does it unfold all its hidden potentialities. To say that the
supervention of wage-labour adulterates commodity production is to say that commodity production
must not develop if it is to remain unadulterated. To the extent that commodity production, in accordance
with its own inherent laws, develops further, into capitalist production, the property laws of commodity

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (6 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

production change into the laws of capitalist appropriation. [8]



We have seen that even in the case of simple reproduction, all capital, whatever its original source,
becomes converted into accumulated capital, capitalised surplus- value. But in the flood of production all
the capital originally advanced becomes a vanishing quantity (magnitudo evanescens, in the
mathematical sense), compared with the directly accumulated capital, i.e., with the surplus-value or
surplus-product that is reconverted into capital, whether it functions in the hands of its accumulator, or in
those of others. Hence, Political Economy describes capital in general as "accumulated wealth"
(converted surplus-value or revenue), "that is employed over again in the production of surplus-value,"
[91 and the capitalist as "the owner of surplus-value." flQl It is merely another way of expressing the
same thing to say that all existing capital is accumulated or capitalised interest, for interest is a mere
fragment of surplus-value, fill



SECTION 2.

ERRONEOUS CONCEPTION, BY POLITICAL ECONOMY, OF REPRODUCTION ON A
PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE



Before we further investigate accumulation or the reconversion of surplus-value into capital, we must
brush on one side an ambiguity introduced by the classical economists.

Just as little as the commodities that the capitalist buys with a part of the surplus-value for his own
consumption, serve the purpose of production and of creation of value, so little is the labour that he buys
for the satisfaction of his natural and social requirements, productive labour. Instead of converting
surplus-value into capital, he, on the contrary, by the purchase of those commodities and that labour,
consumes or expends it as revenue. In the face of the habitual mode of life of the old feudal nobility,
which, as Hegel rightly says, "consists in consuming what is in hand," and more especially displays itself
in the luxury of personal retainers, it was extremely important for bourgeois economy to promulgate the
doctrine that accumulation of capital is the first duty of every citizen, and to preach without ceasing, that
a man cannot accumulate, if he eats up all his revenue, instead of spending a good part of it in the
acquisition of additional productive labourers, who bring in more than they cost. On the other hand the
economists had to contend against the popular prejudice, that confuses capitalist production with
hoarding, \ 121 and fancies that accumulated wealth is either wealth that is rescued from being destroyed
in its existing form, i.e., from being consumed, or wealth that is withdrawn from circulation. Exclusion of
money from circulation would also exclude absolutely its self-expansion as capital, while accumulation
of a hoard in the shape of commodities would be sheer tomfoolery. fl31 The accumulation of
commodities in great masses is the result either of over-production or of a stoppage of circulation. £14]_It
is true that the popular mind is impressed by the sight, on the one hand, of the mass of goods that are
stored up for gradual consumption by the rich, fl51 and on the other hand, by the formation of reserve
stocks; the latter, a phenomenon that is common to all modes of production, and on which we shall dwell



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (7 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

for a moment, when we come to analyse circulation. Classical economy is therefore quite right, when it
maintains that the consumption of surplus-products by productive, instead of by unproductive labourers,
is a characteristic feature of the process of accumulation. But at this point the mistakes also begin. Adam
Smith has made it the fashion, to represent accumulation as nothing more than consumption of
surplus-products by productive labourers, which amounts to saying, that the capitalising of surplus-value
consists in merely turning surplus-value into labour-power. Let us see what Ricardo, e.g., says: "It must
be understood that all the productions of a country are consumed; but it makes the greatest difference
imaginable whether they are consumed by those who reproduce, or by those who do not reproduce
another value. When we say that revenue is saved, and added to capital, what we mean is, that the portion
of revenue, so said to be added to capital, is consumed by productive instead of unproductive labourers.
There can be no greater error than in supposing that capital is increased by non-consumption. " fl61 There
can be no greater error than that which Ricardo and all subsequent economists repeat after A. Smith, viz.,
that "the part of revenue, of which it is said, it has been added to capital, is consumed by productive
labourers." According to this, all surplus-value that is changed into capital becomes variable capital. So
far from this being the case, the surplus-value, like the original capital, divides itself into constant capital
and variable capital, into means of production and labour-power, labour-power is the form under which
variable capital exists during the process of production. In this process the labour-power is itself
consumed by the capitalist while the means of production are consumed by the labour-power in the
exercise of its function, labour. At the same time, the money paid for the purchase of the labour-power, is
converted into necessaries, that are consumed, not by "productive labour," but by the "productive
labourer." Adam Smith, by a fundamentally perverted analysis, arrives at the absurd conclusion, that
even though each individual capital is divided into a constant and a variable part, the capital of society
resolves itself only into variable capital, i.e, is laid out exclusively in payment of wages. For instance,
suppose a cloth manufacturer converts £2,000 into capital. One portion he lays out in buying weavers,
the other in woollen yam, machinery, &c. But the people, from whom he buys the yarn and the
machinery, pay for labour with a part of the purchase money, and so on until the whole £2,000 are spent
in the payment of wages, i.e, until the entire product represented by the £2,000 has been consumed by
productive labourers. It is evident that the whole gist of this argument lies in the words "and so on,"
which send us from pillar to post. In truth, Adam Smith breaks his investigation off, just where its
difficulties begin. ri71

The annual process of reproduction is easily understood, so long as we keep in view merely the sum total
of the year's production. But every single component of this product must be brought into the market as a
commodity, and there the difficulty begins. The movements of the individual capitals, and of the personal
revenues, cross and intermingle and are lost in the general change of places, in the circulation of the
wealth of society; this dazes the sight, and propounds very complicated problems for solution. In the
third part of Book II. I shall give the analysis of the real bearings of the facts. It is one of the great merits
of the Physiocrats, that in their Tableau economique they were the first to attempt to depict the annual
production in the shape in which it is presented to us after passing through the process of circulation. |T81

For the rest, it is a matter of course, that Political Economy, acting in the interests of the capitalist class,
has not failed to exploit the doctrine of Adam. Smith, viz., that the whole of that part of the
surplus-product which is converted into capital, is consumed by the working-class.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (8 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

SECTION 3.

SEPARATION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE. THE ABSTINENCE
THEORY



In the last preceding chapter, we treated surplus-value (or the surplus-product) solely as a fund for
supplying the individual consumption of the capitalist. In this chapter we have, so far, treated it solely as
a fund for accumulation. It is, however, neither the one nor the other, but is both together. One portion is
consumed by the capitalist as revenue, f!91 the other is employed as capital, is accumulated.

Given the mass of surplus-value, then, the larger the one of these parts, the smaller is the other. Caeteris
paribus, the ratio of these parts determines the magnitude of the accumulation. But it is by the owner of
the surplus-value, by the capitalist alone, that the division is made, it is his deliberate act. That part of the
tribute exacted by him which he accumulates, is said to be saved by him, because he does not eat it, i.e,
because he performs the function of a capitalist, and enriches himself.

Except as personified capital, the capitalist has no historical value, and no right to that historical
existence, which, to use an expression of the witty Lichnowsky, "hasn't got no date." And so far only is
the necessity for his own transitory existence implied in the transitory necessity for the capitalist mode of
production. But, so far as he is personified capital, it is not values in use and the enjoyment of them, but
exchange- value and its augmentation, that spur him into action. Fanatically bent on making value expand
itself, he ruthlessly forces the human race to produce for production's sake; he thus forces the
development of the productive powers of society, and creates those material conditions, which alone can
form the real basis of a higher form of society, a society in which the full and free development of every
individual forms the ruling principle. Only as personified capital is the capitalist respectable. As such, he
shares with the miser the passion for wealth as wealth. But that which in the miser is a mere
idiosyncrasy, is, in the capitalist, the effect of the social mechanism, of which he is but one of the wheels.
Moreover, the development of capitalist production makes it constantly necessary to keep increasing the
amount of the capital laid out in a given industrial undertaking, and competition makes the immanent
laws of capitalist production to be felt by each individual capitalist, as external coercive laws. It compels
him to keep constantly extending his capital, in order to preserve it, but extend it he cannot, except by
means of progressive accumulation.

So far, therefore, as his actions are a mere function of capital — endowed as capital is, in his person, with
consciousness and a will — his own private consumption is a robbery perpetrated on accumulation, just
as in book-keeping by double entry, the private expenditure of the capitalist is placed on the debtor side
of his account against his capital. To accumulate, is to conquer the world of social wealth, to increase the
mass of human beings exploited by him, and thus to extend both the direct and the indirect sway of the
capitalist. [201

But original sin is at work everywhere. As capitalist production, accumulation, and wealth, become
developed, the capitalist ceases to be the mere incarnation of capital. He has a fellow-feeling for his own
Adam, and his education gradually enables him to smile at the rage for asceticism, as a mere prejudice of
the old-fashioned miser. While the capitalist of the classical type brands individual consumption as a sin

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (9 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

against his function, and as "abstinence" from accumulating, the modernised capitalist is capable of
looking upon accumulation as "abstinence" from pleasure.

"Two souls, alas, do dwell with in his breast;
The one is ever parting from the other." f211

At the historical dawn of capitalist production, — and every capitalist upstart has personally to go
through this historical stage — avarice, and desire to get rich, are the ruling passions. But the progress of
capitalist production not only creates a world of delights; it lays open, in speculation and the credit
system, a thousand sources of sudden enrichment. When a certain stage of development has been
reached, a conventional degree of prodigality, which is also an exhibition of wealth, and consequently a
source of credit, becomes a business necessity to the "unfortunate" capitalist. Luxury enters into capital's
expenses of representation. Moreover, the capitalist gets rich, not like the miser, in proportion to his
personal labour and restricted consumption, but at the same rate as he squeezes out the labour-power of
others, and enforces on the labourer abstinence from all life's enjoyments. Although, therefore, the
prodigality of the capitalist never possesses the bona-fide character of the open-handed feudal lord's
prodigality, but, on the contrary, has always lurking behind it the most sordid avarice and the most
anxious calculation, yet his expenditure grows with his accumulation, without the one necessarily
restricting the other. But along with this growth, there is at the same time developed in his breast, a
Faustian conflict between the passion for accumulation, and the desire for enjoyment.

Dr. Aikin says in a work published in 1795: "The trade of Manchester may be divided into four periods.
First, when manufacturers were obliged to work hard for their livelihood." They enriched themselves
chiefly by robbing the parents, whose children were bound as apprentices to them; the parents paid a high
premium, while the apprentices were starved. On the other hand, the average profits were low, and to
accumulate, extreme parsimony was requisite. They lived like misers and were far from consuming even
the interest on their capital. "The second period, when they had begun to acquire little fortunes, but
worked as hard as before," — for direct exploitation of labour costs labour, as every slave-driver knows
— "and lived in as plain a manner as before.... The third, when luxury began, and the trade was pushed
by sending out riders for orders into every market town in the Kingdom.... It is probable that few or no
capitals of £3,000 to £4,000 acquired by trade existed here before 1690. However, about that time, or a
little later, the traders had got money beforehand, and began to build modem brick houses, instead of
those of wood and plaster." Even in the early part of the 18th century, a Manchester manufacturer, who
placed a pint of foreign wine before his guests, exposed himself to the remarks and headshakings of all
his neighbours. Before the rise of machinery, a manufacturer's evening expenditure at the public house
where they all met, never exceeded sixpence for a glass of punch, and a penny for a screw of tobacco. It
was not till 1758, and this marks an epoch, that a person actually engaged in business was seen with an
equipage of his own. "The fourth period," the last 30 years of the 18th century, "is that in which expense
and luxury have made great progress, and was supported by a trade extended by means of riders and
factors through every part of Europe." f221 What would the good Dr. Aikin say if he could rise from his
grave and see the Manchester of to-day?

Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets! "Industry furnishes the material which saving
accumulates." f231 Therefore, save, save, i.e, reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus-value, or
surplus-product into capital! Accumulation for accumulation's sake, production for production's sake: by
this formula classical economy expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie, and did not for a
single instant deceive itself over the birth-throes of wealth. f241 But what avails lamentation in the face

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (10 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

of historical necessity? If to classical economy, the proletarian is but a machine for the production of
surplus-value; on the other hand, the capitalist is in its eyes only a machine for the conversion of this
surplus-value into additional capital. Political Economy takes the historical function of the capitalist in
bitter earnest. In order to charm out of his bosom the awful conflict between the desire for enjoyment and
the chase after riches, Malthus, about the year 1820, advocated a division of labour, which assigns to the
capitalist actually engaged in production, the business of accumulating, and to the other sharers in
surplus-value, to the landlords, the place-men, the beneficed clergy, &c, the business of spending. It is of
the highest importance, he says, "to keep separate the passion for expenditure and the passion for
accumulation." f251 The capitalists having long been good livers and men of the world, uttered loud
cries. What, exclaimed one of their spokesmen, a disciple of Ricardo, Mr. Malthus preaches high rents,
heavy taxes, &c, so that the pressure of the spur may constantly be kept on the industrious by
unproductive consumers! By all means, production, production on a constantly increasing scale, runs the
shibboleth; but "production will, by such a process, be far more curbed in than spurred on. Nor is it quite
fair thus to maintain in idleness a number of persons, only to pinch others, who are likely, from their
characters, if you can force them to work, to work with success." [261 Unfair as he finds it to spur on the
industrial capitalist, by depriving his bread of its butter, yet he thinks it necessary to reduce the labourer's
wages to a minimum "to keep him industrious." Nor does he for a moment conceal the fact, that the
appropriation of unpaid labour is the secret of surplus-value. "Increased demand on the part of the
labourers means nothing more than their willingness to take less of their own product for themselves, and
leave a greater part of it to their employers; and if it be said, that this begets glut, by lessening
consumption" (on the part of the labourers), "I can only reply that glut is synonymous with large profits."
[271

The learned disputation, how the booty pumped out of the labourer may be divided, with most advantage
to accumulation, between the industrial capitalist and the rich idler, was hushed in face of the revolution
of July. Shortly afterwards, the town proletariat at Lyons sounded the tocsin of revolution, and the
country proletariat in England began to, set fire to farm-yards and corn-stacks. On this side of the
Channel Owenism began to spread; on the other side, St. Simonism and Fourierism. The hour of vulgar
economy had struck. Exactly a year before Nassau W. Senior discovered at Manchester, that the profit
(including interest) of capital is the product of the last hour of the twelve, he had announced to the world
another discovery. "I substitute," he proudly says, "for the word capital, considered as an instrument of
production, the word abstinence.'" An unparalleled sample this, of the discoveries of vulgar economy! It
substitutes for an economic category, a sycophantic phrase — voila tout. "When the savage," says Senior,
"makes bows, he exercises an industry, but he does not practise abstinence." \2S] This explains how and
why, in the earlier states of society, the implements of labour were fabricated without abstinence on the
part of the capitalist. "The more society progresses, the more abstinence is demanded," f291 namely, from
those who ply the industry of appropriating the fruits of others' industry. All the conditions for carrying
on the labour-process are suddenly converted into so many acts of abstinence on the part of the capitalist.
If the corn is not all eaten, but part of it also sown — abstinence of the capitalist. If the wine gets time to
mature — abstinence of the capitalist. POI The capitalist robs his own self, whenever he "lends (!) the
instruments of production to the labourer," that is, whenever by incorporating labour-power with them,
he uses them to extract surplus-value out of that labour-power, instead of eating them up, steam-engines,
cotton, railways, manure, horses, and all; or as the vulgar economist childishly puts it, instead of
dissipating "their value" in luxuries and other articles of consumption. f311 How the capitalists as a class
are to perform that feat, is a secret that vulgar economy has hitherto obstinately refused to divulge.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (11 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

Enough, that the world still jogs on, solely through the self-chastisement of this modern penitent of
Vishnu, the capitalist. Not only accumulation, but the simple "conservation of a capital requires a
constant effort to resist the temptation of consuming it." f32] The simple dictates of humanity therefore
plainly enjoin the release of the capitalist from this martyrdom and temptation, in the same way that the
Georgian slave-owner was lately delivered, by the abolition of slavery, from the painful dilemma,
whether to squander the surplus-product, lashed out of his niggers, entirely in champagne, or whether to
reconvert a part of it into more niggers and more land.

In economic forms of society of the most different kinds, there occurs, not only simple reproduction, but,
in varying degrees, reproduction on a progressively increasing scale. By degrees more is produced and
more consumed, and consequently more products have to be converted into means of production. This
process, however, does not present itself as accumulation of capital, nor as the function of a capitalist, so
long as the labourer's means of production, and with them, his product and means of subsistence, do not
confront him in the shape of capital. f331 Richard Jones, who died a few years ago, and was the successor
of Malthus in the chair of Political Economy at Haileybury College, discusses this point well in the light
of two important facts. Since the great mass of the Hindu population are peasants cultivating their land
themselves, their products, their instruments of labour and means of subsistence never take "the shape of
a fund saved from revenue, which fund has, therefore, gone through a previous process of accumulation."
f341 On the other hand, the non-agricultural labourers in those provinces where the English rule has least
disturbed the old system, are directly employed by the magnates, to whom a portion of the agricultural
surplus-product is rendered in the shape of tribute or rent. One portion of this product is consumed by the
magnates in kind, another is converted, for their use, by the labourers, into articles of luxury and such
like things, while the rest forms the wages of the labourers, who own their implements of labour. Here,
production and reproduction on a progressively increasing scale, go on their way without any
intervention from that queer saint, that knight of the woeful countenance, the capitalist "abstainer."



SECTION 4.

CIRCUMSTANCES THAT, INDEPENDENTLY OF THE PROPORTIONAL DIVISION OF
SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE, DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF
ACCUMULATION. DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER. PRODUCTIVITY OF
LABOUR. GROWING DIFFERENCE IN AMOUNT BETWEEN CAPITAL EMPLOYED AND
CAPITAL CONSUMED. MAGNITUDE OF CAPITAL ADVANCED



The proportion in which surplus-value breaks up into capital and revenue being given, the magnitude of
the capital accumulated clearly depends on the absolute magnitude of the surplus-value. Suppose that 80
per cent, were capitalised and 20 per cent, eaten up, the accumulated capital will be £2,400 or £200,
according as the total surplus value has amounted to £3,000 or £500. Hence all the circumstances that
determine the mass of surplus-value, operate to determine the magnitude of the accumulation. We sum
them up once again, but only in so far as they afford new points of view in regard to accumulation.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (12 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

It will be remembered that the rate of surplus-value depends, in the first place, on the degree of
exploitation of labour-power. Political Economy values this fact so highly, that it occasionally identifies
the acceleration of accumulation due to increased productiveness of labour, with its acceleration due to
increased exploitation of the labourer. f351 In the chapters on the production of surplus-value it was
constantly pre-supposed that wages are at least equal to the value of labour-power. Forcible reduction of
wages below this value plays, however, in practice too important a part, for us not to pause upon it for a
moment. It, in fact, transforms, within certain limits, the labourer's necessary consumption-fund into a
fund for the accumulation of capital.

"Wages," says John Stuart Mill, "have no productive power; they are the price of a productive power.
Wages do not contribute, along with labour, to the production of commodities, no more than the price of
tools contributes along with the tools themselves. If labour could be had without purchase, wages might
be dispensed with." f361 But if the labourers could live on air they could not be bought at any price. The
zero of their cost is therefore a limit in a mathematical sense, always beyond reach, although we can
always approximate more and more nearly to it. The constant tendency of capital is to force the cost of
labour back towards this zero. A writer of the 18th century, often quoted already, the author of the "Essay
on Trade and Commerce," only betrays the innermost secret soul of English capitalism, when he declares
the historic mission of England to be the forcing down of English wages to the level of the French and
the Dutch. \31] With other things he says naively: "But if our poor" (technical term for labourers) "will
live luxuriously ... then labour must, of course, be dear.... When it is considered what luxuries the
manufacturing populace consume, such as brandy, gin, tea, sugar, foreign fruit, strong beer, printed
linens, snuff, tobacco, &C." f381 He quotes the work of a Northamptonshire manufacturer, who, with
eyes squinting heavenward moans: "Labour is one-third cheaper in France than in England; for their poor
work hard, and fare hard, as to their food and clothing. Their chief diet is bread, fruit, herbs, roots, and
dried fish; for they very seldom eat flesh; and when wheat is dear, they eat very little bread." f391 "To
which may be added," our essayist goes on, "that their drink is either water or other small liquors, so that
they spend very little money.... These things are very difficult to be brought about; but they are not
impracticable, since they have been effected both in France and in Holland. " KOI Twenty years later, an
American humbug, the baronised Yankee, Benjamin Thompson (alias Count Rumford) followed the
same line of philanthropy to the great satisfaction of God and man. His "Essays" are a cookery book with
receipts of all kinds for replacing by some succedaneum the ordinary dear food of the labourer. The
following is a particularly successful receipt of this wonderful philosopher: "5 lbs. of barleymeal, 7 1/2
d.; 5 lbs. of Indian corn, 6 1/4 d.; 3d. worth of red herring, Id. salt, Id. vinegar, 2d. pepper and sweet
herbs, in all 20 3/4.; make a soup for 64 men, and at the medium price of barley and of Indian corn ... this
soup may be provided at 1/4 d., the portion of 20 ounces. f411 With the advance of capitalistic
production, the adulteration of food rendered Thompson's ideal superfluous. f421 At the end of the 18th
and during the first ten years of the 19th century, the English farmers and landlords enforced the absolute
minimum of wage, by paying the agricultural labourers less than the minimum in the form of wages, and
the remainder in the shape of parochial relief. An example of the waggish way in which the English
Dogberries acted in their "legal" fixing of a wages tariff: "The squires of Norfolk had dined, says Mr.
Burke, when they fixed the rate of wages; the squires of Berks evidently thought the labourers ought not
to do so, when they fixed the rate of wages at Speenhamland, 1795.... There they decide that 'income
(weekly) should be 3s. for a man,' when the gallon or half-peck loaf of 8 lbs. 1 1 oz. is at Is., and increase
regularly till bread is Is. 5d.; when it is above that sum decrease regularly till it be at 2s., and then his
food should be 1/5 th less." f431 Before the Committee of Inquiry of the House of Lords, 1814, a certain

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (13 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

A. Bennett, a large farmer, magistrate, poor-law guardian, and wage-regulator, was asked: "Has any
proportion of the value of daily labour been made up to the labourers out of the poors' rate?" Answer:
"Yes, it has; the weekly income of every family is made up to the gallon loaf (8 lbs. 1 1 oz.), and 3d. per
head!... The gallon loaf per week is what we suppose sufficient for the maintenance of every person in
the family for the week; and the 3d. is for clothes, and if the parish think proper to find clothes; the 3d. is
deducted. This practice goes through all the western part of Wiltshire, and, I believe, throughout the
country." f441 "For years," exclaims a bourgeois author of that time, "they (the farmers) have degraded a
respectable class of their countrymen, by forcing them to have recourse to the workhouse ... the farmer,
while increasing his own gains, has prevented any accumulation on the part of his labouring dependents."
f451 The part played in our days by the direct robbery from the labourer's necessary consumption-fund in
the formation of surplus-value, and, therefore, of the accumulation-fund of capital, the so-called domestic
industry has served to show. (Ch. xv., sect. 8, c.) Further facts on this subject will be given later.

Although in all branches of industry that part of the constant capital consisting of instruments of labour
must be sufficient for a certain number of labourers (determined by the magnitude of the undertaking), it
by no means always necessarily increases in the same proportion as the quantity of labour employed. In a
factory, suppose that 100 labourers working 8 hours a day yield 800 working-hours. If the capitalist
wishes to raise this sum by one half, he can employ 50 more workers; but then he must also advance
more capital, not merely for wages, but for instruments of labour. But he might also let the 100 labourers
work 12 hours instead of 8, and then the instruments of labour already to hand would be enough. These
would then simply be more rapidly consumed. Thus additional labour, begotten of the greater tension of
labour-power, can augment surplus-product and surplus-value (i.e., the subject-matter of accumulation),
without corresponding augmentation in the constant part of capital.

In the extractive industries, mines, &c, the raw materials form no part of the capital advanced. The
subject of labour is in this case not a product of previous labour, but is furnished by Nature gratis, as in
the case of metals, minerals, coal, stone, &c. In these cases the constant capital consists almost
exclusively of instruments of labour, which can very well absorb an increased quantity of labour (day
and night shifts of labourers, e.g.). All other things being equal, the mass and value of the product will
rise in direct proportion to the labour expended. As on the first day of production,, the original
produce-formers, now turned into the creators of the material elements of capital — man and Nature —
still work together. Thanks to the elasticity of labour-power, the domain of accumulation has extended
without any previous enlargement of constant capital.

In agriculture the land under cultivation cannot be increased without the advance of more seed and
manure. But this advance once made, the purely mechanical working of the soil itself produces a
marvellous effect on the amount of the product. A greater quantity of labour, done by the same number
of labourers as before, thus increases the fertility, without requiring any new advance in the instruments
of labour. It is once again the direct action of man on Nature which becomes an immediate source of
greater accumulation, without the intervention of any new capital.

Finally, in what is called manufacturing industry, every additional expenditure of labour pre-supposes a
corresponding additional expenditure of raw materials, but not necessarily of instruments of labour. And
as extractive industry and agriculture supply manufacturing industry with its raw materials and those of
its instruments of labour, the additional product the former have created without additional advance of
capital, tells also in favour of the latter.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (14 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

General result: by incorporating with itself the two primary creators of wealth, labour-power and the
land, capital acquires a power of expansion that permits it to augment the elements of its accumulation
beyond the limits apparently fixed by its own magnitude, or by the value and the mass of the means of
production, already produced, in which it has its being.

Another important factor in the accumulation of capital is the degree of productivity of social labour.

With the productive power of labour increases the mass of the products, in which a certain value, and,
therefore, a surplus-value of a given magnitude, is embodied. The rate of surplus-value remaining the
same or even falling, so long as it only falls more slowly, than the productive power of labour rises, the
mass of the surplus-product increases. The division of this product into revenue and additional capital
remaining the same, the consumption of the capitalist may, therefore, increase without any decrease in
the fund of accumulation. The relative magnitude of the accumulation-fund may even increase at the
expense of the consumption-fund, whilst the cheapening of commodities places at the disposal of the
capitalist as many means of enjoyment as formerly, or even more than formerly. But hand-in-hand with
the increasing productivity of labour, goes, as we have seen, the cheapening of the labourer, therefore a
higher rate of surplus-value, even when the real wages are rising. The latter never rise proportionally to
the productive power of labour. The same value in variable capital therefore sets in movement more
labour-power, and, therefore, more labour. The same value in constant capital is embodied in more
means of production, i.e., in more instruments of labour, materials of labour and auxiliary materials; it
therefore also supplies more elements for the production both of use-value and of value, and with these
more absorbers of labour. The value of the additional capital, therefore, remaining the same or even
diminishing, accelerated accumulation still takes place. Not only does the scale of reproduction
materially extend, but the production of surplus-value increases more rapidly than the value of the
additional capital.

The development of the productive power of labour reacts also on the original capital already engaged in
the process of production. A part of the functioning constant capital consists of instruments of labour,
such as machinery, &c, which are not consumed, and therefore not reproduced, or replaced by new ones
of the same kind, until after long periods of time. But every year a part of these instruments of labour
-perishes or reaches t ' he limit of its productive function. It reaches, therefore, in that year, the time for
its periodical reproduction, for its replacement by new ones of the same kind. If the productiveness
of labour has, during the using up of these instruments of labour, increased (and it develops continually
with the uninterrupted advance of science and technology), more efficient and (considering their
increased efficiency), cheaper machines, tools, apparatus, &c, replace the old. The old capital is
reproduced in a more productive form, apart from the constant detail improvements in the instruments of
labour already in use. The other part of the constant capital, raw material and auxiliary substances, is
constantly reproduced in less than a year; those produced by agriculture, for the most part annually.
Every introduction of improved methods, therefore, works almost simultaneously on the new capital and
on that already in action. Every advance in Chemistry not only multiplies the number of useful materials
and the useful applications of those already known, thus extending with the growth of capital its sphere
of investment. It teaches at the same time how to throw the -excrements of the processes of production
and consumption back again into the circle of the process of reproduction, and thus, without any previous
outlay of capital, creates new matter for capital. Like the increased exploitation of natural wealth by the
mere increase in the tension of labour-power, science and technology give capital a power of expansion
independent of the given magnitude of the capital actually functioning. They react at the same time on
that part of the original capital which has entered upon its stage of renewal. This, in passing into its new

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (15 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

shape, incorporates gratis the social advance made while its old shape was being used up. Of course, this
development of productive power is accompanied by a partial depreciation of functioning capital. So far
as this depreciation makes itself acutely felt in competition, the burden falls on the labourer, in the
increased exploitation of whom the capitalist looks for his indemnification.

Labour transmits to its product the value of the means of production consumed by it. On the other hand,
the value and mass of the means of production set in motion by a given quantity of labour increase as the
labour becomes more productive. Though the same quantity of labour adds always to its products only
the same sum of new value, still the old capital- value, transmitted by the labour to the products, increases
with the growing productivity of labour.

An English and a Chinese spinner, e.g., may work the same number of hours with the same intensity;
then they will both in a week create equal values. But in spite of this equality, an immense difference will
obtain between the value of the week's product of the Englishman, who works with a mighty automaton,
and that of the Chinaman, who has but a spinning-wheel. In the same time as the Chinaman spins one
pound of cotton, the Englishman spins several hundreds of pounds. A sum, many hundred times as great,
of old values swells the value of his product, in which those re-appear in a new, useful form, and can thus
function anew as capital. "In 1782," as Frederick Engels teaches us, "all the wool crop in England of the
three preceding years, lay untouched for want of labourers, and so it must have lain, if newly invented
machinery had not come to its aid and spun it." f461 labour embodied in the form of machinery of course
did not directly force into life a single man, but it made it possible for a smaller number of labourers,
with the addition of relatively less living labour, not only to consume the wool productively, and put into
it new value, but to preserve in the form of yarn, &c, its old value. At the same time, it caused and
stimulated increased reproduction of wool. It is the natural property of living labour, to transmit old
value, whilst it creates new. Hence, with the increase in efficacy, extent and value of its means of
production, consequently with the accumulation that accompanies the development of its productive
power, labour keeps up and eternises an always increasing capital-value in a form ever new." [471 This
natural power of labour takes the appearance of an intrinsic property of capital, in which it is
incorporated, just as the productive forces of social labour take the appearance of inherent properties of
capital, and as the constant appropriation of surplus-labour by the capitalists, takes that of a constant
self-expansion of capital.

With the increase of capital, the difference between the capital employed and the capital consumed
increases, in other words, there is increase in the value and the material mass of the instruments of
labour, such as buildings, machinery, drain-pipes, working-cattle, apparatus of every kind that function
for a longer or shorter time in processes of production constantly repeated, or that serve for the
attainment of particular useful effects, whilst they themselves only gradually wear out, therefore only
lose their value piecemeal, therefore transfer that value to the product only bit by bit. In the same
proportion as these instruments of labour serve as product-formers without adding value to the product,
i.e., in the same proportion as they are wholly employed but only partly consumed, they perform, as we
saw earlier, the same gratuitous service as the natural forces, water, steam, air, electricity, etc. This
gratuitous service of past labour, when seized and filled with a soul by living labour, increases with the
advancing stages of accumulation.

Since past labour always disguises itself as capital, i.e, since the passive of the labour of A, B, C, etc.,
takes the form of the active of the non-labourer X, bourgeois and political economists are full of praises
of the services of dead and gone labour, which, according to the Scotch genius MacCulloch, ought to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (16 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

receive a special remuneration in the shape of interest, profit, etc. \48] The powerful and ever-increasing
assistance given by past labour to the living labour-process under the form of means of production is,
therefore, attributed to that form of past labour in which it is alienated, as unpaid labour, from the worker
himself, i.e, to its capitalistic form. The practical agents of capitalistic production and their pettifogging
ideologists are as unable to think of the means of production as separate from the antagonistic social
mask they wear to-day, as a slave-owner to think of the worker himself as distinct from his character as a
slave.

With a given degree of exploitation of labour-power, the mass of the surplus-value produced is
determined by the number of workers simultaneously exploited; and this corresponds, although in
varying proportions, with the magnitude of the capital. The more, therefore, capital increases by means
of successive accumulations, the more does the sum of the value increase that is divided into
consumption-fund and accumulation-fund. The capitalist can, therefore, live a more jolly life, and at the
same time show more "abstinence." And, finally, all the springs of production act with greater elasticity,
the more its scale extends with the mass of the capital advanced.



SECTION 5.

THE SO-CALLED LABOUR-FUND



It has been shown in the course of this inquiry that capital is not a fixed magnitude, but is a part of social
wealth, elastic and constantly fluctuating with the division of fresh surplus-value into revenue and
additional capital. It has been seen further that, even with a given magnitude of functioning capital, the
labour-power, the science, and the land (by which are to be understood, economically, all conditions of
labour furnished by Nature independently of man), embodied in it, form elastic powers of capital,
allowing it, within certain limits, a field of action independent of its own magnitude. In this inquiry we
have neglected all effects of the process of circulation, effects which may produce very different degrees
of efficiency in the same mass of capital. And as we pre-supposed the limits set by capitalist production,
that is to say, pre-supposed the process of social production in a form developed by purely spontaneous
growth, we neglected any more rational combination, directly and systematically practicable with the
means of production, and the mass of labour-power at present disposable. Classical economy always
loved to conceive social capital as a fixed magnitude of a fixed degree of efficiency. But this prejudice
was first established as a dogma by the arch-Philistine, Jeremy Bentham, that insipid, pedantic,
leather-tongued oracle of the ordinary bourgeois intelligence of the 19th century. f491 Bentham is among
philosophers what Martin Tupper is among poets. Both could only have been manufactured in England.
[501 In the light of his dogma the commonest phenomena of the process of production, as, e.g., its sudden
expansions and contractions, nay, even accumulation itself, become perfectly inconceivable. f511 The
dogma was used by Bentham himself, as well as by Malthus, James Mill, MacCulloch, etc., for an
apologetic purpose, and especially in order to represent one part of capital, namely, variable capital, or
that part convertible into labour-power, as a fixed magnitude. The material of variable capital, i.e, the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (17 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

mass of the means of subsistence it represents for the labourer, or the so-called labour-fund, was fabled
as a separate part of social wealth, fixed by natural laws and unchangeable. To set in motion the part of
social wealth which is to function as constant capital, or, to express it in a material form, as means of
production, a definite mass of living labour is required. This mass is given technologically. But neither is
the number of labourers required to render fluid this mass of labour-power given (it changes with the
degree of exploitation of the individual labour-power), nor is the price of this labour-power given, but
only its minimum limit, which is moreover very variable. The facts that lie at the bottom of this dogma
are these: on the one hand, the labourer has no right to interfere in the division of social wealth into
means of enjoyment for the non-labourer and means of production. f521 On the other hand, only in
favourable and exceptional cases, has he the power to enlarge the so-called labour-fund at the expense of
the "revenue" of the wealthy.

What silly tautology results from the attempt to represent the capitalistic limits of the labour-fund as its
natural and social limits may be seen, e.g., in Professor Fawcett. f531 "The circulating capital of a
country," he says, "is its wage-fund. Hence, if we desire to calculate the average money wages received
by each labourer, we have simply to divide the amount of this capital by the number of the labouring
population." f541 That is to say, we first add together the individual wages actually paid, and then we
affirm that the sum thus obtained, forms the total value of the "labour-fund" determined and vouchsafed
to us by God and Nature. Lastly, we divide the sum thus obtained by the number of labourers to find out
again how much may come to each on the average. An uncommonly knowing dodge this. It did not
prevent Mr. Fawcett saying in the same breath: "The aggregate wealth which is annually saved in
England, is divided into two portions; one portion is employed as capital to maintain our industry, and
the other portion is exported to foreign countries... Only a portion, and perhaps, not a large portion of the
wealth which is annually saved in this country, is invested in our own industry. f551

The greater part of the yearly accruing surplus-product, embezzled, because abstracted without return of
an equivalent, from the English labourer, is thus used as capital, not in England, but in foreign countries.
But with the additional capital thus exported, a part of the labour-fund" invented by God and Bentham is
also exported. f561



Footnotes

£11 "Accumulation of capital; the employment of a portion of revenue as capital." (Malthus: "Definitions,
&c," ed. Cazenove, p. 11.) "Conversion of revenue into capital," (Malthus: "Princ. of Pol. Econ " 2nd
Ed., Lond.. 1836, p. 320.)

\2] We here take no account of export trade, by means of which a nation can change articles of luxury
either into means of production or means of subsistence, and vice versa. In order to examine the object of
our investigation in its integrity, free from all disturbing subsidiary circumstances, we must treat the
whole world as one nation, and assume that capitalist production is everywhere established and has
possessed itself of every branch of industry.

\3] Sismondi's analysis of accumulation suffers from the great defect, that he contents himself, to too
great an extent, with the phrase "conversion of revenue into capital," without fathoming the material



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (18 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

conditions of this operation.

[41 "Le travail primitif auquelson capital a dii sa naissance." Sismondi, 1. c, ed. Paris, 1. 1., p. 109.

\5] "Labour creates capital before capital employs labour." E. G. Wakefield, "England and America,"
Lond., 1833, Vol. II, p. 110.

[61 The property of the capitalist in the product of the tabour of others "is a strict consequence of the law
of appropriation, the fundamental principle of which was, on the contrary, the exclusive title of every
labourer to the product of his own labour." (Cherbuliez, "Richesse ou Pauvreti," Paris, 1841, p. 58,
where, however, the dialectical reversal is not properly developed.)

[71 NOTE: The following passage (to p. 551 "laws of capitalist appropriation.") has been added to the
English text in conformity with the 4th German edition.

[81 We may well, therefore, feel astonished at the cleverness Of Proudhon, who would abolish
capitalistic property by enforcing the eternal laws of property that are based on commodity production!

[9J "Capital, viz., accumulated wealth employed with a view to profit." (Malthus, 1. c.) "Capital ...
consists of wealth saved from revenue, and used with a view to profit." (R. Jones: "An Introductory
Lecture on Polit. Econ.," Lond., 1833, p. 16.)

f 101 "The possessors of surplus-produce or capital." ("The Source and Remedy of the National
Difficulties. A Letter to Lord John Russell." Lond., 1821.)

fill "Capital, with compound interest on every portion of capital saved, is so all engrossing that all the
wealth in the world from which income is derived, has long ago become the interest on capital."
(London, Economist, 19th July, 1851.)

fl21 "No political economist of the present day can by saving mean.mere hoarding: and beyond this
contracted and insufficient proceeding, no use of the term in reference to the national wealth can well be
imagined,, but that which must arise from a different application of what is saved, founded upon a real
distinction between the different kinds of labour maintained by it." (Malthus, 1. c, pp. 38, 39.)

f 131 Thus for instance, Balzac, who so thoroughly studied every shade of avarice, represents the old
usurer Gobseck as in his second childhood when he begins to heap up a hoard of commodities.

f 141 "Accumulation of stocks ... upon-exchange ... over-production." (Th. Corbet. 1. c, p. 104.)

f 151 In this sense Necker speaks of the "objets de faste et de somptuosit6," of which "le temps a grossi
I'accuinulation," and which "les lois de propriata ont rassemblas dans une seule classe de la sociata."
(Oeuvres de M. Necker, Paris and Lausanne, 1789, t. ii., p. 291.)

[161 Ricardo, 1. C-, P- 163, note.

f 171 In spite of his "Logic," John St. Mill never detects even such faulty analysis as this when made by
his predecessors, an analysis which, even from the bourgeois standpoint of the science, cries out for
rectification. In every case he registers with the dogmatism of a disciple, the confusion of his master's
thoughts. So here: "The capital itself in the longrun becomes entirely wages, and when replaced by the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (19 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

sale of produce becomes wages again."

f 181 In his description of the process of reproduction, and of accumulation, Adam Smith, in many ways,
not only made no advance, but even lost considerable ground, compared with his predecessors, especially
by the Physiocrats. Connected with the illusion mentioned in the text, is the really wonderful dogma, left
by him as an inheritance to Political Economy, the dogma, that the price of commodities is made up of
wages, profit (interest) and rent, i.e., of wages and surplus- value. Starting from this basis, Storch naively
confesses, "II est impossible de rasoudre le prix n6cessaire dans ses alaments les plus simples." (Storch,
1. c, Petersb. Edit., 1815, t. ii., p. 141, note.) A fine science of economy this, which declares it impossible
to resolve the price of a commodity into its simplest elements ! This point will be further investigated in
the seventh part of Book iii.

fl91 The reader will notice, that the word revenue is used in a double sense: first, to designate
surplus-value so far as it is the fruit periodically yielded by capital; secondly, to designate the part of that
fruit which is periodically consumed by the capitalist, or added to the fund that supplies his private
consumption. I have retained this double meaning because it harmonises with the language of the English
and French economists.

r201 Taking the usurer, that old-fashioned but ever renewed specimen of the capitalist for his text, Luther
shows very aptly that the love of power is an element in the desire to get rich. "The heathen were able, by
the light of reason, to conclude that a usurer is a double-dyed thief and murderer. We Christians,
however, hold them in such honour, that we fairly worship them for the sake of their money.... Whoever
eats up, robs, and steals the nourishment of another, that man commits as great a murder (so far as in him
lies) as he who starves a man or utterly undoes him. Such does a usurer, and sits the while safe on his
stool, when he ought rather to be hanging on the gallows, and be eaten by as many ravens as he has
stolen guilders, if only there were so much flesh on him, that so many ravens could stick their beaks in
and share it. Meanwhile, we hang the small thieves.... Little thieves are put in the stocks, great thieves go
flaunting in gold and silk.... Therefore is there, on this earth, no greater enemy of man (after the devil)
than a gripe-money, and usurer, for he wants to be God over all men.Turks, soldiers, and tyrants are also
bad men, yet must they let the people live, and Confess that they are bad, and enemies, and do, nay,
must, now and then show pity to some. But a usurer and money-glutton, such a one would iiave the
whole world perish of hunger and thirst, misery and want, so far as in him lies, so that he may have all to
himself, and every one may receive from him as from a God, and be his serf for ever. To wear fine
cloaks, golden chains, Tings, to wipe his mouth, to be deemed and taken for a worthy, pious man ....
Usury is a great huge monster, like a werewolf, wbo lays waste all, more than any Cacus, Gerion or
Antus. And yet decks himself out, and would be thought pious, so that people may not see where the
oxen have gone, that he drags backwards into his den. But Hercules shall hear the cry of the oxen and of
his prisoners, and shall seek Cacus even in cliffs and among rocks, and shall set the oxen loose again
from the villain. For Cacus means the villain that is a pious usurer, and steals, robs, eats everything. And
will not own that he has done it, and thinks no one will find him out, because the oxen, drawn backwards
into his den, make it seem, from their foot-prints, that they have been let out. So the usurer would
deceive the world, as though he were of use and gave the world oxen,- which he, however, rends, and
eats all alone... And since we break on the wheel, and behead highwaymen, murderers and
housebreakers, how much more ought we to break on the wheel and kill.... hunt down, curse and behead
all usurers." (Martin Luther, 1. c.)

T211 See Goethe's "Faust."

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (20 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

f221 Dr. Aikin: "Description of the Country from 30 to 40 miles round Manchester." Lond., 1795, p. 182,
sq.

f231 A. Smith, 1. c, bk. iii., ch. iii.

f241 Even J. B. Say says: "Les apargnes des riches se font aux dapens des pauvres." "The Roman
proletarian lived almost entirely at the expense of society.... It can almost be said that modern society
lives at the expense of the proletarians, on what it keeps out of the remuneration of labour." (Sismondi:
"ttudes, &c," t. i., p. 24.)

[251 Malthus, 1. c, pp. 319, 320.

f261 "An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, &c," p. 67.

I27J 1. c, p. 59.

f281 (Senior, "Principes fondamentaux del'Econ. Pol." trad. Arrivabene. Paris, 1836, p. 308.) This was
rather too much for the adherents of the old classical school. "Mr. Senior has substituted for it" (the
expression, labour and,profit) "the expression labour and Abstinence. He who converts his revenue
abstains from the enjoyment which its expenditure would afford him. It is not the capital, but the use of
the capital productively, which is the cause of profits." (John Cazenove, 1. c, p. 130, Note.) John St. Mill,
on the contrary, accepts on the one hand Ricardo's theory of profit, and annexes on the other hand
Senior's "remuneration of abstinence." He is as much at home in absurd contradictions, as he feels at sea
in the Hegelian contradiction, the source of all dialectic. It has never occurred to the vulgar economist to
make the simple reftexion, that every human action may be viewed, as "abstinence" from its opposite.
Eating is abstinence from fasting, walking, abstinence from standing still, working, abstinence from
idling, idling, abstinence from working, &C. These gentlemen would do well, to ponder, once in a way,
over Spinoza's: "Determinatio est Negatio."

[29J Senior, 1. c, p. 342.

r301 "No one ... will sow his wheat, for instance, and allow it to remain a twelvle month in the ground, or
leave his wine in a cellar for years, instead of consuming these things or their equivalent at once ... unless
he expects to acquire additional value, &c." (Scrope, "Polit. Econ.," edit, by A. Potter, New York, 1841,
pp. 133-134.)

f3 11 "La privation que s'impose le capitalists, en pr6tant (this euphemism used, for the purpose of
identifying, according to the approved method of vulgar economy, the labourer who is exploited, with the
industrial capitalist who exploits, and to whom other capitalists lend money) ses instruments de
production au travailleur, au lieu d'en consacrer la valeur i son propre usage, en la transforment en objets
d'utilite ou d'agriment." (G. de Molinari, 1. c, p. 36.)

f321 "La conservation d'un capital exige ... un effort constant pour rasister a la tentation de le
consommer." (Courcelle-Seneuil, 1. c, p. 57.)

f331 "The particular classes of income which yield the most abundantly to the progress of national
capital, change at different stages of their progress, and are, therefore, entirely different in nations
occupying different positions in that progress.... Profits ... unimportant source of accumulation, compared



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (21 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

with wages and rents, in the earlier stages of society.... When a considerable advance in the powers of
national industry has actually taken place, profits rise into comparative importance as a source of
accumulation." (Richard Jones, "Textbook, &c," pp. 16, 21.)

[341 1. c, p. 36, sq.

f351 "Ricardo says: 'In different stages of society the accumulation of capital or of the means of
employing' (i.e., exploiting) labour is more or less rapid, and must in all cases depend on the productive
powers of labour. The productive powers of labour are generally greatest where there is an abundance of
fertile land.' If, in the first sentence, the productive powers of labour mean the smallness of that aliquot
part of any produce that goes to those whose manual labour produced it, the sentence is nearly identical,
because the remaining aliquot part is the fund whence capital can, if the owner pleases, be accumulated.
But then this does not generally happen, where there is most fertile land." ("Observations on Certain
Verbal Disputes, &c." pp. 74, 75.)

f361 J. Stuart Mill: "Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy," Lond., 1844, p. 90.

f371 "An Essay on Trade and Commerce," Lond., 1770, P. 44. The Times of December, 1866, and
January, 1867, in like manner published certain outpourings of the heart of the English mine-owner, in
which the happy lot of the Belgian miners was pictured, who asked and received no more than was
strictly necessary for them to live for their "masters." The Belgian labourers have to suffer much, but to
figure in The Times as model labourers! In the beginning of February, 1867, came the answer: strike of
the Belgian miners at Marchienne, put down by powder and lead.

[381 I.e., pp. 44,46.

f391 The Northamptonshire manufacturer commits a pious fraud, pardonable in one whose heart is so
full. He nominally compares the life of the English and French manufacturing labourer, but in the words
just quoted he is painting, as he himself confesses in his confused way, the French agricultural labourers.

KOI 1. c, pp. 70, 71. Note in the 3rd German edition: To-day, thanks to the competition on the
world-market, established since then, we have advanced much further. "If China," says Mr. Stapleton,
M.P., to his constituents, "should become a great manufacturing country, I do not see how the
manufacturing population of Europe could sustain the contest without descending to the level of their
competitors." {Times, Sept. 3, 1873, p. 8.) The wished-for goal of English capital is no longer Continental
wages but Chinese.

f411 Benjamin Thompson: "Essays, Political, Economical, and Philosophical, &c," 3 vols., Lond,
1796-1802, vol. i., p. 294. In his "The State of the Poor, or an History of the labouring Classes in
England, &c," Sir F. M. Eden strongly recommends the Rumfordian beggar-soup to workhouse
overseers, and reproachfully warns the English labourers that "many poor people, particularly in
Scotland, live, and that very comfortably, for months together, upon oat-meal and barley-meal, mixed
with only water and salt." (1. c, vol. i, book i., ch. 2, p. 503.) The same sort of hints in the 19th century.
"The most wholesome mixtures of flour having been refused (by the English agricultural labouTer)... in
Scotland, where education is better, this prejudice is, probably, unknown." (Charles H. Parry, M. D.,
"The Question of the Necessecity of the Existing Corn Laws Considered." London, 1816,, p. 69.) This
same Parry, however, complains that the English labourer is now (1815) in a much worse condition than
in Eden's time (1797.)

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (22 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

f421 From the reports of the last Parliamentary Commission on adulteration of means of subsistence, it
will be seen that the adulteration even of medicines is the rule, not the exception in England. E.g., the
examination of 34 specimens of opium, purchased of as many different chemists in London, showed that
31 were adulterated with poppy heads, wheat-flour, gum, clay, sand, &c. Several did not contain an atom
of morphia.

f431 G. B. Newnham (barrister- at-law): "A Review of the Evidence before the Committee of the two
Houses of Parliament on the Com Laws." Lond., 1815, p. 20, note.

[44J I.e., pp. 19,20.

f451 C. H. Parry, 1. c, pp. 77, 69. The landlords, on their side, not only "indemnified" themselves for the
Anti-Jacobin War, which they waged in the name of England, but enriched themselves enormously.
Their rents doubled, trebled, quadrupled, "and in one instance, increased sixfold in eighteen years." (I. c,
pp. 100, 101.)

f461 Friedrich Engels, "Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," p. 20.

f471 Classic economy has, on account of a deficient analysis of the labour-process, and of the process of
creating value-, never properly grasped this weighty element of reproduction, as may be seen in Ricardo;
he says, e.g., whatever the change in productive power, "a million men always produce in manufactures
the same value." This is accurate, if the extension and degree of Intensity of their labour are given. But it
does not prevent (this Ricardo overlooks in certain conclusions he draws) a million men with different
powers of productivity in their labour, turning into products very different masses of the means of
production, and therefore preserving in their products very different masses of value; in consequence of
which the values of the products yielded may vary considerably. Ricardo has, it may be noted in passing,
tried in vain to make clear to J. B. Say, by that very example, the difference between use-value (which he
here calls wealth or material riches) and exchange- value. Say answers: "Quant a la difficulte qu'eleve Mr.
Ricardo en disant que, par des precedes mieux entendus un million de personnes peuvent produire deux
fois, trois fois autant de richesses, sans produire plus de valeurs, cette difficulte n'est pas une lorsque Ton
considere, ainsi qu'on le doit, la production comme un echange dans lequel on donne les services
productifs de son travail, de sa terre, et de ses capitaux, pour obtenir des produits. C'est par le moyen de
ces services productifs, que nous acquerons tous les produits qui sont au monde. Or... nous sommes
d'autant plus riches, nos services productifs ont d'autant plus de valeur qu'ils obtiennent dans l'echange
appele production une plus grande quantite de choses utiles." (J. B. Say, "Lettres a M. Malthus," Paris,
1820, pp. 168, 169.) The "difficulte" — it exists for him, not for Ricardo — that Say means to clear up is
this: Why does not the exchange-value of the use- values increase, when their quantity increases in
consequence of increased productive power of labour? Answer: the difficulty is met by calling use-value,
exchange- value, if you please. Exchange-value is a thing that is connected one way or another with
exchange. If therefore production is called an exchange of labour and means of production against the
product, it is clear as day that you obtain more exchange-value in proportion as the production yields
more use-value. In other words, the more use-values, e.g., stockings, a working-day yields to the
stocking-manufacturer, the richer is he in stockings. Suddenly, however, Say recollects that "with a
greater quantity" of stockings their "price" (which of course has nothing to do with their
exchange-value!) falls "parce que la concurrence les (les producteurs) oblige a donner les produits pour
ce qu'its leur content... But whence does the profit come, if the capitalist sells the commodities at
cost-price? Never mind! Say declares that, in consequence of increased productivity, every one now

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (23 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

receives in return for a given equivalent two pairs of stockings instead of one as before. The result he
arrives at, is precisely that proposition of Ricardo that he aimed at disproving. After this mighty effort of
thought, he triumphantly apostrophises Malthus in the words: "Telle est, monsieur, la doctrine bien liee,
sates laquelle il est impossible, je le declare, d'expliquer les plus grandes difficultes de l'economie
politique, et notamment, comment il se peut qu'une nation soit plus riche lorsque ses produits diminuent
de valeur, quoique la richesse soit,de la valeur." (I. c, p. 170.) An English economist remarks upon the
conjuring tricks of the same nature that appear in Say's "Lettres": "Those affected ways of talking make
up in general that which M. Say is pleased to call his doctrine and which he earnestly urges Malthus to
teach at Hertford, as it is already taught 'dans plusieurs parties de I'Europe.' He says, 'Si vous trbuvez une
physionomie de paradoxe a toutes ces propositions, voyez les choses qu'elles expriment, et j'ose croire
queues vous paraitront fort simples et fort raisonnables.' Doubtless, and in consequence of the same
process, they will appear everything else, except original." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting
the Nature of Demand, &c," pp. 116, 110.)

f481 MacCulloch took out a patent for "wages of past labour," long before Senior did for "wages of
abstinence."

f491 Compare among others, Jeremy Bentham: "Theorie des Peines et des Recompenses," traduct. d'Et.
Dumont, 3eme edit. Paris, 1826, t. II, L. IV., ch. II.

f501 Bentham is a purely English phenomenon. Not even excepting our philosopher, Christian Wolff, in
no time and in no country has the most homespun commonplace ever strutted about in so self-satisfied a
way. The principle of utility was no discovery of Bentham. He simply reproduced in his dull way what
Helvetius and other Frenchmen had said with esprit in the 18th century. To know what is useful for a
dog, one must study dog-nature. This nature itself is not to be deduced from the principle of utility.
Applying this to man, he that would criticise all human acts, movements, relations, etc., by the principle
of utility, must first deal with human nature in general, and then with human nature as modified in each
historical epoch. Bentham makes short work of it. With the driest naivete he takes the modern
shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal man. Whatever is useful to this queer
normal man, and to his world, is absolutely useful. This yard-measure, then, he applies to past, present,
and future. The Christian religion, e.g., is "useful," "because it forbids in the name of religion the same
faults that the penal code condemns in the name of the law." Artistic criticism is "harmful," because it
disturbs worthy people in their enjoyment of Martin Tupper, etc. With such rubbish has the brave fellow,
with his motto, "nuila dies sine line!," piled up mountains of books. Had I the courage of my friend,
Heinrich Heine, I should call Mr. Jeremy a genius in the way of bourgeois stupidity.

f511 "Political economists are too apt to consider a certain quantity of capital and a certain number of
labourers as productive instruments of uniform power, or operating with a certain uniform intensity....
Those... who maintain ... that commodities are the sole agents of production ... -prove that production
could never be enlarged, for it requires as an indispensable condition to such an enlargement that food,
raw materials, and tools should be previously augmented; which is in fact maintaining that no increase of
production can take place without a previous increase, or, in other words, that an increase is impossible."
(S. Bailey: "Money and its Vicissitudes," pp. 58 and 70.) Bailey criticises the dogma mainly from the
point of view of the process of circulation.

f521 John Stuart Mill, in his "Principles of Political Economy," says: "The really exhausting and the
really repulsive labours instead of being better paid than others, are almost invariably paid the worst of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (24 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Four

all.... The more revolting the occupation, the more certain it is to receive the minimum of remuneration....
The hardships and the earnings, instead of being directly proportional, as in any just arrangements of
society they would be, are generally in an inverse ratio to one another." To avoid misunderstanding, let
me say that although men like John Stuart Mill are to blame for the contradiction between their
traditional economic dogmas and their modem tendencies, it would be very wrong to class them with the
herd of vulgar economic apologists.

f531 H. Fawcett, Professor of Political Economy at Cambridge. "The Economic position of the British
labourer." London, 1865, p. 120.

f541 1 must here remind the reader that the categories, "variable and constant capital," were first used by
me. Political Economy since the time of Adam Smith has confusedly mixed up the essential distinctions
involved in these categories, with the mere formal differences, arising out of the process of circulation, of
fixed and circulating capital. For further details on this point, see Book II., Part II.

[551 Fawcett, 1. c, pp. 122, 123.

f561 It might be said that not only capital, but also labourers, in the shape of emigrants, are annually
exported from England. In the text, however, there is no question of the peculium of the emigrants, who
are in great part not labourers. The sons of farmers make up a great part of them. The additional capital
annually transported abroad to be put out at interest is in much greater proportion to the annual
accumulation than the yearly emigration is to the yearly increase of population.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Five: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm (25 of 25) [23/08/2000 16:18:58]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VII:

The Accumulation of Capital



CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE:

THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION

Contents

Section 1 - The Increased Demand for Labour-Power that Accompanies Accumulation, the Composition of Capital

Remaining the same

Section 2 - Relative Diminution of the Variable Part of Capital Simultaneously with the Progress of Accumulation and

of the Concentration that Accompanies it

Section 3 - Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus-Population or Industrial Reserve Army

Section 4 - Different Forms of the Relative Surplus-Population. The General Law of Capitalistic Accumulation

Section 5 - Illustrations of the General Law of Capitalist Accumulation

A. England from 1846-1866

B. The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class

C. The Nomad Population

D. Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working-Class

E. The British Agricultural Proletariat

F. Ireland

SECTION 1.

THE INCREASED DEMAND FOR LABOUR-POWER THAT ACCOMPANIES ACCUMULATION, THE
COMPOSITION OF CAPITAL REMAINING THE SAME



In this chapter we consider the influence of the growth of capital on the lot of the labouring class. The most important
factor in this inquiry is the composition of capital and the changes it undergoes in the course of the process of
accumulation.

The composition of capital is to be understood in a two-fold sense. On the side of value, it is determined by the
proportion in which it is divided into constant capital or value of the means of production, and variable capital or
value of labour-power, the sum total of wages. On the side of material, as it functions in the process of production, all
capital is divided into means of production and living labour-power. This latter composition is determined by the
relation between the mass of the means of production employed, on the one hand, and the mass of labour necessary for
their employment on the other. I call the former the value-composition, the latter the technical composition of capital.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (1 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Between the two there is a strict correlation. To express this, I call the value-composition of capital, in so far as it is
determined by its technical composition and mirrors the changes of the latter, the organic composition of capital.
Wherever I refer to the composition of capital, without further qualification, its organic composition is always
understood.

The many individual capitals invested in a particular branch of production have, one with another, more or less
different compositions. The average of their individual compositions gives us the composition of the total capital in
this branch of production. Lastly, the average of these averages, in all branches of production, gives us the
composition of the total social capital of a country, and with this alone are we, in the last resort, concerned in the
following investigation.

Growth of capital involves growth of its variable constituent or of the part invested in labour-power. A part of the
surplus-value turned into additional capital must always be re-transformed into variable capital, or additional
labour-fund. If we suppose that, all other circumstances remaining the same, the composition of capital also remains
constant (i.e., that a definite mass of means of production constantly needs the same mass of labour-power to set it in
motion), then the demand for labour and the subsistence-fund of the labourers clearly increase in the same proportion
as the capital, and the more rapidly, the more rapidly the capital increases. Since the capital produces yearly a
surplus- value, of which one part is yearly added to the original capital; since this increment itself grows yearly along
with the augmentation of the capital already functioning; since lastly, under special stimulus to enrichment, such as
the opening of new markets, or of new spheres for the outlay of capital in consequence of newly developed social
wants, &c, the scale of accumulation may be suddenly extended, merely by a change in the division of the
surplus-value or surplus-product into capital and revenue, the requirements of accumulating capital may exceed the
increase of labour-power or of the number of labourers; the demand for labourers may exceed the supply, and,
therefore, wages may rise. This must, indeed, ultimately be the case if the conditions supposed above continue. For
since in each year more labourers are employed than in its predecessor, sooner or later a point must be reached, at
which the requirements of accumulation begin to surpass the customary supply of labour, and, therefore, a rise of
wages takes place. A lamentation on this score was heard in England during the whole of the fifteenth, and the first
half of the eighteenth centuries. The more or less favourable circumstances in which the wage-working class supports
and multiplies itself, in no way alter the fundamental character of capitalist production. As simple reproduction
constantly reproduces the capital-relation itself, i.e., the relation of capitalists on the one hand, and wage-workers on
the other, so reproduction on a progressive scale, i.e., accumulation, reproduces the capital-relation on a progressive
scale, more capitalists or larger capitalists at this pole, more wage-workers at that. The reproduction of a mass of
labour-power, which must incessantly re-incorporate itself with capital for that capital's self-expansion; which cannot
get free from capital, and whose enslavement to capital is only concealed by the variety of individual capitalists to
whom it sells itself, this reproduction of labour-power forms, in fact, an essential of the reproduction of capital itself.
Accumulation of capital is, therefore, increase of the proletariat. J_1J

Classical economy grasped this fact so thoroughly that Adam Smith, Ricardo, &c, as mentioned earlier, inaccurately
identified accumulation with the consumption, by the productive labourers, of all the capitalised, part of the
surplus-product, or with its transformation into additional wage-labourers. As early as 1696 John Bellers says: "For if
one had a hundred thousand acres of land and as many pounds in money, and as many cattle, without a labourer, what
would the rich man be, but a labourer? And as the labourers make men rich, so the more labourers there will be, the
more rich men ... the labour of the poor being the mines of the rich." £2] So also Bernard de Mandeville at the
beginning of the eighteenth century: "It would be easier, where property is well secured, to live without money than
without poor; for who would do the work? ... As they [the poor] ought to be kept from starving, so they should receive
nothing worth saving. If here and there one of the lowest class by uncommon industry, and pinching his belly, lifts
himself above the condition he was brought up in, nobody ought to hinder him; nay, it is undeniably the wisest course
for every person in the society, and for every private family to be frugal; but it is the interest of all rich nations, that
the greatest part of the poor-should almost never be idle, and yet continually spend what they get.... Those that get
their living by their daily labour ... have nothing to stir them up to be serviceable but their wants which it is prudence
to relieve, but folly to cure. The only thing then that can render the labouring man industrious, is a moderate quantity
of money, for as too little will, according as his temper is, either dispirit or make him desperate, so too much will

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (2 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

make him insolent and lazy.... From what has been said, it is manifest, that, in a free nation, where slaves are not
allowed of, the surest wealth consists in a multitude of laborious poor; for besides, that they are the never-failing
nursery of fleets and armies, without them there could be no enjoyment, and no product of any country could be
valuable. "To make the society" [which of course consists of non-workers] "happy and people easier under the
meanest circumstances, it is requisite that great numbers of them should be ignorant as well as poor; knowledge both
enlarges and multiplies our desires, and the fewer things a man wishes for, the more easily his necessities may be
supplied." [3] What Mandeville, an honest, clear-headed man, had not yet seen, is that the mechanism of the process
of accumulation itself increases, along with the capital, the mass of "labouring poor," i.e., the wage-labourers, who
turn their labour-power into an increasing power of self-expansion of the growing capital, and even by doing so must
eternise their dependent relation on their own product, as personified in the capitalists. In reference to this relation of
dependence, Sir F. M. Eden in his "The State of the Poor, an History of the Labouring Classes in England," says, "the
natural produce of our soil is certainly not fully adequate to our subsistence; we can neither be clothed, lodged nor fed
but in consequence of some previous labour. A portion at least of the society must be indefatigably employed ....
There are others who, though they 'neither toil nor spin,' can yet command the produce of industry, but who owe their
exemption from labour solely to civilisation and order .... They are peculiarly the creatures of civil institutions, [4]
which have recognised that individuals may acquire property by various other means besides the exertion of labour....
Persons of independent fortune ... owe their superior advantages by no means to any superior abilities of their own,
but almost entirely ... to the industry of others. It is not the possession of land, or of money, but the command of
labour which distinguishes the opulent from the labouring part of the community .... This [scheme approved by Eden]
would give the people of property sufficient (but by no means too much) influence and authority over those who ...
work for them; and it would place such labourers, not in an abject or servile condition, but in such a state of easy and
liberal dependence as all who know human nature, and its history, will allow to be necessary for their own comfort."
[5] Sir F. M. Eden, it may be remarked in passing, is the only disciple of Adam Smith during the eighteenth century
that produced any work of importance. [6]

Under the conditions of accumulation supposed thus far, which conditions are those most favourable to the labourers,
their relation of dependence upon capital takes on a form endurable or, as Eden says: "easy and liberal." Instead of
becoming more intensive with the growth of capital, this relation of dependence only becomes more extensive, i.e., the
sphere of capital's exploitation and rule merely extends with its own dimensions and the number of its subjects. A
larger part of their own surplus-product, always increasing and continually transformed into additional capital, comes
back to them in the shape of means of payment, so that they can extend the circle of their enjoyments; can make some
additions to their consumption-fund of clothes, furniture, &c, and can lay by small reserve-funds of money. But just
as little as better clothing, food, and treatment, and a larger peculium, do away with the exploitation of the slave, so
little do they set aside that of the wage- worker. A rise in the price of labour, as a consequence of accumulation of
capital, only means, in fact, that the length and weight of the golden chain the wage-worker has already forged for
himself, allow of a relaxation of the tension of it. In the controversies on this subject the chief fact has generally been
overlooked, viz., the differentia specifica of capitalistic production. Labour-power is sold to-day, not with a view of
satisfying, by its service or by its product, the personal needs of the buyer. His aim is augmentation of his capital,
production of commodities containing more labour than he pays for, containing therefore a portion of value that costs
him nothing, and that is nevertheless realised when the commodities are sold. Production of surplus-value is the
absolute law of this mode of production. Labour-power is only saleable so far as it preserves the means of production
in their capacity of capital, reproduces its own value as capital, and yields in unpaid labour a source of additional
capital. [7] The conditions of its sale, whether more or less favourable to the labourer, include therefore the necessity
of its constant re-selling, and the constantly extended reproduction of all wealth in the shape of capital. Wages, as we
have seen, by their very nature, always imply the performance of a certain quantity of unpaid labour on the part of the
labourer. Altogether, irrespective of the case of a rise of wages with a falling price of labour, &c, such an increase
only means at best a quantitative diminution of the unpaid labour that the worker has to supply. This diminution can
never reach the point at which it would threaten the system itself. Apart from violent conflicts as to the rate of wages
(and Adam Smith has already shown that in such a conflict, taken on the whole, the master is always master), a rise in
the price of labour resulting from accumulation of capital implies the following alternative:



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (3 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Either the price of labour keeps on rising, because its rise does not interfere with the progress of accumulation. In this
there is nothing wonderful, for, says Adam Smith, "after these (profits) are diminished, stock may not only continue to
increase, but to increase much faster than before.... A great stock, though with small profits, generally increases faster
than a small stock with great profits." (1. c, ii, p. 189.) In this case it is evident that a diminution in the unpaid labour
in no way interferes with the extension of the domain of capital. — Or, on the other hand, accumulation slackens in
consequence of the rise in the price of labour, because the stimulus of gain is blunted. The rate of accumulation
lessens; but with its lessening, the primary cause of that lessening vanishes, i.e., the disproportion between capital and
exploitable labour-power. The mechanism of the process of capitalist production removes the very obstacles that it
temporarily creates. The price of labour falls again to a level corresponding with the needs of the self-expansion of
capital, whether the level be below, the same as, or above the one which was normal before the rise of wages took
place. We see thus: In the first case, it is not the diminished rate either of the absolute, or of the proportional, increase
in labour-power, or labouring population, which causes capital to be in excess, but conversely the excess of capital
that makes exploitable labour-power insufficient. In the second case, it is not the increased rate either of the absolute,
or of the proportional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, that makes capital insufficient; but,
conversely, the relative diminution of capital that causes the exploitable labour-power, or rather its price, to be in
excess. It is these absolute movements of the accumulation of capital which are reflected as relative movements of the
mass of exploitable labour-power, and therefore seem produced by the latter's own independent movement. To put it
mathematically: the rate of accumulation is the independent, not the dependent, variable; the rate of wages, the
dependent, not the independent, variable. Thus, when the industrial cycle is in the phase of crisis, a general fall in the
price of commodities is expressed as a rise in the value of money, and, in the phase of prosperity, a general rise in the
price of commodities, as a fall in the value of money. The so-called currency school concludes from this that with high
prices too much, with low prices too little [8] money is in circulation. Their ignorance and complete misunderstanding
of facts [9] are worthily paralleled by the economists, who interpret the above phenomena of accumulation by saying
that there are now too few, now too many wage-labourers.

The law of capitalist production, that is at the bottom of the pretended "natural law of population," reduces itself
simply to this: The correlation between accumulation of capital and rate of wages is nothing else than the correlation
between the unpaid labour transformed into capital, and the additional paid labour necessary for the setting in motion
of this additional capital. It is therefore in no way a relation between two magnitudes, independent one of the other: on
the one hand, the magnitude of the capital; on the other, the number of the labouring population; it is rather, at bottom,
only the relation between the unpaid and the paid labour of the same labouring population. If the quantity of unpaid
labour supplied by the working-class, and accumulated by the capitalist class, increases so rapidly that its conversion
into capital requires an extraordinary addition of paid labour, then wages rise, and, all other circumstances remaining
equal, the unpaid labour diminishes in proportion. But. as soon as this diminution touches the point at which the
surplus-labour that nourishes capital is no longer supplied in normal quantity, a reaction sets in: a smaller part of
revenue is capitalised accumulation lags, and the movement of rise in wages receives a check. The rise of wages
therefore is confined within limits that not only leave intact the foundations of the capitalistic system, but also secure
its reproduction on a progressive scale. The law of capitalistic accumulation, metamorphosed by economists into
pretended law of Nature, in reality merely states that the very nature of accumulation excludes every diminution in the
degree of exploitation of labour, and every rise in the price of labour, which could seriously imperil the continual
reproduction, on an ever-enlarging scale, of the capitalistic relation. It cannot be otherwise in a mode of production in
which the labourer exists to satisfy the needs of self-expansion of existing values, instead of, on the contrary, material
wealth existing to satisfy the needs of development on the part of the labourer. As, in religion, man is governed by the
products of his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is governed by the products of his own hand. [101



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (4 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

SECTION 2.

RELATIVE DIMINUTION OF THE VARIABLE PART OF CAPITAL SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE
PROGRESS OF ACCUMULATION AND OF THE CONCENTRATION THAT ACCOMPANIES IT



According to the economists themselves, it is neither the actual extent of social wealth, nor the magnitude of the
capital already functioning, that lead to a rise of wages, but only the constant growth of accumulation and the degree
of rapidity of that growth. (Adam Smith, Book L, chapter 8.) So far, we have only considered one special phase of this
process, that in which the increase of capital occurs along with a constant technical composition of capital. But the
process goes beyond this phase.

Once given the general basis of the capitalistic system, then, in the course of accumulation, a point is reached at which
the development of the productivity of social labour becomes the most powerful lever of accumulation. "The same
cause," says Adam Smith, "which raises the wages of labour, the increase of stock, tends to increase its productive
powers, and to make a smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work."

Apart from natural conditions, such as fertility of the soil, &C, and from the skill of independent and isolated
producers (shown rather qualitatively in the goodness than quantitatively in the mass of their products), the degree of
productivity of labour, in a given society, is expressed in the relative extent of the means of production that one
labourer, during a given time, with the same tension of labour-power, turns into products. The mass of the means of
production which he thus transforms, increases with the productiveness of his labour. But those means of production
play a double part. The increase of some is a consequence, that of the others a condition of the increasing productivity
of labour. E.g., with the division of labour in manufacture, and with the use of machinery, more raw material is
worked up in the same time, and, therefore, a greater mass of raw material and auxiliary substances enter into the
labour-process. That is the consequence of the increasing productivity of labour. On the other hand, the mass of
machinery, beasts of burden, mineral manures, drain-pipes, &c, is a condition of the increasing productivity of labour.
So also is it with the means of production concentrated in buildings, furnaces, means of transport, &c. But whether
condition or consequence, the growing extent of the means of production, as compared with the labour-power
incorporated with them, is an expression of the growing productiveness of labour. The increase of the latter appears,
therefore, in the diminution of the mass of labour in proportion to the mass of means of production moved by it, or in
the diminution of the subjective factor of the labour-process as compared with the objective factor.

This change in the technical composition of capital, this growth in the mass of means of production, as compared with
the mass of the labour-power that vivifies them, is reflected again in its value-composition, by the increase of the
constant constituent of capital at the expense of its variable constituent. There may be, e.g., originally 50 per cent, of a
capital laid out in means of production, and 50 per cent, in labour-power; later on, with the development of the
productivity of labour, 80 per cent, in means of production, 20 per cent, in labour-power, and so on. This law of the
progressive increase in constant capital, in proportion to the variable, is confirmed at every step (as already shown) by
the comparative analysis of the prices of commodities, whether we compare different economic epochs or different
nations in the same epoch. The relative magnitude of the element of price, which represents the value of the means of
production only, or the constant part of capital consumed, is in direct, the relative magnitude of the other element of
price that pays labour (the variable part of capital) is in inverse proportion to the advance of accumulation.

This diminution in the variable part of capital as compared with the constant, or the altered value-composition of the
capital, however, only shows approximately the change in the composition of its material constituents. If, e.g., the
capital-value employed to-day in spinning is 7/8 constant and 1/8 variable, whilst at the beginning of the 18th century
it was 1/2 constant and 1/2 variable, on the other hand, the mass of raw material, instruments of labour, &c, that a
certain quantity of spinning labour consumes productively to-day, is many hundred times greater than at the beginning
of the 18th century. The reason is simply that, with the increasing productivity of labour, not only does the mass of the
means of production consumed by it increase, but their value compared with their mass diminishes. Their value

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (5 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

therefore rises absolutely, but not in proportion to their mass. The increase of the difference between constant and
variable capital, is, therefore, much less than that of the difference between the mass of the means of production into
which the constant, and the mass of the labour-power into which the variable, capital is converted. The former
difference increases with the latter, but in a smaller degree.

But, if the progress of accumulation lessens the relative magnitude of the variable part of capital, it by no means, in
doing this, excludes the possibility of a rise in its absolute magnitude. Suppose that a capital-value at first is divided
into 50 per cent, of constant and 50 per cent, of variable capital; later into 80 per cent, of constant and 20 per cent, of
variable. If in the meantime the original capital, say £6,000, has increased to £18,000, its variable constituent has also
increased. It was £3,000, it is now £3,600. But where as formerly an increase of capital by 20 per cent, would have
sufficed to raise the demand for labour 20 per cent., now this latter rise requires a tripling of the original capital.

In Part IV. it was shown, how the development of the productiveness of social labour pre-supposes co-operation on a
large scale; how it is only upon this supposition that division and combination of labour can be organised, and the
means of production economised by concentration on a vast scale; how instruments of labour which, from their very
nature, are only fit for use in common, such as a system of machinery, can be called into being; how huge natural
forces can be pressed into the service of production; and how the transformation can be effected of the process of
production into a technological application of science. On the basis of the production of commodities, where the
means of production are the property of private persons, and where the artisan therefore either produces commodities,
isolated from and independent of others, or sells his labour-power as a commodity, because he lacks the means for
independent industry, co-operation on a large scale can realise itself only in the increase of individual capitals, only in
proportion as the -means of social production and the means of subsistence are transformed into the private property
of capitalists. The basis of the production of commodities can admit of production on a large scale in the capitalistic
form alone. A certain accumulation of capital, in the hands of individual producers of commodities, forms therefore
the necessary preliminary of the specifically capitalistic mode of production. We had, therefore, to assume that this
occurs during the transition from handicraft to capitalistic industry. It may be called primitive accumulation, because it
is the historic basis, instead of the historic result of specifically capitalist production. How it itself originates, we need
not here inquire as yet. It is enough that it forms the starting-point. But all methods for raising the social productive
power of labour that are developed on this basis, are at the same time methods for the increased production of
surplus-value or surplus-product, which in its turn is the formative element of accumulation. They are, therefore, at the
same time methods of the production of capital by capital, or methods of its accelerated accumulation. The continual
re-transformation of surplus-value into capital now appears in the shape of the increasing magnitude of the capital that
enters into the process of production. This in turn is the basis of an extended scale of production, of the methods for
raising the productive power of labour that accompany it, and of accelerated production of surplus-value. If, therefore,
a certain degree of accumulation of capital appears as a condition of the specifically capitalist mode of production, the
latter causes conversely an accelerated accumulation of capital. With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the
specifically capitalistic mode of production develops, and with the capitalist mode of production the accumulation of
capital. Both these economic factors bring about, in the compound ratio of the impulses they reciprocally give one
another, that change in the technical composition of capital by which the variable constituent becomes always smaller
and smaller as compared with the constant.

Every individual capital is a larger or smaller concentration of means of production, with a corresponding command
over a larger or smaller labour-army. Every accumulation becomes the means of new accumulation. With the
increasing mass of wealth which functions as capital, accumulation increases the concentration of that wealth in the
hands of individual capitalists, and thereby widens the basis of production on a large scale and of the specific methods
of capitalist production. The growth of social capital is effected by the growth of many individual capitals. All other
circumstances remaining the same, individual capitals, and with them the concentration of the means of production,
increase in such proportion as they form aliquot parts of the total social capital. At the same time portions of the
original capitals disengage themselves and function as new independent capitals. Besides other causes, the division of
property, within capitalist families, plays a great part in this. With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the number
of capitalists grows to a greater or less extent. Two points characterise this kind of concentration which grows directly
out of, or rather is identical with, accumulation. First: The increasing concentration of the social means of production



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (6 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

in the hands of individual capitalists is, other things remaining equal, limited by the degree of increase of social
wealth. Second: The part of social capital domiciled in each particular sphere of production is divided among many
capitalists who face one another as independent commodity-producers competing with each other. Accumulation and
the concentration accompanying it are, therefore, not only scattered over many points, but the increase of each
functioning capital is thwarted by the formation of new and the sub-division of old capitals. Accumulation, therefore,
presents itself on the one hand as increasing concentration of the means of production, and of the command over
labour; on the other, as repulsion of many individual capitals one from another.

This splitting-up of the total social capital into many individual capitals or the repulsion of its fractions one from
another, is counteracted by their attraction. This last does not mean that simple concentration of the means of
production and of the command over labour, which is identical with accumulation. It is concentration of capitals
already formed, destruction of their individual independence, expropriation of capitalist by capitalist, transformation
of many small into few large capitals. This process differs from the former in this, that it only pre-supposes a change
in the distribution of capital already to hand, and functioning; its field of action is therefore not limited by the absolute
growth of social wealth, by the absolute limits of accumulation. Capital grows in one place to a huge mass in a single
hand, because it has in another place been lost by many. This is centralisation proper, as distinct from accumulation
and concentration.

The laws of this centralisation of capitals, or of the attraction of capital by capital, cannot be developed here. A brief
hint at a few facts must suffice. The battle of competition is fought by cheapening of commodities. The cheapness of
commodities demands, caeteris paribus, on the productiveness of labour, and this again on the scale of production.
Therefore, the larger capitals beat the smaller. It will further be remembered that, with the development of the
capitalist mode of production, there is an increase in the minimum amount of individual capital necessary to carry on a
business under its normal conditions. The smaller capitals, therefore, crowd into spheres of production which Modern
Industry has only sporadically or incompletely got hold of. Here competition rages in direct proportion to the number,
and in inverse proportion to the magnitudes, of the antagonistic capitals. It always ends in the ruin of many small
capitalists, whose capitals partly pass into the hands of their conquerors, partly vanish. Apart from this, with capitalist
production an altogether new force comes into play — the credit system, which in its first stages furtively creeps in as
the humble assistant of accumulation, drawing into the hands of individual or associated capitalists, by invisible
threads, the money resources which lie scattered, over the surface of society, in larger or smaller amounts; but it soon
becomes a new and terrible weapon in the battle of competition and is finally transformed into an enormous social
mechanism for the centralisation of capitals.

Commensurately with the development of capitalist production and accumulation there develop the two most powerful
levers of centralisation — competition and credit. At the same time the progress of accumulation increases the
material amenable to centralisation, i.e., the individual capitals, whilst the expansion of capitalist production creates,
on the one hand, the social want, and, on the other, the technical means necessary for those immense industrial
undertakings which require a previous centralisation of capital for their accomplishment. To-day, therefore, the force
of attraction, drawing together individual capitals, and the tendency to centralisation are stronger than ever before. But
if the relative extension and energy of the movement towards centralisation is determined, in a certain degree, by the
magnitude of capitalist wealth and superiority of economic mechanism already attained, progress in centralisation
does not in any way depend upon a positive growth in the magnitude of social capital. And this is the specific
difference between centralisation and concentration, the latter being only another name for reproduction on an
extended scale. Centralisation may result from a mere change in the distribution of capitals already existing,from a
simple alteration in the quantitative grouping of the component parts of social capital. Here capital can grow into
powerful masses in a single hand because there it has been withdrawn from many individual hands. In any given
branch of industry centralisation would reach its extreme limit if all the individual capitals invested in it were fused
into a single capital. [121 In a, given society the limit would be reached only when the entire social capital was united
in the hands of either a single capitalist or a single capitalist company.

Centralisation completes the work of accumulation by enabling industrial capitalists to extend the scale of their
operations. Whether this latter result is the consequence of accumulation or centralisation, whether centralisation is
accomplished by the violent method of annexation — when certain capitals become such preponderant centres of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (7 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

attraction for others that they shatter the individual cohesion of the latter and then draw the separate fragments to
themselves — or whether the fusion of a number of capitals already formed or in process of formation takes place by
the smoother process of organising joint-stock companies — the economic effect remains the same. Everywhere the
increased scale of industrial establishments is the starting-point for a more comprehensive organisation of the
collective work of many, for a wider development of their material motive forces — in other words, for the
progressive transformation of isolated processes of production, carried on by customary methods, into processes of
production socially combined and scientifically arranged.

But accumulation, the gradual increase of capital by reproduction as it passes from the circular to the spiral form, is
clearly a very slow procedure compared with centralisation, which has only to change the quantitative groupings of
the constituent parts of social capital. The world would still be without railways if it had had to wait until
accumulation had got a few individual capitals far enough to be adequate for the construction of a railway.
Centralisation, on the contrary, accomplished this in the twinkling of an eye, by means of joint-stock companies. And
whilst centralisation thus intensifies and accelerates the effects of accumulation, it simultaneously extends and speeds
those revolutions in the technical composition of capital which raise its constant portion at the expense of its variable
portion, thus diminishing the relative demand for labour.

The masses of capital fused together overnight by centralisation reproduce and multiply as the others do, only more
rapidly, thereby becoming new and powerful levers in social accumulation. Therefore, when we speak of the progress
of social accumulation we tacitly include — to-day — the effects of centralisation.

The additional capitals formed in the normal course of accumulation (see Chapter XXIV, Section 1) serve particularly
as vehicles for the exploitation of new inventions and discoveries, and industrial improvements in general. But in time
the old capital also reaches the moment of renewal from top to toe, when it sheds its skin and is reborn like the others
in a perfected technical form, in which a smaller quantity of labour will suffice to set in motion a larger quantity of
machinery and raw materials. The absolute reduction in the demand for labour which necessarily follows from this is
obviously so much the greater the higher the degree in which the capitals undergoing this process of renewal are
already massed together by virtue of the centralisation movement.

On the one hand, therefore, the additional capital formed in the course of accumulation attracts fewer and fewer
labourers in proportion to its magnitude. On the other hand, the old capital periodically reproduced with change of
composition, repels more and more of the labourers formerly employed by it.



SECTION 3.

PROGRESSIVE PRODUCTION OF A RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION OR INDUSTRIAL RESERVE
ARMY



The accumulation of capital, though originally appearing as its quantitative extension only, is effected, as we have
seen, under a progressive qualitative change in its composition, under a constant increase of its constant, at the
expense of its variable constituent. [131

The specifically capitalist mode of production, the development of the productive power of labour corresponding to it,
and the change thence resulting in the organic composition of capital, do not merely keep pace with the advance of
accumulation, or with the growth of social wealth. They develop at a much quicker rate, because mere accumulation,
the absolute increase of the total social capital, is accompanied by the centralisation of the individual capitals of which
that total is made up; and because the change in the technological composition of the additional capital goes hand in
hand with a similar change in the technological composition of the original capital. With the advance of accumulation,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (8 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

therefore, the proportion of constant to variable capital changes. If it was originally say 1:1, it now becomes
successively 2:1, 3:1, 4:1, 5:1, 7:1, &c, so that, as the capital increases, instead of 1/2 of its total value, only 1/3, 1/4,
1/5, 1/6, 1/8, &c, is transformed into labour-power, and, on the other hand, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, 5/6, 7/8 into means of
production. Since the demand for labour is determined not by the amount of capital as a whole, but by its variable
constituent alone, that demand falls progressively with the increase of the total capital, instead of, as previously
assumed, rising in proportion to it. It falls relatively to the magnitude of the total capital, and at an accelerated rate, as
this magnitude increases. With the growth of the total capital, its variable constituent or the labour incorporated in it,
also does increase, but in a constantly diminishing proportion. The intermediate pauses are shortened, in which
accumulation works as simple extension of production, on a given technical basis. It is not merely that an accelerated
accumulation of total capital, accelerated in a constantly growing progression, is needed to absorb an additional
number of labourers, or even, on account of the constant metamorphosis of old capital, to keep employed those
already functioning. In its turn, this increasing accumulation and centralisation becomes a source of new changes in
the composition of capital, of a more accelerated diminution of its variable, as compared with its constant constituent.
This accelerated relative diminution of the variable constituent, that goes along with the accelerated increase of the
total capital, and moves more rapidly than this increase, takes the inverse form, at the other pole, of an apparently
absolute increase of the labouring population, an increase always moving more rapidly than that of the variable capital
or the means of employment. But in fact, it is capitalistic accumulation itself that constantly produces, and produces in
the direct ratio of its own energy and extent, a relativity redundant population of labourers, i.e., a population of greater
extent than suffices for the average needs of the self-expansion of capital, and therefore a surplus-population.

Considering the social capital in its totality, the movement of its accumulation now causes periodical changes,
affecting it more or less as a whole, now distributes its various phases simultaneously over the different spheres of
production. In some spheres a change in the composition of capital occurs without increase of its absolute magnitude,
as a consequence of simple centralisation; in others the absolute growth of capital is connected with absolute
diminution of its variable constituent, or of the labour-power absorbed by it; in others again, capital continues growing
for a time on its given technical basis, and attracts additional labour-power in proportion to its increase, while at other
times it undergoes organic change, and lessens its variable constituent; in all spheres, the increase of the variable part
of capital, and therefore of the number of labourers employed by it, is always connected with violent fluctuations and
transitory production of surplus-population, whether this takes the more striking form of the repulsion of labourers
already employed, or the less evident but not less real form of the more difficult absorption of the additional labouring
population through the usual channels. [141 With the magnitude of social capital already functioning, and the degree
of its increase, with the extension of the scale of production, and the mass of the labourers set in motion, with the
development of the productiveness of their labour, with the greater breadth and fulness of all sources of wealth, there
is also an extension of the scale on which greater attraction of labourers by capital is accompanied by their greater
repulsion; the rapidity of the change in the organic composition of capital, and in its technical form increases, and an
increasing number of spheres of production becomes involved in this change, now simultaneously, now alternately.
The labouring population therefore produces, along with the accumulation of capital produced by it, the means by
which it itself is made relatively superfluous, is turned into a relative surplus-population; and it does this to an always
increasing extent. [151 This is a law of population peculiar to the capitalist mode of production; and in fact every
special historic mode of production has its own special laws of population, historically valid within its limits and only
in so far as man has not interfered with them.

But if a surplus labouring population is a necessary product of accumulation or of the development of wealth on a
capitalist basis, this surplus-population becomes, conversely, the lever of capitalistic accumulation, nay, a condition of
existence of the capitalist mode of production. It forms a disposable industrial reserve army, that belongs to capital
quite as absolutely as if the latter had bred it at its own cost. Independently of the limits of the actual increase of
population, it creates, for the changing needs of the self-expansion of capital, a mass of human material always ready
for exploitation. With accumulation, and the development of the productiveness of labour that accompanies it, the
power of sudden expansion of capital grows also; it grows, not merely because the elasticity of the capital already
functioning increases, not merely because the absolute wealth of society expands, of which capital only forms an
elastic part, not merely because credit, under every special stimulus, at once places an unusual part of this wealth at
the disposal of production in the form of additional capital; it grows, also, because the technical conditions of the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (9 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

process of production themselves — machinery, means of transport, &c. — now admit of the rapidest transformation
of masses of surplus-product into additional means of production. The mass of social wealth, overflowing with the
advance of accumulation, and transformable into additional capital, thrusts itself frantically into old branches of
production, whose market suddenly expands, or into newly formed branches, such as railways, &c, the need for
which grows out of the development of the old ones. In all such cases, there must be the possibility of throwing great
masses of men suddenly on the decisive points without injury to the scale of production in other spheres.
Overpopulation supplies these masses. The course characteristic of modern industry, viz., a decennial cycle
(interrupted by smaller oscillations), of periods of average activity, production at high pressure, crisis and stagnation,
depends on the constant formation, the greater or less absorption, and the re-formation of the industrial reserve army
or surplus-population. In their turn, the varying phases of the industrial cycle recruit the surplus-population, and
become one of the most energetic agents of its reproduction. This peculiar course of modem industry, which occurs in
no earlier period of human history, was also impossible in the childhood of capitalist production. The composition of
capital changed but very slowly. With its accumulation, therefore, there kept pace, on the whole, a corresponding
growth in the demand for labour. Slow as was the advance of accumulation compared with that of more modem times,
it found a check in the natural limits of the exploitable labouring population, limits which could only be got rid of by
forcible means to be mentioned later. The expansion by fits and starts of the scale of production is the preliminary to
its equally sudden contraction; the latter again evokes the former, but the former is impossible without disposable
human material, without an increase, in the number of labourers independently of the absolute growth of the
population. This increase is effected by the simple process that constantly "sets free" a part of the labourers; by
methods which lessen the number of labourers employed in proportion to the increased production. The whole form of
the movement of modem industry depends, therefore, upon the constant transformation of a part of the labouring
population into unemployed or half-employed hands. The superficiality of Political Economy shows itself in the fact
that it looks upon the expansion and contraction of credit, which is a mere symptom of the periodic changes of the
industrial cycle, as their cause. As the heavenly bodies, once thrown into a certain definite motion, always repeat this,
so is it with social production as soon as it is once thrown into this movement of alternate expansion and contraction.
Effects, in their turn, become causes, and the varying accidents of the whole process, which always reproduces its own
conditions, take on the form of periodicity. When this periodicity is once consolidated, even Political Economy then
sees that the production of a relative surplus-population — i.e., surplus with regard to the average needs of the
self-expansion of capital — is a necessary condition of modern industry.

"Suppose," says H. Merivale, formerly Professor of Political Economy at Oxford, subsequently employed in the
English Colonial Office, "suppose that, on the occasion of some of these crises, the nation were to rouse itself to the
effort of getting rid by emigration of some hundreds of thousands of superfluous arms, what would be the
consequence? That, at the first returning demand for labour, there would be a deficiency. However rapid reproduction
may be, it takes, at all events, the space of a generation to replace the loss of adult labour. Now, the profits of our
manufacturers depend mainly on the power of making' use of the prosperous moment when demand is brisk, and thus
compensating themselves for the interval during which it is slack. This power is secured to them only by the command
of machinery and of manual labour. They must have hands ready by them, they must be able to increase the activity of
their operations when required, and to slacken it again, according to the state of the market, or they cannot possibly
maintain that pre-eminence in the race of competition on which the wealth of the country is founded." [T61 Even
Malthus recognises overpopulation as a necessity of modem industry, though, after his narrow fashion, he explains it
by the absolute over-growth of the labouring population, not by their becoming relatively supernumerary. He says:
"Prudential habits with regard to marriage, carried to a considerable extent among the labouring class of a country
mainly depending upon manufactures and commerce, might injure it.... From the nature of a population, an increase of
labourers cannot be brought into market in consequence of a particular demand till after the lapse of 16 or 18 years,
and the conversion of revenue into capital, by saving, may take place much more rapidly: a country is always liable to
an increase in the quantity of the funds for the maintenance of labour faster than the increase of population." [171
After Political Economy has thus demonstrated the constant production of a relative surplus-population of labourers to
be a necessity of capitalistic accumulation, she very aptly, in the guise of an old maid, puts in the mouth of her "beau
ideal" of a capitalist the following words addressed to those supernumeraries thrown on the streets by their own
creation of additional capital: — "We manufacturers do what we can for you, whilst we are increasing that capital on



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (10 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five
which you must subsist, and you must do the rest by accommodating your numbers to the means of subsistence." [181

Capitalist production can by no means content itself with the quantity of disposable labour-power which the natural
increase of population yields. It requires for its free play an industrial reserve army independent of these natural limits.

Up to this point it has been assumed that the increase or diminution of the variable capital corresponds rigidly with the
increase or diminution of the number of labourers employed.

The number of labourers commanded by capital may remain the same, or even fall, while the variable capital
increases. This is the case if the individual labourer yields more labour, and therefore his wages increase, and this
although the price of labour remains the same or even falls, only more slowly than the mass of labour rises. Increase
of variable capital, in this case, becomes an index of more labour, but not of more labourers employed. It is the
absolute interest of every capitalist to press a given quantity of labour out of a smaller, rather than a greater number of
labourers, if the cost is about the same. In the latter case, the outlay of constant capital increases in proportion to the
mass of labour set in action; in the former that increase is much smaller. The more extended the scale of production,
the stronger this motive. Its force increases with the accumulation of capital.

We have seen that the development of the capitalist mode of production and of the productive power of labour — at
once the cause and effect of accumulation — enables the capitalist, with the same outlay of variable capital, to set in
action more labour by greater exploitation (extensive or intensive) of each individual labour-power. We have further
seen that the capitalist buys with the same capital a greater mass of labour-power, as he progressively replaces skilled
labourers by less skilled, mature labour-power by immature, male by female, that of adults by that of young persons or
children.

On the one hand, therefore, with the progress of accumulation, a larger variable capital sets more labour in action
without enlisting more labourers; on the other, a variable capital of the same magnitude sets in action more labour
with the same mass of labour-power; and, finally, a greater number of inferior labour-powers by displacement of
higher.

The production of a relative surplus-population, or the setting free of labourers, goes on therefore yet more rapidly
than the technical revolution of the process of production that accompanies, and is accelerated by, the advance of
accumulation; and more rapidly than the corresponding diminution of the variable part of capital as compared with the
constant. If the means of production, as they increase in extent and effective power, become to a less extent means of
employment of labourers, this state of things is again modified by the fact that in proportion as the productiveness of
labour increases, capital increases its supply of labour more quickly than its demand for labourers. The over-work of
the employed part of the working-class swells the ranks of the reserve, whilst conversely the greater pressure that the
latter by its competition exerts on the former, forces these to submit to overwork and to subjugation under the dictates
of capital. The condemnation of one part of the working-class to enforced idleness by the overwork of the other part,
and the converse, becomes a means of enriching the individual capitalists, [191 and accelerates at the same time the
production of the industrial reserve army on a scale corresponding with the advance of social accumulation. How
important is this element in the formation of the relative surplus-population, is shown by the example of England. Her
technical means for saving labour are colossal. Nevertheless, if to-morrow morning labour generally were reduced to a
rational amount, and proportioned to the different sections of the working-class according to age and sex, the working
population to hand would be absolutely insufficient for the carrying on of national production on its present scale. The
great majority of the labourers now "unproductive" would have to be turned into "productive" ones.

Taking them as a whole, the general movements of wages are exclusively regulated by the expansion and contraction
of the industrial reserve army, and these again correspond to the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. They are,
therefore, not determined by the variations of the absolute number of the working population, but by the varying
proportions in which the working-class is divided into active and reserve army, by the increase or diminution in the
relative amount of the surplus-population, by the extent to which it is now absorbed, now set free. For Modern
Industry with its decennial cycles and periodic phases, which, moreover, as accumulation advances, are complicated
by irregular oscillations following each other more and more quickly, that would indeed be a beautiful law, which
pretends to make the action of capital dependent on the absolute variation of the population, instead of regulating the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (11 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

demand and supply of labour by the alternate expansion and contraction of capital, the labour-market now appearing
relatively under-full, because capital is expanding, now again over-full, because it is contracting. Yet this is the dogma
of the economists. According to them, wages rise in consequence of accumulation of capital. The higher wages
stimulate the working population to more rapid multiplication, and this goes on until the labour-market becomes too
full, and therefore capital, relatively to the supply of labour, becomes insufficient. Wages fall, and now we have the
reverse of the medal. The working population is little by little decimated as the result of the fall in wages, so that
capital is again in excess relatively to them, or, as others explain it, falling wages and the corresponding increase in
the exploitation of the labourer again accelerates accumulation, whilst, at the same time, the lower wages hold the
increase of the working-class in check. Then comes again the time, when the supply of labour is less than the demand,
wages rise, and so on. A beautiful mode of motion this for developed capitalist production! Before, in consequence of
the rise of wages, any positive increase of the population really fit for work could occur, the time would have been
passed again and again, during which the industrial campaign must have been carried through, the battle fought and
won.

Between 1849 and 1859, a rise of wages practically insignificant, though accompanied by falling prices of corn, took
place in the English agricultural districts. In Wiltshire, e.g., the weekly wages rose from 7s. to 8s.; in Dorsetshire from
7s. or 8s., to 9s., &c. This was the result of an unusual exodus of the agricultural surplus-population caused by the
demands of war, the vast extension of railroads, factories, mines, &c. The lower the wages, the higher is the
proportion in which ever so insignificant a rise of them expresses itself. If the weekly wage, e.g., is 20s. and it rises to
22s., that is a rise of 10 per cent.; but if it is only 7s. and it rises to 9s., that is a rise of 28 4/7 per cent., which sounds
very fine. Everywhere the farmers were howling, and the London Economist, with reference to these starvation-wages,
prattled quite seriously of "a general and substantial advance." [201 What did the farmers do now? Did they wait until,
in consequence of this brilliant remuneration, the agricultural labourers had so increased and multiplied that their
wages must fall again, as prescribed by the dogmatic economic brain? They introduced more machinery, and in a
moment the labourers were redundant again in a proportion satisfactory even to the farmers. There was now "more
capital" laid out in agriculture than before, and in a more productive form. With this the demand for labour fell, not
only relatively, but absolutely.

The above economic fiction confuses the laws that regulate the general movement of wages, or the ratio between the
working-class — i.e., the total labour-power — and the total social capital, with the laws that distribute the working
population over the different spheres of production. If, e.g., in consequence of favourable circumstances, accumulation
in a particular sphere of production becomes especially active, and profits in it, being greater than the average profits,
attract additional capital, of course the demand for labour rises and wages also rise. The higher wages draw a larger
part of the working population into the more favoured sphere, until it is glutted with labour-power, and wages at
length fall again to their average level or below it, if the pressure is too great. Then, not only does the immigration of
labourers into the branch of industry in question cease; it gives place to their emigration. Here the political economist
thinks he sees the why and wherefore of an absolute increase of workers accompanying an increase of wages, and of a
diminution of wages accompanying an absolute increase of labourers. But he sees really only the local oscillation of
the labour-market in a particular sphere of production — he sees only the phenomena accompanying the distribution
of the working population into the different spheres of outlay of capital, according to its varying needs.

The industrial reserve army, during the periods of stagnation and average prosperity, weighs down the active
labour-army; during the periods of over-production and paroxysm, it holds its pretensions in check. Relative
surplus-population is therefore the pivot upon which the law of demand and supply of labour works. It confines the
field of action of this law within the limits absolutely convenient to the activity of exploitation and to the domination
of capital.

This is the place to return to one of the grand exploits of economic apologetics. It will be remembered that if through
the introduction of new, or the extension of old, machinery, a portion of variable capital is transformed into constant,
the economic apologist interprets this operation which "fixes" capital and by that very act sets labourers "free," in
exactly the opposite way, pretending that it sets free capital for the labourers. Only now can one fully understand the
effrontery of these apologists. What are set free are not only the labourers immediately turned out by the machines,
but also their future substitutes in the rising generation, and the additional contingent, that with the usual extension of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (12 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

trade on the old basis would be regularly absorbed. They are now all "set free," and every new bit of capital looking
out for employment can dispose of them. Whether it attracts them or others, the effect on the general labour demand
will be nil, if this capital is just sufficient to take out of the market as many labourers as the machines threw upon it. If
it employs a smaller number, that of the supernumeraries increases; if it employs a greater, the general demand for
labour only increases to the extent of the excess of the employed over those "set free." The impulse that additional
capital, seeking an outlet, would otherwise have given to the general demand for labour, is therefore in every case
neutralised to the extent of the labourers thrown out of employment by the machine. That is to say, the mechanism of
capitalistic production so manages matters that the absolute increase of capital is accompanied by no corresponding
rise in the general demand for labour. And this the apologist calls a compensation for the misery, the sufferings, the
possible death of the displaced labourers during the transition period that banishes them into the industrial reserve
army! The demand for labour is not identical with increase of capital, nor supply of labour with increase of the
working-class. It is not a case of two independent forces working on one another. Les des sont pipes. Capital works on
both sides at the same time. If its accumulation, on the one hand, increases the demand for labour, it increases on the
other the supply of labourers by the "setting free" of them, whilst at the same time the pressure of the unemployed
compels those that are employed to furnish more labour, and therefore makes the supply of labour, to a certain extent,
independent of the supply of labourers. The action of the law of supply and demand of labour on this basis completes
the despotism of capital. As soon, therefore, as the labourers learn the secret, how it comes to pass that in the same
measure as they work more, as they produce more wealth for others, and as the productive power of their labour
increases, so in the same measure even their function as a means of the self-expansion of capital becomes more and
more precarious for them; as soon as they discover that the degree of intensity of the competition among themselves
depends wholly on the pressure of the relative surplus-population; as soon as, by Trades' Unions, &c, they try to
organise a regular co-operation between employed and unemployed in order to destroy or to weaken the ruinous
effects of this natural law of capitalistic production on their class, so soon capital and its sycophant, Political
Economy, cry out at the infringement of the "eternal" and so to say "sacred" law of supply and demand. Every
combination of employed and unemployed disturbs the "harmonious" action of this law. But, on the other hand, as
soon as (in the colonies, e.g.) adverse circumstances prevent the creation of an industrial reserve army and, with it, the
absolute dependence of the working-class upon the capitalist class, capital, along with its commonplace Sancho Panza,
rebels against the "sacred" law of supply and demand, and tries to check its inconvenient action by forcible means and
State interference.



SECTION 4.

DIFFERENT FORMS OF THE RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION.THE GENERAL LAW OF
CAPITALISTIC ACCUMULATION



The relative surplus-population exists in every possible form. Every labourer belongs to it during the time when he is
only partially employed or wholly unemployed. Not taking into account the great periodically recurring forms that the
changing phases of the industrial cycle impress on it, now an acute form during the crisis, then again a chronic form
during dull times — it has always three forms, the floating, the latent, the stagnant.

In the centres of modern industry — factories, manufactures, ironworks, mines, &c. — the labourers are sometimes
repelled, sometimes attracted again in greater masses, the number of those employed increasing on the whole,
although in a constantly decreasing proportion to the scale of production. Here the surplus-population exists in the
floating form.

In the automatic factories, as in all the great workshops, where machinery enters as a factor, or where only the modern
division of labour is carried out, large numbers of boys are employed up to the age of maturity. When this term is once

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (13 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

reached, only a very small number continue to find employment in the same branches of industry, whilst the majority
are regularly discharged. This majority forms an element of the floating surplus-population, growing with the
extension of those branches of industry. Part of them emigrates, following in fact capital that has emigrated. One
consequence is that the female population grows more rapidly than the male, teste England. That the natural increase
of the number of labourers does not satisfy the requirements of the accumulation of capital, and yet all the time is in
excess of them, is a contradiction inherent to the movement of capital itself. It wants larger numbers of youthful
labourers, a smaller number of adults. The contradiction is not more glaring than that other one that there is a
complaint of the want of hands, while at the same time many thousands are out of work, because the division of labour
chains them to a particular branch of industry. [211

The consumption of labour-power by capital is, besides, so rapid that the labourer, half-way through his life, has
already more or less completely lived himself out. He falls into the ranks of the supernumeraries, or is thrust down
from a higher to a lower step in the scale. It is precisely among the work-people of modern industry that we meet with
the shortest duration of life. Dr. Lee, Medical Officer of Health for Manchester, stated "that the average age at death of
the Manchester ... upper middle class was 38 years, while the average age at death of the labouring class was 17; while
at Liverpool those figures were represented as 35 against 15. It thus appeared that the well-to-do classes had a lease of
life which was more than double the value of that which fell to the lot of the less favoured citizens." [221 In order to
conform to these circumstances, the absolute increase of this section of the proletariat must take place under
conditions that shall swell their numbers, although the individual elements are used up rapidly. Hence, rapid renewal
of the generations of labourers (this law does not hold for the other classes of the population). This social need is met
by early marriages, a necessary consequence of the conditions in which the labourers of modern industry live, and by
the premium that the exploitation of children sets on their production.

As soon as capitalist production takes possession of agriculture, and in proportion to the extent to which it does so, the
demand for an agricultural labouring population falls absolutely, while the accumulation of the capital employed in
agriculture advances, without this repulsion being, as in non- agricultural industries, compensated by a greater
attraction. Part of the agricultural population is therefore constantly on the point of passing over into an urban or
manufacturing proletariat, and on the look-out for circumstances favourable to this transformation. (Manufacture is
used here in the sense of all nonagricultural industries.) [231 This source of relative surplus-population is thus
constantly flowing. But the constant flow towards the towns pre-supposes, in the country itself, a constant latent
surplus-population, the extent of which becomes evident only when its channels of outlet open to exceptional width.
The agricultural labourer is therefore reduced to the minimum of wages, and always stands with one foot already in
the swamp of pauperism.

The third category of the relative surplus-population, the stagnant, forms a part of the active labour army, but with
extremely irregular employment. Hence it furnishes to capital an inexhaustible reservoir of disposable labour-power.
Its conditions of life sink below the average normal level of the working-class; this makes it at once the broad basis of
special branches of capitalist exploitation. It is characterised by maximum of working-time, and minimum of wages.
We have learnt to know its chief form under the rubric of "domestic industry." It recruits itself constantly from the
supernumerary forces of modern industry and agriculture, and specially from those decaying branches of industry
where handicraft is yielding to manufacture, manufacture to machinery. Its extent grows, as with the extent and energy
of accumulation, the creation of a surplus-population advances. But it forms at the same time a self-reproducing and
self -perpetuating element of the working-class, taking a proportionally greater part in the general increase of that class
than the other elements. In fact, not only the number of births and deaths, but the absolute size of the families stand in
inverse proportion to the height of wages, and therefore to the amount of means of subsistence of which the different
categories of labourers dispose. This law of capitalistic society would sound absurd to savages, or even civilised
colonists. It calls to mind the boundless reproduction of animals individually weak and constantly hunted down. [241

The lowest sediment of the relative surplus-population finally dwells in the sphere of pauperism. Exclusive of
vagabonds, criminals, prostitutes, in a word, the "dangerous" classes, this layer of society consists of three categories.
First, those able to work. One need only glance superficially at the statistics of English pauperism to find that the
quantity of paupers increases with every crisis, and diminishes with every revival of trade. Second, orphans and



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (14 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

pauper children. These are candidates for the industrial reserve army, and are, in times of great prosperity, as 1860,
e.g., speedily and in large numbers enrolled in the active army of labourers. Third, the demoralised and ragged, and
those unable to work, chiefly people who succumb to their incapacity for adaptation, due to the division of labour;
people who have passed the normal age of the labourer; the victims of industry, whose number increases with the
increase of dangerous machinery, of mines, chemical works, &c, the mutilated, the sickly, the widows, &c.
Pauperism is the hospital of the active labour-army and the dead weight of the industrial reserve army. Its production
is included in that of the relative surplus-population, its necessity in theirs; along with the surplus-population,
pauperism forms a condition of capitalist production, and of the capitalist development of wealth. It enters into the
fauxfrais of capitalist production; but capital knows how to throw these, for the most part, from its own shoulders on
to those of the working-class and the lower middle class.

The greater the social wealth, the functioning capital, the extent and energy of its growth, and, therefore, also the
absolute mass of the proletariat and the productiveness of its labour, the greater is the industrial reserve army. The
same causes which develop the expansive power of capital, develop also the labour-power at its disposal. The relative
mass of the industrial reserve army increases therefore with the potential energy of wealth. But the greater this reserve
army in proportion to the active labour-army, the greater is the mass of a consolidated surplus-population, whose
misery is in inverse ratio to its torment of labour. The more extensive, finally, the lazarus-layers of the working-class,
and the industrial reserve army, the greater is official pauperism. This is the absolute general law of capitalist
accumulation. Like all other laws it is modified in its working by many circumstances, the analysis of which does not
concern us here.

The folly is now patent of the economic wisdom that preaches to the labourers the accommodation of their number to
the requirements of capital. The mechanism of capitalist production and accumulation constantly effects this
adjustment. The first word of this adaptation is the creation of a relative surplus-population, or industrial reserve army.
Its last word is the misery of constantly extending strata of the active army of labour, and the dead weight of
pauperism.

The law by which a constantly increasing quantity of means of production, thanks to the advance in the
productiveness of social labour, may be set in movement by a progressively diminishing expenditure of human power,
this law, in a capitalist society — where the labourer does not employ the means of production, but the means of
production employ the labourer — undergoes a complete inversion and is expressed thus: the higher the
productiveness of labour, the greater is the pressure of the labourers on the means of employment, the more
precarious, therefore, becomes their condition of existence, viz., the sale of their own labour-power for the increasing
of another's wealth, or for the self-expansion of capital. The fact that the means of production, and the productiveness
of labour, increase more rapidly than the productive population, expresses itself, therefore, capitalistically in the
inverse form that the labouring population always increases more rapidly than the conditions under which capital can
employ this increase for its own self-expansion.

We saw in Part IV., when analysing the production of relative surplus-value: within the capitalist system all methods
for raising the social productiveness of labour are brought about at the cost of the individual labourer; all means for
the development of production transform themselves into means of domination over, and exploitation of, the
producers; they mutilate the labourer into a fragment of a man, degrade him to the level of an appendage of a machine,
destroy every remnant of charm in his work and turn it into a hated toil; they estrange from him the intellectual
potentialities of the labour-process in the same proportion as science is incorporated in it as an independent power;
they distort the conditions under which he works, subject him during the labour-process to a despotism the more
hateful for its meanness; they transform his life-time into working-time, and drag his wife and child beneath the
wheels of the Juggernaut of capital. But all methods for the production of surplus-value are at the same time methods
of accumulation; and every extension of accumulation becomes again a means for the development of those methods.
It follows therefore that in proportion as capital accumulates, the lot of the labourer, be his payment high or low, must
grow worse. The law, finally, that always equilibrates the relative surplus-population, or industrial reserve army, to the
extent and energy of accumulation, this law rivets the labourer to capital more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan did
Prometheus to the rock. It establishes an accumulation of misery, corresponding with accumulation of capital.
Accumulation of wealth at one pole is, therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil slavery,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (15 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole, i.e., on the side of the class that produces its own
product in the form of capital. [251 This antagonistic character of capitalistic accumulation is enunciated in various
forms by political economists, although by them it is confounded with phenomena, certainly to some extent
analogous, but nevertheless essentially distinct, and belonging to pre-capitalistic modes of production.

The Venetian monk Ortes, one of the great economic writers of the 18th century, regards the antagonism of capitalist
production as a general natural law of social wealth. "In the economy of a nation, advantages and evils always balance
one another (il bene ed il male economico in una nazione sempre all, istessa misura): the abundance of wealth with
some people, is always equal to the want of it with others (la copia dei beni in alcuni sempre eguale alia mancanza di
essi in altri): the great riches of a small number are always accompanied by the absolute privation of the first
necessaries of life for many others. The wealth of a nation corresponds with its population, and its misery corresponds
with its wealth. Diligence in some compels idleness in others. The poor and idle are a necessary consequence of the
rich and active," &c. [261 In a thoroughly brutal way about 10 years after Ortes, the Church of England parson,
Townsend, glorified misery as a necessary condition of wealth. "Legal constraint (to labour) is attended with too much
trouble, violence, and noise, whereas hunger is not only a peaceable, silent, unremitted pressure, but as the most
natural motive to industry and labour, it calls forth the most powerful exertions." Everything therefor ' e depends upon
making hunger permanent among the working-class, and for this, according to Townsend, the principle of population,
especially active among the poor, provides. "It seems to be a law of Nature that the poor should be to a certain degree
improvident" [i.e., so improvident as to be born without a silver spoon in the mouth], "that there may always be some
to fulfil the most servile, the most sordid, and the most ignoble offices in the community. The stock of human
happiness is thereby much increased, whilst the more delicate are not only relieved from drudgery ... but are left at
liberty without interruption to pursue those callings which are suited to their various dispositions ... it [the Poor Law]
tends to destroy the harmony and beauty, the symmetry and order of that system which God and Nature have
established in the world. [27] If the Venetian monk found in the fatal destiny that makes misery eternal, the raison
d'etre of Christian charity, celibacy, monasteries and holy houses, the Protestant prebendary finds in it a pretext for
condemning the laws in virtue of which the poor possessed a right to a miserable public relief.

"The progress of social wealth," says Storch, "begets this useful class of society ... which performs the most
wearisome, the vilest, the most disgusting functions, which takes, in a word, on its shoulders all that is disagreeable
and servile in life, and procures thus for other classes leisure, serenity of mind and conventional [c'est bon!] dignity of
character." [28] Storch asks himself in what then really consists the progress of this capitalistic civilisation with its
misery and its degradation of the masses, as compared with barbarism. He finds but one answer: security!

"Thanks to the advance of industry and science," says Sismondi, "every labourer can produce every day much more
than his consumption requires. But at the same time, whilst his labour produces wealth, that wealth would, were he
called on to consume it himself, make him less fit for labour." According to him, "men" [i.e., non-workers] "would
probably prefer to do without all artistic perfection, and all the enjoyments that manufacturers procure for us, if it were
necessary that all should buy them by constant toil like that of the labourer.... Exertion to-day is separated from its
recompense; it is not the same man that first works, and then reposes; but it is because the one works that the other
rests.... The indefinite multiplication of the productive powers of labour can then only have for result the increase of
luxury and enjoyment of the idle rich." [29]

Finally Destutt de Tracy, the fish-blooded bourgeois doctrinaire, blurts out brutally: "In poor nations the people are
comfortable, in rich nations they are generally poor." [30]



SECTION 5.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (16 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



A. England from 1846-1866

No period of modern society is so favourable for the study of capitalist accumulation as the period of the last 20 years.
It is as if this period had found Fortunatus' purse. But of all countries England again furnishes the classical example,
because it holds the foremost place in the world-market, because capitalist production is here alone completely
developed, and lastly, because the introduction of the Free-trade millennium since 1846 has cut off the last retreat of
vulgar economy. The titanic advance of production — the latter half of the 20 years' period again far surpassing the
former — has been already pointed out sufficiently in Part IV.

Although the absolute increase of the English population in the last half century was very great, the relative increase
or rate of growth fell constantly, as the following table borrowed from the census shows.

Annual increase per cent, of the population of England and Wales in decimal numbers:





1811-1821 1.533 per cent.


1821-1831 1.446 per cent.


1831-1841 1.326 percent.


1841-1851 1.216 per cent.


1851-1861 1.141 per cent.



Let us now, on the other hand, consider the increase of wealth. Here the movement of profit, rent of land, &c, that
come under the income tax. furnishes the surest basis. The increase of profits liable to income tax (farmers and some
other categories not included) in Great Britain from 1853 to 1864 amounted to 50.47% or 4.58% as the annual
average, [311 that of the population during the same period to about 12%. The augmentation of the rent of land subject
to taxation (including houses, railways, mines, fisheries, &c), amounted for 1853 to 1864 to 38% or 3 5/12%
annually. Under this head the following categories show the greatest increase:





Excess of annual income
of 1864 over that of 1853


Increase
per year


Houses 38.60%


3.50%


Quarries 84.76%


7.70%


Mines 68.85%


6.26%


Ironworks 39.92%


3.63%


Fisheries 57.37%


5.21%


Gasworks 126.02%


11.45%


Railways 83.29%


7.57%



If we compare the years from 1853 to 1864 in three sets of four consecutive years each, the rate of augmentation of
the income increases constantly. f321 It is, e.g., for that arising from profits between 1853 to 1857, 1.73% yearly;
1857-1861, 2.74%, and for 1861-64, 9.30% yearly. The sum of the incomes of the United Kingdom that come under
the income tax was in 1856, £307,068,898; in 1859, £328,127,416; in 1862. £351,745,241; in 1863, £359,142,897; in
1864, £362,462,279; in 1865, £385,530,020. [331

The accumulation of capital was attended at the same time by its concentration and centralisation. Although no official
statistics of agriculture existed for England (they did for Ireland), they were voluntarily given in 10 counties. These



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (17 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

statistics gave the result that from 1851 to 1861 the number of farms of less than 100 acres had fallen from 31,583 to
26,597, so that 5,016 had been thrown together into larger farms. [341 From 1815 to 1825 no personal estate of more
than £1,000,000 came under the succession duty; from 1825 to 1855, however, 8 did; and 4 from 1856 to June, 1859,
i.e., in 4 1/2 years. [351 The centralisation will, however, be best seen from a short analysis of the Income Tax
Schedule D (profits, exclusive of farms, &c), in the years 1864 and 1865. 1 note beforehand that incomes from this
source pay income tax on everything over £60. These incomes liable to taxation in England, Wales and Scotland,
amounted in 1864 to £95,844,222. in 1865 to £105,435,579. I36J The number of persons taxed were in 1864, 308,416,
out of a population of 23,891,009; in 1865, 332,431 out of a population of 24,127,003. The following table shows the
distribution of these incomes in the two years:









Year ending
April 5th, 1864.


Year ending
April 5th, 1865.


Income from
Profits


Income from
People


Income from
Profits


Income from
People


Total Income


£95,844,222


308,416


105,435,738


332,431


of these


57,028,289


23,334


64,554,297


24,265


of these


36,415,225


3,619


42,535,576


4,021


of these


22,809,781


832


27,555,313


973


of these


8,744,762


91


11,077,238


107



In 1855 there were produced in the United Kingdom 61,453,079 tons of coal, of value £16,1 13,167; in 1864,
92,787,873 tons, of value £23,197,968; in 1855, 3,218,154 tons of pig-iron, of value £8,045,385; 1864, 4,767,951
tons, of value £1 1,919,877. In 1854 the length of the railroads worked in the United Kingdom was 8,054 miles, with a
paid-up capital of £286,068,794; in 1864 the length was 12,789 miles, with capital paid up of £425,719,613. In 1854
the total sum of the exports and imports of the United Kingdom was £268,210,145; in 1865, £489,923,285. The
following table shows the movement of the exports:





1846


£58,842,377


1849


63,596,052


1856


115,826,948


1860


135,842,817


1865


165,862,402


1866


188,917,563




[371



After these few examples one understands the cry of triumph of the Registrar-General of the British people: "Rapidly
as the population has increased, it has not kept pace with the progress of industry and wealth." [381

Let us turn now to the direct agents of this industry, or the producers of this wealth, to the working-class. "It is one of
the most melancholy features in the social state of this country," says Gladstone, "that while there was a decrease in
the consuming powers of the people, and while there was an increase in the privations and distress of the labouring
class and operatives, there was at the same time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, and a constant
increase of capital." [391 Thus spake this unctuous minister in the House of Commons of February 13th, 1843. On
April 16th, 1863, 20 years later, in the speech in which he introduced his Budget: "From 1842 to 1852 the taxable
income of the country increased by 6 per cent.... In the 8 years from 1853 to 1861 it had increased from the basis taken
in 1853 by 20 per cent.! The fact is so astonishing as to he almost incredible ... this intoxicating augmentation of
wealth and power ... entirely confined to classes of property ... must be of indirect benefit to the labouring population,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (18 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

because it cheapens the commodities of general consumption. While the rich have been growing richer, the poor have
been growing less poor. At any rate, whether the extremes of poverty are less, I do not presume to say." [401 How
lame an anti-climax! If the working-class has remained "poor," only "less poor" in proportion as it produces for the
wealthy class "an intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power," then it has remained relatively just as poor. If the
extremes of poverty have not lessened, they have increased, because the extremes of wealth have. As to the
cheapening of the means of subsistence, the official statistics, e.g., the accounts of the London Orphan Asylum, show
an increase in price of 20% for the average of the three years 1860-1862, compared with 1851-1853. In the following
three years, 1863-1865, there was a progressive rise in the price of meat, butter, milk, sugar, salt, coals, and a number
of other necessary means of subsistence. [411 Gladstone's next Budget speech of April 7th, 1864, is a Pindaric
dithyrambus on the advance of surplus-value-making and the happiness of the people "tempered by poverty." He
speaks of masses "on the border" of pauperism, of branches of trade in which "wages have not increased," and finally
sums up the happiness of the working-class in the words: "human life is but, in nine cases out of ten, a struggle for
existence." [421 Professor Fawcett, not bound like Gladstone by official considerations, declares roundly: "I do not, of
course, deny that money wages have been augmented by this increase of capital (in the last ten years), but this
apparent advantage is to a great extent lost, because many of the necessaries of life are becoming dearer" (he believes
because of the fall in value of the precious metals)... "the rich grow rapidly richer, whilst there is no perceptible
advance in the comfort enjoyed by the industrial classes.... They (the labourers) become almost the slaves of the
tradesman, to whom they owe money." [431

In the chapters on the "working-day" and "machinery," the reader has seen under what circumstances the British
working-class created an "intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power" for the propertied classes. There we were
chiefly concerned with the social functioning of the labourer. But for a full elucidation of the law of accumulation, his
condition outside the workshop must also be looked at, his condition as to food and dwelling. The limits of this book
compel us to concern ourselves chiefly with the worst paid part of the industrial proletariat, and with the agricultural
labourers, who together form the majority of the working-class.

But first, one word on official pauperism, or on that part of the working-class which has forfeited its condition of
existence (the sale of labour-power), and vegetates upon public alms. The official list of paupers numbered in England
[441 851,369 persons; in 1856, 877,767; in 1865, 971,433. In consequence of the cotton famine, it grew in the years
1863 and 1864 to 1,079,382 and 1,014,978. The crisis of 1866, which fell most heavily on London, created in this
centre of the world-market, more populous than the kingdom of Scotland, an increase of pauperism for the year 1866
of 19.5% compared with 1865, and of 24.4% compared with 1864, and a still greater increase for the first months of
1867 as compared with 1866. From the analysis of the statistics of pauperism, two points are to be taken. On the one
hand, the fluctuation up and down of the number of paupers, reflects the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. On
the other, the official statistics become more and more misleading as to the actual extent of pauperism in proportion
as, with the accumulation of capital, the class-struggle, and, therefore, the class-consciousness of the working-men,
develop. E.g., the barbarity in the treatment of the paupers, at which the English Press (The Times, Pall Mall Gazette,
etc.) have cried out so loudly during the last two years, is of ancient date. F. Engels showed in 1844 exactly the same
horrors, exactly the same transient canting outcries of "sensational literature." But frightful increase of "deaths by
starvation" in London during the last ten years proves beyond doubt the growing horror in which the working-people
hold the slavery of the workhouse, that place of punishment for misery. [451



B. The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class

During the cotton famine of 1862, Dr. Smith was charged by the Privy Council with an inquiry into the conditions of
nourishment of the distressed operatives in Lancashire and Cheshire. His observations during many preceding years
had led him to the conclusion that "to avert starvation diseases," the daily food of an average woman ought to contain
at least 3,900 grains of carbon with 180 grains of nitrogen; the daily food of an average man, at least 4,300 grains of
carbon with 200 grains of nitrogen; for women, about the same quantity of nutritive elements as are contained in 2 lbs.
of good wheaten bread, for men 1/9 more; for the weekly average of adult men and women, at least 28,600 grains of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (19 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

carbon and 1,330 grains of nitrogen. His calculation was practically confirmed in a surprising manner by its agreement
with the miserable quantity of nourishment to which want had forced down the consumption of the cotton operatives.
This was, in December, 1862, 29,211 grains of carbon, and 1,295 grains of nitrogen weekly.

In the year 1863, the Privy Council ordered an inquiry into the state of distress of the worst-nourished part of the
English working-class. Dr. Simon, medical officer to the Privy Council, chose for this work the above-mentioned Dr.
Smith. His inquiry ranges on the one hand over the agricultural labourers, on the other, over silk-weavers,
needlewomen, kid-glovers, stocking-weavers, glove-weavers, and shoemakers. The latter categories are, with the
exception of the stocking- weavers, exclusively town-dwellers. It was made a rule in the inquiry to select in each
category the most healthy families, and those comparatively in the best circumstances.

As a general result it was found that "in only one of the examined classes of in-door operatives did the average
nitrogen-supply just exceed, while in another it nearly reached, the estimated standard of bare sufficiency [i.e.,
sufficient to avert starvation diseases], and that in two classes there was defect — in one, a very large defect — of
both nitrogen and carbon. Moreover, as regards the examined families of the agricultural population, it appeared that
more than a fifth were with less than the estimated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that more than one-third were
with less than the estimated sufficiency of nitrogenous food, and that in three counties (Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and
Somersetshire), insufficiency of nitrogenous food was the average local diet." [461 Among the agricultural labourers,
those of England, the wealthiest part of the United Kingdom, were the worst fed. [471 The insufficiency of food
among the agricultural labourers, fell, as a rule, chiefly on the women and children, for "the man must eat to do his
work." Still greater penury ravaged the town-workers examined. "They are so ill fed that assuredly among them there
must be many cases of severe and injurious privation." [481 ("Privation" of the capitalist all this! i.e., "abstinence"
from paying for the means of subsistence absolutely necessary for the mere vegetation of his "hands. ")[49J

The following table shows the conditions of nourishment of the above-named categories of purely town-dwelling
work-people, as compared with the minimum assumed by Dr. Smith, and with the food-allowance of the cotton
operatives during the time of their greatest distress:





Both Sexes


Average weekly
carbon


Average weekly
nitrogen


Five in-door
occupations


28,876 grains


1,192 grains


Unemployed Lancashire
Operatives


28,211 grains


1,295 grains


Minimum quantity to be
allowed to the Lancashire
Operatives, equal number
of males and females


28,600 grains


1,330 grains



One half, or 60/125, of the industrial labour categories investigated, had absolutely no beer, 28% no milk. The weekly
average of the liquid means of nourishment in the families varied from seven ounces in the needle-women to 24 3/4
ounces in the stocking-makers. The majority of those who did not obtain milk were needle-women in London. The
quantity of bread-stuffs consumed weekly varied from 7 3/4 lbs. for the needle-women to 1 1 1/2 lbs. for the
shoemakers, and gave a total average of 9.9 lbs. per adult weekly. Sugar (treacle, etc.) varied from 4 ounces weekly
for the kid-glovers to 1 1 ounces for the stockingmakers; and the total average per week for all categories was 8 ounces
per adult weekly. Total weekly average of butter (fat, etc.) 5 ounces per adult. The weekly average of meat (bacon,
etc.) varied from 7 1/4 ounces for the silk- weavers, to 18 1/4 ounces for the kid-glovers; total average for the different
categories 13.6 ounces. The weekly cost of food per adult, gave the following average figures; silk- weavers 2s. 2
l/2d., needle-women 2s. 7d., kid-glovers 2s. 9 l/2d., shoemakers 2s 7 3/4d., stocking-weavers 2s. 6 l/4d. For the
silk- weavers of Macclesfield the average was only Is. 8 l/2d. The worst categories were the needle- women,
silk-weavers and kid-glovers. [501 Of these facts, Dr. Simon in his General Health Report says: "That cases are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (20 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

innumerable in which defective diet is the cause or the aggravator of disease, can be affirmed by any one who is
conversant with poor law medical practice, or with the wards and out-patient rooms of hospitals.... Yet in this point of
view, there is, in my opinion, a very important sanitary context to be added. It must be remembered that privation of
food is very reluctantly borne, and that as a rule great poorness of diet will only come when other privations have
preceded it. Long before insufficiency of diet is a matter of hygienic concern, long before the physiologist would think
of counting the grains of nitrogen and carbon which intervene between life and starvation, the household will have
been utterly destitute of material comfort; clothing and fuel will have been even scantier than food — against
inclemencies of weather there will have been no adequate protection — dwelling space will have been stinted to the
degree in which over-crowding produces or increases disease; of household utensils and furniture there will have been
scarcely any-even cleanliness will have been found costly or difficult, and if there still be self-respectful endeavours to
maintain it, every such endeavour will represent additional pangs of hunger. The home, too, will be where shelter can
be cheapest bought; in quarters where commonly there is least fruit of sanitary supervision, least drainage, least
scavenging, least suppression of public nuisances, least or worst water supply, and, if in town, least light and air. Such
are the sanitary dangers to which poverty is almost certainly exposed, when it is poverty enough to imply scantiness of
food. And while the sum of them is of terrible magnitude against life, the mere scantiness of food is in itself of very
serious moment.... These are painful reflections, especially when it is remembered that the poverty to which they
advert is not the deserved poverty of idleness. In all cases it is the poverty of working populations. Indeed, as regards
the in-door operatives, the work which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is for the most part excessively prolonged.
Yet evidently it is only in a qualified sense that the work can be deemed self-supporting.... And on a very large scale
the nominal self-support can be only a circuit, longer or shorter, to pauperism." [511

The intimate connexion between the pangs of hunger of the most industrious layers of the working-class, and the
extravagant consumption, coarse or refined, of the rich, for which capitalist accumulation is the basis, reveals itself
only when the economic laws are known. It is otherwise with the "housing of the poor." Every unprejudiced observer
sees that the greater the centralisation of the means of production, the greater is the corresponding heaping together of
the labourers, within a given space; that therefore the swifter capitalistic accumulation, the more miserable are the
dwellings of the working-people. "Improvements" of towns, accompanying the increase of wealth, by the demolition
of badly built quarters, the erection of palaces for banks, warehouses, &c, the widening of streets for business traffic,
for the carriages of luxury, and for the introduction of tramways, &c, drive away the poor into even worse and more
crowded hiding places. On the other hand, every one knows that the dearness of dwellings is in inverse ratio to their
excellence, and that the mines of misery are exploited by house speculators with more profit or less cost than ever
were the mines of Potosi. The antagonistic character of capitalist accumulation, and therefore of the capitalistic
relations of property generally, [521 is here so evident, that even the official English reports on this subject teem with
heterodox onslaughts on "property and its rights." With the development of industry, with the accumulation of capital,
with the growth and "improvement" of towns, the evil makes such progress that the mere fear of contagious diseases
which do not spare even "respectability," brought into existence from 1847 to 1864 no less than 10 Acts of Parliament
on sanitation, and that the frightened bourgeois in some towns, as Liverpool, Glasgow, &c, took strenuous measures
through their municipalities. Nevertheless Dr. Simon, in his report of 1865, says: "Speaking generally, it may be said
that the evils are uncontrolled in England." By order of the Privy Council, in 1864, an inquiry was made into the
conditions of the housing of the agricultural labourers, in 1865 of the poorer classes in the towns. The results of the
admirable work of Dr. Julian Hunter are to be found in the seventh (1865) and eighth (1866) exports on "Public
Health." To the agricultural labourers, I shall come later. On the condition of town dwellings, I quote, as preliminary,
a general remark of Dr. Simon. "Although my official point of view," he says, "is one exclusively physical, common
humanity requires that the other aspect of this evil should not be ignored .... In its higher degrees it [i.e.,
over-crowding] almost necessarily involves such negation of all delicacy, such unclean confusion of bodies and bodily
functions, such exposure of animal and sexual nakedness, as is rather bestial than human. To be subject to these
influences is a degradation which must become deeper and deeper for those on whom it continues to work. To
children who are born under its curse, it must often be a very baptism into infamy. And beyond all measure hopeless is
the wish that persons thus circumstanced should ever in other respects aspire to that atmosphere of civilisation which
has its essence in physical and moral cleanliness." [531

London takes the first place in over-crowded habitations, absolutely unfit for human beings. "He feels clear," says Dr.
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (21 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Hunter, "on two points; first, that there are about 20 large colonies in London, of about 10,000 persons each, whose
miserable condition exceeds almost anything he has seen elsewhere in England, and is almost entirely the result of
their bad house accommodation; and second, that the crowded and dilapidated condition of the houses of these
colonies is much worse than was the case 20 years ago." [541 "It is not too much to say that life in parts of London and
Newcastle is infernal." [551

Further, the better-off part of the working-class, together with the small shopkeepers and other elements of the lower
middle class, falls in London more and more under the curse of these vile conditions of dwelling, in proportion as
"improvements," and with them the demolition of old streets and houses, advance, as factories and the afflux of human
beings grow in the metropolis, and finally as house rents rise with the ground-rents. "Rents have become so heavy that
few labouring men can afford more than one room." [561 There is almost no house-property in London that is not
overburdened with a number of middlemen. For the price of land in London is always very high in comparison with
its yearly revenue, and therefore every buyer speculates on getting rid of it again at a jury price (the expropriation
valuation fixed by jurymen), or on pocketing an extraordinary increase of value arising from the neighbourhood of
some large establishment. As a consequence of this there is a regular trade in the purchase of "fag-ends of leases."
"Gentlemen in this business may be fairly expected to do as they do — get all they can from the tenants while they
have them, and leave as little as they can for their successors." [571

The rents are weekly, and these gentlemen run no risk. In consequence of the making of railroads in the City, "the
spectacle has lately been seen in the East of London of a number of families wandering about some Saturday night
with their scanty worldly goods on their backs, without any resting place but the workhouse." [581 The workhouses
are already over-crowded, and the "improvements" already sanctioned by Parliament are only just begun. If labourers
are driven away by the demolition of their old houses, they do not leave their old parish, or at most they settle down
on its borders, as near as they can get to it. "They try, of course, to remain as near as possible to their workshops. The
inhabitants do not go beyond the same or the next parish, parting their two-room tenements into single rooms, and
crowding even those.... Even at an advanced rent, the people who are displaced will hardly be able to get an
accommodation so good as the meagre one they have left.... Half the workmen ... of the Strand ... walked two miles to
their work." [591 This same Strand, a main thoroughfare which gives strangers an imposing idea of the wealth of
London, may serve as an example of the packing together of human beings in that town. In one of its parishes, the
Officer of Health reckoned 581 persons per acre, although half the width of the Thames was reckoned in. It will be
self-understood that every sanitary measure, which, as has been the case hitherto in London, hunts the labourers from
one quarter, by demolishing uninhabitable houses, serves only to crowd them together yet more closely in another.
"Either," says Dr. Hunter, "the whole proceeding will of necessity stop as an absurdity, or the public compassion (!) be
effectually aroused to the obligation which may now be without exaggeration called national, of supplying cover to
those who by reason of their having no capital, cannot provide it for themselves, though they can by periodical
payments reward those who, will provide it for them." [601 Admire this capitalistic justice! The owner, of land, of
houses, the businessman, when expropriated by "improvements" such as railroads, the building of new streets, &c,
not only receives full indemnity. He must, according to law, human and divine, be comforted for his enforced
"abstinence" over and above this by a thumping profit. The labourer, with his wife and child and chattels, is thrown
out into the street, and — if he crowds in too large numbers towards quarters of the town where the vestries insist on
decency, he is prosecuted in the name of sanitation!

Except London, there was at the beginning of the 19th century no single town in England of 100,000 inhabitants. Only
five had more than 50,000. Now there are 28 towns with more than 50,000 inhabitants. "The result of this change is
not only that the class of town people is enormously increased, but the old close-packed little towns are now centres,
built round on every side, open nowhere to air, and being no longer agreeable to the rich are abandoned by them for
the pleasanter outskirts. The successors of these rich are occupying the larger houses at the rate of a family to each
room [... and find accommodation for two or three lodgers ...] and a population, for which the houses were not
intended and quite unfit, has been created, whose surroundings are truly degrading to the adults and ruinous to the
children." [611 The more rapidly capital accumulates in an industrial or commercial town, the more rapidly flows the
stream of exploitable human material, the more miserable are the improvised dwellings of the labourers.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (22 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Newcastle-on-Tyne, as the centre of a coal and iron district of growing productiveness, takes the next place after
London in the housing inferno. Not less than 34,000 persons live there in single rooms. Because of their absolute
danger to the community, houses in great numbers have lately been destroyed by the authorities in Newcastle and
Gateshead. The building of new houses progresses very slowly, business very quickly. The town was, therefore, in
1865, more full than ever. Scarcely a room was to let. Dr. Embleton, of the Newcastle Fever Hospital, says: "There
can be little doubt that the great cause of the continuance and spread of the typhus has been the over-crowding of
human beings, and the uncleanliness of their dwellings. The rooms, in which labourers in many cases live, are situated
in confined and unwholesome yards or courts, and for space, light, air, and cleanliness, are models of insufficiency
and insalubrity, and a disgrace to any civilised community; in them men, women, and children lie at night huddled
together: and as regards the men, the night-shift succeed the day-shift, and the day-shift the night-shift in unbroken
series for some time together, the beds having scarcely time to cool; the whole house badly supplied with water and
worse with privies; dirty, unventilated, and pestiferous." [62] The price per week of such lodgings ranges from 8d. to
3s. "The town of Newcastle-on-Tyne," says Dr. Hunter, "contains a sample of the finest tribe of our countrymen, often
sunk by external circumstances of house and street into an almost savage degradation." [631

As a result of the ebbing and flowing of capital and labour, the state of the dwellings of an industrial town may to-day
be bearable, tomorrow hideous. Or the aedileship of the town may have pulled itself together for the removal of the
most shocking abuses. To-morrow, like a swarm of locusts, come crowding in masses of ragged Irishmen or decayed
English agricultural labourers. They are stowed away in cellars and lofts, or the hitherto respectable labourer's
dwelling is transformed into a lodging-house whose personnel changes as quickly as the billets in the 30 years' war.
Example: Bradford (Yorkshire). There the municipal philistine was just busied with urban improvements. Besides,
there were still in Bradford, in 1861, 1,751 uninhabited houses. But now comes that revival of trade which the mildly
liberal Mr. Forster, the negro's friend, recently crowed over with so much grace. With the revival of trade came of
course an overflow from the waves of the ever fluctuating "reserve army" or "relative surplus-population." The
frightful cellar habitations and rooms registered in the list, [64] which Dr. Hunter obtained from the agent of an
Insurance Company, were for the most part inhabited by well-paid labourers. They declared that they would willingly
pay for better dwellings if they were to be had. Meanwhile, they become degraded, they fall ill, one and all, whilst the
mildly liberal Forster, M. P., sheds tears over the blessings of Free-trade, and the profits of the eminent men of
Bradford who deal in worsted. In the Report of September, 1865, Dr. Bell, one of the poor law doctors of Bradford,
ascribes the frightful mortality of fever-patients in his district to the nature of their dwellings. "In one small cellar
measuring 1,500 cubic feet ... there are ten persons .... Vincent Street, Green Aire Place, and the Leys include 223
houses having 1,450 inhabitants, 435 beds, and 36 privies.... The beds-and in that term I include any roll of dirty old
rags, or an armful of shavings-have an average of 3.3 persons to each, many have 5 and 6 persons to each, and some
people, I am told, are absolutely without beds; they sleep in their ordinary clothes, on the bare boards — young men
and women, married and unmarried, all together. I need scarcely add that many of these dwellings are dark, damp,
dirty, stinking holes, utterly unfit for human habitations; they are the centres from which disease and death are
distributed amongst those in better circumstances, who have allowed them thus to fester in our midst." [651

Bristol takes the third place after London in the misery of its dwellings. "Bristol, where the blankest poverty and
domestic misery abound in the wealthiest town of Europe." [661



C. The Nomad Population

We turn now to a class of people whose origin is agricultural, but whose occupation is in great part industrial. They
are the light infantry of capital, thrown by it, according to its needs, now to this point, now to that. When they are not
on the march, they "camp." Nomad labour is used for various operations of building and draining, brick-making,
lime-burning, railway-making, &c. A flying column of pestilence, it carries into the places in whose neighbourhood it
pitches its camp, small-pox, typhus, cholera, scarlet fever, &c. [671 In undertakings that involve much capital outlay,
such as railways, &c, the contractor himself generally provides his army with wooden huts and the like, thus
improvising villages without any sanitary provisions, outside the control of the local boards, very profitable to the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (23 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

contractor, who exploits the labourers in two-fold fashion — as soldiers of industry and as tenants. According as the
wooden hut contains 1, 2, or 3 holes, its inhabitant, navvy, or whatever he may be, has to pay 1, 3, or 4 shillings
weekly. [681 One example will suffice. In September, 1864, Dr. Simon reports that the Chairman of the Nuisances
Removal Committee of the parish of Sevenoaks sent the following denunciation to Sir George Grey, Home Secretary:
— "Small-pox cases were rarely heard of in this parish until about twelve months ago. Shortly before that time, the
works for a railway from Lewisham to Tunbridge were commenced here, and, in addition to the principal works being
in the immediate neighbourhood of this town, here was also established the depot for the whole of the works, so that a
large number of persons was of necessity employed here. As cottage accommodation could not be obtained for them
all, huts were built in several places along the line of the works by the contractor, Mr. Jay, for their especial
occupation. These huts possessed no ventilation nor drainage, and, besides, were necessarily over-crowded, because
each occupant had to accommodate lodgers, whatever the number in his own family might be, although there were
only two rooms to each tenement. The consequences were, according to the medical report we received, that in the
night-time these poor people were compelled to endure all the horror of suffocation to avoid the pestiferous smells
arising from the filthy, stagnant water, and the privies close under their windows. Complaints were at length made to
the Nuisances Removal Committee by a medical gentleman who had occasion to visit these huts, and he spoke of their
condition as dwellings in the most severe terms, and he expressed his fears that some very serious consequences might
ensue, unless some sanitary measures were adopted. About a year ago, Mr. Jay promised to appropriate a hut, to which
persons in his employ, who were suffering from contagious diseases, might at once be removed. He repeated that
promise on the 23rd July last, but although since the date of the last Promise there have been several cases of
small-pox in his huts, and two deaths from the same disease, yet he has taken no steps whatever to carry out his
promise. On the 9th September instant, Mr. Kelson, surgeon, reported to me further cases of small-pox in the same
huts, and he described their condition as most disgraceful. I should add, for your (the Home Secretary's) information
that an isolated house, called the Pest-house, which is set apart for parishioners who might be suffering from
infectious diseases, has been continually occupied by such patients for many months past, and is also now occupied;
that in one family five children died from small-pox and fever; that from the 1st April to the 1st September this year, a
period of five months, there have been no fewer than ten deaths from small-pox in the parish, four of them being in the
huts already referred to; that it is impossible to ascertain the exact number of persons who have suffered from that
disease although they are known to be many, from the fact of the families keeping it as private as possible." [691

The labourers in coal and other mines belong to the best paid categories of the British proletariat. The price at which
they buy their wages was shown on an earlier page. [701 Here I merely cast a hurried glance over the conditions of
their dwellings. As a rule, the exploiter of a mine, whether its owner or his tenant, builds a number of cottages for his
hands. They receive cottages and coal for firing "for nothing" — i.e., these form part of their wages, paid in kind.
Those who are not lodged in this way receive in compensation £4 per annum. The mining districts attract with rapidity
a large population, made up of the miners themselves, and the artisans, shopkeepers, &c, that group themselves
around them. The ground-rents are high, as they are generally where population is dense. The master tries, therefore,
to run up, within the smallest space possible at the mouth of the pit, just so many cottages as are necessary to pack
together his hands and their families. If new mines are opened in the neighborhood, or old ones are again set working,
the pressure increases. In the construction of the cottages, only one point of view is of moment, the "abstinence" of the
capitalist front all expenditure that is not absolutely unavoidable. "The lodging which is obtained by the pitman and
other labourers connected with the collieries of Northumberland and Durham," says Dr. Julian Hunter, "is perhaps, on
the whole, the worst and the dearest of which any large specimens can be found in England, the similar parishes of
Monmouthshire excepted.... The extreme badness is in the high number of men found in one room, in the smallness of
the ground-plot on which a great number of houses are thrust, the want of water, the absence of privies, and the
frequent placing of one house on the top of another, or distribution into flats, ... the lessee acts as if the whole colony
were encamped, not resident." [711

"In pursuance of my instructions," says Dr. Stevens, "I visited most of the large colliery villages in the Durham
Union.... With very few exceptions, the general statement that no means are taken to secure the health of the
inhabitants would be true of all of them.... All colliers are bound ['bound,' an expression which, like bondage, dates
from the age of serfdom] to the colliery lessee or owner for twelve months.... If the colliers express discontent, or in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (24 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

any way annoy the 'viewer,' a mark of memorandum is made against their names, and, at the annual 'binding,' such
men are turned off... It appears to me that no part of the 'truck system' could be worse than what obtains in these
densely-populated districts. The collier is bound to take as part of his hiring a house surrounded with pestiferous
influences; he cannot help himself, and it appears doubtful whether anyone else can help him except his proprietor (he
is, to all intents and purposes, a serf), and his proprietor first consults his balance-sheet, and the result is tolerably
certain. The collier is also often supplied with water by the proprietor, which, whether it be good or bad, he has to pay
for, or rather he suffers a deduction for from his wages." \12]

In conflict with "public opinion," or even with the Officers of Health, capital makes no difficulty about "justifying"
the conditions partly dangerous, partly degrading, to which it confines the working and domestic life of the labourer,
on the ground that they are necessary for profit. It is the same thing when capital "abstains" from protective measures
against dangerous machinery in the factory, from appliances for ventilation and for safety in mines, &c. It is the same
here with the housing of the miners. Dr. Simon, medical officer of the Privy Council, in his official Report says: "In
apology for the wretched household accommodation ... it is alleged that miners are commonly worked on lease; that
the duration of the lessee's interest (which in collieries is commonly for 21 years), is not so long that he should deem it
worth his while to create good accommodation for his labourers, and for the tradespeople and others whom the work
attracts; that even if he were disposed to act liberally in the matter, this disposition would commonly be defeated by
his landlord's tendency to fix on him, as ground-rent, an exorbitant additional charge for the privilege of having on the
surface of the ground the decent and comfortable village which the labourers of the subterranean property ought to
inhabit, and that prohibitory price (if not actual prohibition) equally excludes others who might desire to build. It
would be foreign to the purpose of this report to enter upon any discussion of the merits of the above apology. Nor
here is it even needful to consider where it would be that, if decent accommodation were provided, the cost ... would
eventually fall — whether on landlord, or lessee, or labourer, or public. But in presence of such shameful facts as are
vouched for in the annexed reports [those of Dr. Hunter, Dr. Stevens, &c] a remedy may well be claimed.... Claims of
landlordship are being so used as to do great public wrong. The landlord in his capacity of mine-owner invites an
industrial colony to labour on his estate, and then in his capacity of surface-owner makes it impossible that the
labourers whom he collects, should find proper lodging where they must live. The lessee [the capitalist exploiter]
meanwhile has no pecuniary motive for resisting that division of the bargain; well knowing that if its latter conditions
be exorbitant, the consequences fall, not on him, that his labourers on whom they fall have not education enough to
know the value of their sanitary rights, that neither obscenest lodging nor foulest drinking water will be appreciable
inducements towards a 'strike.'" [731



D. Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working-Class

Before I turn to the regular agricultural labourers, I may be allowed to show, by one example, how industrial
revulsions affect even the bestpaid, the aristocracy, of the working-class. It will be remembered that the year 1857
brought one of the great crises with which the industrial cycle periodically ends. The next termination of the cycle was
due in 1866. Already discounted in the regular factory districts by the cotton famine, which threw much capital from
its wonted sphere into the great centres of the money-market, the crisis assumed, at this time, an especially financial
character. Its outbreak in 1866 was signalised by the failure of a gigantic London Bank, immediately followed by the
collapse of countless swidling companies. One of the great London branches of industry involved in the catastrophe
was iron shipbuilding. The magnates of this trade had not only over-produced beyond all measure during the
overtrading time, but they had, besides, engaged in enormous contracts on the speculation that credit would be
forthcoming to an equivalent extent. Now, a terrible reaction set in, that even at this hour (the end of March, 1867)
continues in this and other London industries. [741 To show the condition of the labourers, I quote the following from
the circumstantial report of a correspondent of the Morning Star, who, at the end of 1866, and beginning of 1867,
visited the chief centres of distress: "In the East End districts of Poplar, Millwall, Greenwich, Deptford, Limehouse
and Canning Town, at least 15,000 workmen and their families were in a state of utter destitution, and 3,000 skilled
mechanics were breaking stones in the workhouse yard (after distress of over half a year's duration).... I had great
difficulty in reaching the workhouse door, for a hungry crowd besieged it.... They were waiting for their tickets, but

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (25 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

the time had not yet arrived for the distribution. The yard was a great square place with an open shed running all round
it, and several large heaps of snow covered the paving-stones in the middle. In the middle, also, were little
wicker-fenced spaces, like sheep pens, where in finer weather the men worked; but on the day of my visit the pens
were so snowed up that nobody could sit in them. Men were busy, however, in the open shed breaking paving-stones
into macadam. Each man had a big paving- stone for a seat, and he chipped away at the rime-covered granite with a
big hammer until he had broken up, and think! five bushels of it, and then he had done his day's work, and got his
day's pay — threepence and an allowance of food. In another part of the yard was a rickety little wooden house, and
when we opened the door of it, we found it filled with men who were huddled together shoulder to shoulder for the
warmth of one another's bodies and breath. They were picking oakum and disputing the while as to which could work
the longest on a given quantity of food — for endurance was the point of honour. Seven thousand ... in this one
workhouse ... were recipients of relief ... many hundreds of them ... it appeared, were, six or eight months ago, earning
the highest wages paid to artisans.... Their number would be more than doubled by the count of those who, having
exhausted all their savings, still refuse to apply to the parish, because they have a little left to pawn. Leaving the
workhouse, I took a walk through the streets, mostly of little one-storey houses, that abound in the neighbourhood of
Poplar. My guide was a member of the Committee of the Unemployed.... My first call was on an ironworker who had
been seven and twenty weeks out of employment. I found the man with his family sitting in a little back room. The
room was not bare of furniture, and there was a fire in it. This was necessary to keep the naked feet of the young
children from getting frost bitten, for it was a bitterly cold day. On a tray in front of the fire lay a quantity of oakum,
which the wife and children were picking in return for their allowance from the parish. The man worked in the stone
yard of the workhouse for a certain ration of food, and threepence per day. He had now come home to dinner quite
hungry, as he told us with a melancholy smile, and his dinner consisted of a couple of slices of bread and dripping,
and a cup of milkless tea.... The next door at which we knocked was opened by a middle-aged woman, who, without
saying a word, led us into a little back parlour, in which sat all her family, silent and fixedly staring at a rapidly dying
fire. Such desolation, such hopelessness was about these people and their little room, as I should not care to witness
again. 'Nothing have they done, sir,' said the woman, pointing to her boys, 'for six and twenty weeks; and all our
money gone — all the twenty pounds that me and father saved when times were better, thinking it would yield a little
to keep us when we got past work. Look at it,' she said, almost fiercely, bringing out a bank-book with all its well kept
entries of money paid in, and money taken out, so that we could see how the little fortune had begun with the first five
shilling deposit, and had grown by little and little to be twenty pounds, and how it had melted down again till the sum
in hand got from pounds to shillings, and the last entry made the book as worthless as a blank sheet. This family
received relief from the workhouse, and it furnished them with just one scanty meal per day.... Our next visit was to an
iron labourer's wife, whose husband had worked in the yards. We found her ill from want of food, lying on a mattress
in her clothes, and just covered with a strip of carpet, for all the bedding had been pawned. Two wretched children
were tending her, themselves looking as much in need of nursing as their mother. Nineteen weeks of enforced idleness
had brought them to this pass, and while the mother told the history of that bitter past, she moaned as if all her faith in
a future that should atone for it were dead.... On getting outside a young fellow came running after us, and asked us to
step inside his house and see if anything could be done for him. A young wife, two pretty children, a cluster of
pawn-tickets, and a bare room were all he had to show."

On the after pains of the crisis of 1866, the following extract from a Tory newspaper. It must not be forgotten that the
East-end of London, which is here dealt with, is not only the seat of the iron shipbuilding mentioned above,, but also
of a so-called "home-industry" always underpaid. "A frightful spectacle was to be seen yesterday in one part of the
metropolis. Although the unemployed thousands of the East-end did not parade with their black flags en masse, the
human torrent was imposing enough. Let us remember what these people suffer. They are dying of hunger. That is the
simple and terrible fact. There are 40,000 of them.... In our presence, in one quarter of this wonderful metropolis, are
packed — next door to the most enormous accumulation of wealth the world ever saw — cheek by jowl with this are
40,000 helpless, starving people. These thousands are now breaking in upon the other quarters; always half- starving,
they cry their misery in our ears, they cry to Heaven, they tell us from their miserable dwellings, that it is impossible
for them to find work, and useless for them to beg. The local ratepayers themselves are driven by the parochial
charges to the verge of pauperism." — {Standard, 5th April, 1867.)

As it is the fashion amongst English capitalists to quote Belgium as the Paradise of the labourer because "freedom of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (26 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

labour," or what is the same thing, "freedom of capital," is there limited neither by the despotism of Trades' Unions,
nor by Factory Acts, a word or two on the "happiness' of the Belgian labourer. Assuredly no one was more thoroughly
initiated in the mysteries of this happiness than the late M. Ducpetiaux, inspector-general of Belgian prisons and
charitable institutions, and member of the central commission of Belgian statistics. Let us take his work: "Budgets
economiques des classes ouvrieres de la Belgique," Bruxelles, 1855. Here we find among other matters, a normal
Belgian labourer's family, whose yearly income and expenditure he calculates on very exact data, and whose
conditions of nourishment are then compared with those of the soldier, sailor, and prisoner. The family "consists of
father, mother, and four children." Of these 6 persons "four may be usefully employed the whole year through." It is
assumed that "there is no sick person nor one incapable of work, among them," nor are there "expenses for religious,
moral, and intellectual purposes, except a very small sum for church sittings," nor "contributions to savings banks or
benefit societies," nor "expenses due to luxury or the result of improvidence." The father and eldest son, however,
allow themselves "the use of tobacco," and on Sundays "go to the cabaret" for which a whole 86 centimes a week are
reckoned. "From a general compilation of wages allowed to the labourers in different trades, it follows that the highest
average of daily wage is 1 franc 56c, for men, 89 centimes for women, 56 centimes for boys, and 55 centimes for
girls. Calculated at this rate, the resources of the family would amount, at the maximum, to 1,068 francs a-year.... In
the family ... taken as typical we have calculated all possible resources. But in ascribing wages to the mother of the
family we raise the question of the direction of the household. How will its internal economy be cared for? Who will
look after the young children? Who will get ready the meals, do the washing and mending? This is the dilemma
incessantly presented to the labourers."

According to this the budget of the family is:



The father 300 working-days at fr. 1.56 fr. 468


mother 300 working-days at fr. 0.89 fr. 267


boy 300 working-days at fr. 0.56 fr. 168


|girl |300 working-days at fr. 0.55 fr. 165


Total fr. 1,068



The annual expenditure of the family would cause a deficit upon the hypothesis that the labourer has the food of:



A


The man-of-war's man fr. 1,828 Deficit fr. 760 |


The soldier fr. 1,473 Deficit fr. 405 |


The prisoner fr. 1,112 Deficit fr. 44 |



"We see that few labouring families can reach, we will not say the average of the sailor or soldier, but even that of the
prisoner. 'The general average (of the cost of each prisoner in the different prisons during the period 1847-1849), has
been 63 centimes for all prisons. This figure, compared with that of the daily maintenance of the labourer, shows a
difference of 13 centimes. It must be remarked further, that if in the prisons it is necessary to set down in the account
the expenses of administration and surveillance, on the other hand, the prisoners have not to pay for their lodging; that
the purchases they make at the canteens are not included in the expenses of maintenance, and that these expenses are
greatly lowered in consequence of the large number of persons that make up the establishments, and of contracting for
or buying wholesale, the food and other things that enter into their consumption.... How comes it, however, that a
great number, we might say, a great majority, of labourers, live in a more economical way? It is ... by adopting
expedients, the secret of which only the labourer knows;, by reducing his daily rations; by substituting rye-bread for
wheat; by eating less meat, or even none at all, and the same with butter and condiments; by contenting themselves
with one or two rooms where the family is crammed together, where boys and girls sleep side by side, often on the
same pallet; by economy of clothing, washing, decency: by giving up the Sunday diversions; by, in short, resigning
themselves to the most painful privations. Once arrived at this extreme limit, the least rise in the price of food,
stoppage of work, illness, increases the labourer's distress and determines his complete ruin; debts accumulate, credit
fails, the most necessary clothes and furniture are pawned, and finally, the family asks to be enrolled on the list of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (27 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

paupers." (Ducpetiaux, 1. c, pp. 151, 154, 155.) In fact, in this "Paradise of capitalists" there follows, on the smallest
change in the price of the most essential means of subsistence, a change in the number of deaths and crimes! (See
Manifesto of the Maatschappij: "De Vlamingen Vooruit!" Brussels, 1860, pp. 15, 16.) In all Belgium are 930,000
families, of whom, according to the official statistics, 90,000 are wealthy and on the list of voters = 450,000 persons;
390,000 families of the lower middle-class in towns and villages, the greater part of them constantly sinking into the
proletariat, = 1,950,000 persons, Finally, 450,000 working-class families = 2,250,000 persons, of whom the model
ones enjoy the happiness depicted by Ducpetiaux. Of the 450,000 working-class families, over 200,000 are on the
pauper list.



E. The British Agricultural Proletariat

Nowhere does the antagonistic character of capitalistic product and accumulation assert itself more brutally than in the
progress of English agriculture (including cattle-breeding) and the retrogression the English agricultural labourer.
Before I turn to his present situate a rapid retrospect. Modern agriculture dates in England from the middle of the 18th
century, although the revolution in landed property, from which the changed mode of production starts as a basis, has
a much earlier date.

If we take the statements of Arthur Young, a careful observer, though a superficial thinker, as to the agricultural
labourer of 1771, the latter plays a very pitiable part compared with his predecessor of the end of the 14th century,
"when the labourer ... could live in plenty, and accumulate wealth," [751 not to speak of the 15th century, "the golden
age of the English labourer in town and country." We need not, however, go back so far. In a very instructive work of
the year 1777 we read: "The great farmer is nearly mounted to a level with him [the gentleman]; while the poor
labourer is depressed almost to the earth. His unfortunate situation will fully appear, by taking a comparative view of
it, only forty years ago, and at present.... Landlord and tenant ... have both gone hand in hand in keeping the labourer
down." [761 It is then proved in detail that the real agricultural wages between 1737 and 1777 fell nearly 1/4 or 25 per
cent. "Modern policy," says Dr. Richard Price also, "is, indeed, more favourable to the higher classes of people; and
the consequences may in time prove that the whole kingdom will consist of only gentry and beggars, or of grandees
and slaves." [771

Nevertheless, the position of the English agricultural labourer from 1770 to 1780, with regard to his food and
dwelling, as well as to his self-respect, amusements, &c, is an ideal never attained again since that time. His average
wage expressed in pints of wheat was from 1770 to 1771, 90 pints, in Eden's time (1797) only 65, in 1808 but 60. [781

The state of the agricultural labourer at the end of the Anti- Jacobin War, during which landed proprietors, farmers,
manufacturers, merchants, bankers, stockbrokers, army-contractors, &c, enriched themselves so extraordinarily, has
been already indicated above. The nominal wages rose in consequence partly of the bank-note depreciation, partly of a
rise in the price of the primary means of subsistence independent of this depreciation.- But the actual wage-variation
can be evidenced in a very simple way, without entering into details that are here unnecessary. The Poor Law and its
administration were in 1795 and 1814 the same. It will be remembered how this law was carried out in the country
districts: in the form of alms the parish made up the nominal wage to the nominal sum required for the simple
vegetation of the labourer. The ratio between the wages paid by the farmer, and the wage-deficit made good by the
parish, shows us two things. First, the falling of wages below their minimum; second, the degree in which the
agricultural labourer was a compound of wage-labourer and pauper, or the degree in which he had been turned into a
serf of his parish. Let us take one county that represents the average condition of things in all counties. In
Northamptonshire, in 1795, the average weekly wage was 7s. 6d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 6
persons, £36 12s. 5d.; their total income, £29 18s.; deficit made good by the parish, £6 14s. 5d. In 1814, in the same
county, the weekly wage was 12s. 2d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 5 persons, £54 18s. 4d.; their total
income, £36, 2s.; deficit made good by the parish, £18 6s. 4d. [791 In 1795 the deficit was less than 1/4 the wage, in
1814, more than half. It is self-evident that, under these circumstances, the meagre comforts that Eden still found in
the cottage of the agricultural labourer, had vanished by 1814. [801 Of all the animals kept by the farmer, the labourer,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (28 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five
the instrumentum vocals, was, thenceforth, the most oppressed, the worst nourished, the most brutally treated.

The same state of things went on quietly until "the Swing riots, in 1830, revealed to us {i.e., the ruling classes) by the
light of blazing corn-stacks, that misery and black mutinous discontent smouldered quite as fiercely under the surface
of agricultural as of manufacturing England." [811 At this time, Sadler, in the House of Commons, christened the
agricultural labourers "white slaves," and a Bishop echoed the epithet in the Upper House. The most notable political
economist of that period — E. G. Wakefield — says: "The peasant of the South of England ... is not a freeman, nor is
he a slave; he is a pauper." [821

The time just before the repeal of the Corn Laws threw new light on the condition of the agricultural labourers. On the
one hand; it was to the interest of the middle-class agitators to prove how little the Corn Laws protected the actual
producers of the corn. On the other hand, the industrial bourgeoisie foamed with sullen rage at the denunciations of
the factory system by the landed aristocracy, at the pretended sympathy with the woes of the factory operatives, of
those utterly corrupt, heartless, and genteel loafers, and at their "diplomatic zeal" for factory legislation. It is an old
English proverb that "when thieves fall out, honest men come by their own," and, in fact, the noisy, passionate quarrel
between the two fractions of the ruling class about the question, which of the two exploited the labourers the more
shamefully, was on each hand the midwife of the truth. Earl Shaftesbury, then Lord Ashley, was commander-in-chief
in the aristocratic, philanthropic, anti-factory campaign. He was, therefore, in 1845, a favourite subject in the
revelations of the Morning Chronicle on the condition of the agricultural labourers. This journal, then the most
important Liberal organ, sent special commissioners into the agricultural districts, who did not content themselves
with mere general descriptions and statistics, but published the names both of the labouring families examined and of
their landlords. The following list gives the wages paid in three villages in the neighbourhood of Blanford,
Wimbourne, and Poole. The villages are the property of Mr. G. Bankes and of the Earl of Shaftesbury. It will be noted
that, just like Bankes, this "low church pope," this head of English pietists, pockets a great part of the miserable wages
of the labourers under the pretext of house-rent: —





FIRST VILLAGE


(a) Children.


2


3 2 2


6


3


(b) Number of Members in Family.


4


5 4 4


8


5


(c) Weekly Wage of the Men.


8s. Od.


8s. Od. 8s. Od. 8s. Od.


7s. Od.


7s. Od.


(d) Weekly Wage of the Children.


—


— — —


1/-, 1/6


1/-, Il-


(e) Weekly Income of the whole Family.


8s. Od.


8s. Od. 8s. Od. 8s. Od.


10s. 6d.


ls. Od.


(f) Weekly Rent.


2s. Od.


Is. 6d. Is. Od. Is. Od.


2s. Od.


Is. 4d.


(g) Total Weekly wage after deduction of Rent. 6s. Od.


6s. 6d. 7s. Od. 7s. Od.


8s. 6d.


5s. 8d.


(h) Weekly income per head.


Is. 6d.


Is. 3 l/2d. Is. 9d. Is. 9d.


Is. 3/4d.


Is. 1 l/2d.



SECOND VILLAGE


(a) Children. 6 6 8 4 3


(b) Number of Members in Family. 8 8 10 6 5


(c) Weekly Wage of the Men. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od.


(d) Weekly Wage of the Children. 1/-, 1/6 1/-, 1/6


(e) Weekly Income of the whole Family. 10s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od. 7s. Od.


(f) Weekly Rent. Is. 6d. Is. 3 l/2d. Is. 3 l/2d. Is. 6 l/2d. Is. 6 l/2d.


(g) Total Weekly wage after deduction of Rent. 8s. 6d. 5s. 8 l/2d. 5s. 8 l/2d. 5s. 5 l/2d. 5s. 5 l/2d.


(h) Weekly income per head. Is. 3/4d. 0s. 8 l/2d. 0s. 7d. 0s. lid. Is. Id.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (29 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five





THIRD VILLAGE


(a) Children. 4


3


(b) Number of Members in Family. 6


5 2


(c) Weekly Wage of the Men. 7s. Od.


7s. Od. 5s. Od.


(d) Weekly Wage of the Children.


1/-2/- 1/-2/6


(e) Weekly Income of the whole Family. 7s. Od.


lis. 6d. 5s. Od.


if) Weekly Rent. Is. Od.


Os. lOd. Is. Od.


(g) Total Weekly wage after deduction of Rent. 6s. Od.


10s. 8d. 4s. Od.


(h) Weekly income per head. Is. Od.


2s. 1 3/5d. 2s. Od.



1841

The repeal of the Corn Laws gave a marvellous impulse to English agriculture. [831 Drainage on the most extensive
scale, new methods of stall-feeding, and of the artificial cultivation of green crops, introduction of mechanical
manuring apparatus, new treatment of clay soils, increased use of numeral manures, employment of the steam-engine,
and of all kinds of new machinery, more intensive cultivation generally, characterised this epoch. Mr. Pusey,
Chairman of the Royal Agricultural Society, declares that the (relative) expenses of farming have been reduced nearly
one half by the introduction of new machinery. On the other hand, the actual return of the soil rose rapidly. Greater
outlay of capital per acre, and, as a consequence, more rapid concentration of farms, were essential conditions of the
new method. [851 At the same time, the area under cultivation increased, from 1846 to 1856, by 464,1 19 acres,
without reckoning the great area in the Eastern Counties which was transformed from rabbit warrens and poor
pastures into magnificent corn-fields. It has already been seen that, at the same time, the total number of persons
employed in agriculture fell. As far as the actual agricultural labourers of both sexes and of all ages are concerned,
their number fell from 1,241,396, in 1851, to 1,163, 217 in 1861. [861 If the English Registrar-General, therefore,
rightly remarks: "The increase of farmers and farm-labourers, since 1801, bears no kind of proportion ... to the
increase of agricultural produce," [871 this disproportion obtains much more for the last period, when a positive
decrease of the agricultural population went hand in hand with increase of the area under cultivation, with more
intensive cultivation, unheard-of accumulation of the capital incorporated with the soil, and devoted to its working, an
augmentation in the products of the soil without parallel in the history of English agriculture, plethoric rent-rolls of
landlords, and growing wealth of the capitalist farmers. If we take this, together with the swift, unbroken extension of
the markets, viz., the towns, and the reign of Free-trade, then the agricultural labourer was at last, post tot discrimina
rerum, placed in circumstances that ought, secundum ariem, to have made him drunk with happiness.

But Professor Rogers comes to the conclusion that the lot of the English agricultural labourer of to-day, not to speak
of his predecessor in the last half of the 14th and in the 15th century, but only compared with his predecessor from
1770 to 1780, has changed for the worse to an extraordinary extent, that "the peasant has again become a serf," and a
serf worse fed and worse clothed. [881 Dr. Julian Hunter, in his epochmaking report on the dwellings of the
agricultural labourers, says: "The cost of the hind" (a name for the agricultural labourer, inherited from the time of
serfdom) "is fixed at the lowest possible amount on which he can live ... the supplies of wages and shelter are not
calculated on the profit to be derived from him. He is a zero in farming calculations... [891 The means [of subsistence]
being always supposed to be a fixed quantity. [901 As to any further reduction of his income, he may say, nihil habeo
nihil euro. He has no fears for the future, because he has now only the spare supply necessary to keep him. He has
reached the zero from which are dated the calculations of the farmer. Come what will, he has no share either in
prosperity or adversity." [911

In the year 1863, an official inquiry took place into the conditions of nourishment and labour of the criminals
condemned to transportation and penal servitude. The results are recorded in two voluminous Blue books. Among
other things it is said: "From an elaborate comparison between the diet of convicts in the convict prisons in England,
and that of paupers in workhouses and of free labourers in the same country ... it certainly appears that the former are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (30 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

much better fed than either of the two other classes," [92] whilst "the amount of labour required from an ordinary
convict under penal servitude is about one half of what would be done by an ordinary day-labourer." [931 A few
characteristic depositions of witnesses: John Smith, governor of the Edinburgh prison, deposes: No. 5056. "The diet of
the English prisons [is] superior to that of ordinary labourers in England." No 50. "It is the fact ... that the ordinary
agricultural labourers in Scotland very seldom get any meat at all." Answer No. 3047. "Is there anything that you are
aware of to account for the necessity of feeding them very much better than ordinary labourers? — Certainly not." No.
3048. "Do you think that further experiments ought to be made in order to ascertain whether a dietary might not be hit
upon for prisoners employed on public works nearly approaching to the dietary of free labourers? ..." [941 "He [the
agricultural labourer] might say: I work hard, and have not enough to eat, and when in prison I did not work harder
where I had plenty to eat, and therefore it is better for me to be in prison again than here.'" [95] From the tables
appended to the first volume of the Report I have compiled the annexed comparative summary.





WEEKLY AMOUNT OF NUTRIENTS




Quantity Of
Nitrogenous
Ingredients


Quantity Of
Non-Nitro-
genous In-
gredients


Quantity Of
Mineral
Matter


TOTAL


Ounces


Ounces


Ounces


Ounces


Portland (convict)


28.95


150.06


4.68


183.69


Sailor in the Navy


29.63


152.91


4.52


187.06


Soldier


25.55


114.49


3.94


143.98


Working Coachmaker


24.53


162.06


4.23


190.82


Compositor


21.24


100.83


3.12


125.19


Agricultural labourer


17.73


118.06


3.29


139.08



[96J

The general result of the inquiry by the medical commission of 1863 on the food of the lowest fed classes, is already
known to the reader. He will remember that the diet of a great part of the agricultural labourers' families is below the
minimum necessary "to arrest starvation diseases." This is especially the case in all the purely rural districts of
Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Wilts, Stafford, Oxford, Berks, and Herts. "The nourishment obtained by the labourer
himself," says Dr. E. Smith, "is larger than the average quantity indicates, since he eats a larger share ... necessary to
enable him to perform his labour ... of food than the other members of the family, including in the poorer districts
nearly all the meat and bacon.... The quantity of food obtained by the wife and also by the children at the period of
rapid growth, is in many cases, in almost every county, deficient, and particularly in nitrogen." [97] The male and
female servants living with the farmers themselves are sufficiently nourished. Their number fell from 288,277 in
1851, to 204,962 in 1861. "The labour of women in the fields," says Dr. Smith, "whatever may be its disadvantages, ...
is under present circumstances of great advantage to the family, since it adds that amount of income which ... provides
shoes and clothing and pays the rent, and thus enables the family to be better fed." [98] One of the most remarkable
results of the inquiry was that the agricultural labourer of England, as compared with other parts of the United
Kingdom, "is considerably the worst fed," as the appended table shows:

Quantities of Carbon and Nitrogen weekly consumed by an average agricultural adult:









Carbon,
grains


Nitrogen,
grains


England


46,673


1,594


1 Wales


48,354


2,031



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (31 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



Scotland 48,980 2,348


Ireland 43,366 2,4341 |



[99J

"To the insufficient quantity and miserable quality of the house accommodation generally had," says Dr. Simon, in his
official Health Report, "by our agricultural labourers, almost every page of Dr. Hunter's report bears testimony. And
gradually, for many years past, the state of the labourer in these respects has been deteriorating, house-room being
now greatly more difficult for him to find, and, when found, greatly less suitable to his needs than, perhaps, for
centuries had been the case. Especially within the last twenty or thirty years, the evil has been in very rapid increase,
and the household circumstances of the labourer are now in the highest degree deplorable. Except in so far as they
whom his labour enriches, see fit to treat him with a kind of pitiful indulgence, he is quite peculiarly helpless in the
matter. Whether he shall find house-room on the land which he contributes to till, whether the house-room which he
gets shall be human or swinish, whether he shall have the little space of garden that so vastly lessens the pressure of
his poverty — all this does not depend on his willingness and ability to pay reasonable rent for the decent
accommodation he requires, but depends on the use which others may see fit to make of their 'right to do as they will
with their own.' However large may be a farm, there, is no law that a certain proportion of labourers' dwellings (much
less of decent dwellings) shall be upon it; nor does any law reserve for the labourer ever so little right in that soil to
which his industry is as needful as sun and rain.... An extraneous element weighs the balance heavily against him ...
the influence of the Poor Law in its provisions concerning settlement and chargeability. [1001 Under this influence,
each parish has a pecuniary interest in reducing to a minimum the number of its resident labourers: — for, unhappily,
agricultural labour instead of implying a safe and permanent independence for the hardworking labourer and his
family, implies for the most part only a longer or shorter circuit to eventual pauperism — a pauperism which, during
the whole circuit, is so near, that any illness or temporary failure of occupation necessitates immediate recourse to
parochial relief — and thus all residence of agricultural population in a parish is glaringly an addition to its poor-rates
.... Large proprietors [1011 ... have but to resolve that there shall be no labourers' dwellings on their estates, and their
estates will thenceforth be virtually free from half their responsibility for the poor. How far it has been intended, in the
English constitution and law, that this kind of unconditional property in land should be acquirable, and that a landlord
'doing as he wills with his own,' should be able to treat the cultivators of the soil as aliens, whom he may expel from
his territory, is a question which I do not pretend to discuss.... For that (power) of eviction ... does not exist only in
theory. On a very large scale it prevails in practice — prevails ... as a main governing condition in the household
circumstances of agricultural labour.... As regards the extent of the evil, it may suffice to refer to the evidence which
Dr. Hunter has compiled from the last census, that destruction of houses, notwithstanding increased local demands for
them, had, during the last ten years, been in progress in 821 separate parishes or townships of England, so that
irrespectively of persons who had been forced to become non-resident (that is in the parishes in which they work),
these parishes and townships were receiving in 1861, as compared with 1851, a population 5 1/3 per cent, greater, into
houseroom 4 1/2 per cent. less... When the process of depopulation has completed itself, the result, says Dr. Hunter, is
a show-village where the cottages have been reduced to a few, and where none but persons who are needed as
shepherds, gardeners, or game-keepers, are allowed to live; regular servants who receive the good treatment usual to
their class. [1021 But the land requires cultivation, and it will be found that the labourers employed upon it are not the
tenants of the owner, but that they come from a neighbouring open village, perhaps three miles off, where a numerous
small proprietary had received them when their cottages were destroyed in the close villages around. Where things are
tending to the above result, often the cottages which stand, testify, in their unrepaired and wretched condition, to the
extinction to which they are doomed. They are seen standing in the various stages of natural decay. While the shelter
holds together, the labourer is permitted to rent it, and glad enough he will often be to do so, even at the price of
decent lodging. But no repair, no improvement shall it receive, except such as its penniless occupants can supply. And
when at last it becomes quite uninhabitable — uninhabitable even to the humblest standard of serfdom — it will be
but one more destroyed cottage, and future poor-rates will be somewhat lightened. While great owners are thus
escaping from poor-rates through the depopulation of lands over which they have control, the nearest town or open
village receive the evicted labourers: the nearest, I say, but this "nearest" may mean three or four miles distant from
the farm where the labourer has his daily toil. To that daily toil there will then have to be added, as though it were

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (32 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

nothing, the daily need of walking six or eight miles for power of earning his bread. And whatever farmwork is done
by his wife and children, is done at the same disadvantage. Nor is this nearly all the toil which the distance occasions
him. In the open village, cottage-speculators buy scraps of land, which they throng as densely as they can with the
cheapest of all possible hovels. And into those wretched habitations (which, even if they adjoin the open country, have
some of the worst features of the worst town residences) crowd the agricultural labourers of England. [1031 •■•■ Nor on
the other hand must it be supposed that even when the labourer is housed upon the lands which he cultivates, his
household circumstances are generally such as his life of productive industry would seem to deserve. Even on princely
estates ... his cottage ... may be of the meanest description. There are landlords who deem any stye good enough for
their labourer and his family, and who yet do not disdain to drive with him the hardest possible bargain for rent. IT 041
It may be but a ruinous one-bedroomed hut, having no fire-grate, no privy, no opening window, no water supply but
the ditch, no garden — but the labourer is helpless against the wrong.... And the Nuisances Removal Acts ... are ... a
mere dead letter ... in great part dependent for their working on such cottage-owners as the one from whom his (the
labourer's) hovel is rented.... From brighter, but exceptional scenes, it is requisite in the interests of justice, that
attention should again be drawn to the overwhelming preponderance of facts which are a reproach to the civilisation of
England. Lamentable indeed, must be the case, when, notwithstanding all that is evident with regard to the quality of
the present accommodation, it is the common conclusion of competent observers that even the general badness of
dwellings is an evil infinitely less urgent than their mere numerical insufficiency. For years the over-crowding of rural
labourers' dwellings has been a matter of deep concern, not only to persons who care for sanitary good, but to persons
who care for decent and moral life. For, again and again in phrases so uniform that they seem stereotyped, reporters on
the spread of epidemic disease in rural districts, have insisted en the extreme importance of that over-crowding, as an
influence which renders it a quite hopeless task, to attempt the limiting of any infection which is introduced. And
again and again it has been pointed out that, notwithstanding the many salubrious influences which there are in
country life, the crowding which so favours the extension of contagious disease, also favours the origination of disease
which is not contagious. And those who have denounced the over-crowded state of our rural population have not been
silent as to a further mischief. Even where their primary concern has been only with the injury to health, often almost
perforce they have referred to other relations on the subject. In showing how frequently it happens that adult persons
of both sexes, married and unmarried, are huddled together in single small sleeping rooms, their reports have carried
the conviction that, under the circumstances they describe, decency must always be outraged, and morality almost of
necessity must suffer. [1051 Thus, for instance, in the appendix of my last annual report, Dr. Ord, reporting on an
outbreak of fever at Wing, in Buckinghamshire, mentions how a young man who had come thither from Wingrave
with fever, "in the first days of his illness slept in a room with nine other persons. Within a fortnight several of these
persons were attacked, and in the course of a few weeks five out of the nine had fever, and one died..." From Dr.
Harvey, of St. George's Hospital, who, on private professional business, visited Wing during the time of the epidemic,
I received information exactly in the sense of the above report.... "A young woman having fever, lay at night in a room
occupied by her father and mother, her bastard child, two young men (her brothers), and her two sisters, each with a
bastard child — 10 persons in all. A few weeks ago 13 persons slept in it." [1061

Dr. Hunter investigated 5,375 cottages of agricultural labourers, not only in the purely agricultural districts, but in all
counties of England. Of these, 2,195 had only one bedroom (often at the same time used as living-room), 2,930 only
two, and 250, more than two. I will give a few specimens culled from a dozen counties.



(1 .) Bedfordshire



Wrestlingworth. Bedrooms about 12 feet long and 10 broad, although many are smaller than this. The small,
one-storied cots are often divided by partitions into two bedrooms, one bed frequently in a kitchen, 5 feet 6 inches in
height. Rent, £3 a year. The tenants have to make their own privies, the landlord only supplies a hole. As soon as one
has made a privy, it is made use of by the whole neighbourhood. One house, belonging to a family called Richardson,
was of quite unapproachable beauty. "Its plaster walls bulged very like a lady's dress in a curtsey. One gable end was
convex, the other concave, and on this last, unfortunately, stood the chimney, a curved tube of clay and wood like an

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (33 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

elephant's trunk. A long stick served as prop to prevent the chimney from falling. The doorway and window were
rhomboidal." Of 17 houses visited, only 4 had more than one bedroom, and those four over-crowded. The cots with
one bedroom sheltered 3 adults and 3 children, a married couple with 6 children, &c.

Dunton. High rents, from £4 to £5; weekly wages of the man, 10s. They hope to pay the rent by the straw-plaiting of
the family. The higher the rent, the greater the number that must work together to pay it. Six adults, living with 4
children in one sleeping apartment, pay £3 10s. for it. The cheapest house in Dunton, 15 feet long externally, 10 broad,
let for £3. Only one of the houses investigated had 2 bedrooms. A little outside the village, a house whose "tenants
dunged against the house-side," the lower 9 inches of the door eaten away through sheer rottenness; the doorway, a
single opening closed at night by a few bricks, ingeniously pushed up after shutting and covered with some matting.
Half a window, with glass and frame, had gone the way of all flesh. Here, without furniture, huddled together were 3
adults and 5 children. Dunton is not worse than the rest of Biggleswade Union.



(2.) Berkshire



Beenham. In June, 1864, a man, his wife and 4 children lived in a cot (one-storied cottage). A daughter came home
from service with scarlet fever. She died. One child sickened and died. The mother and one child were down with
typhus when Dr. Hunter was called in. The father and one child slept outside, but the difficulty of securing isolation
was seen here, for in the crowded market of the miserable village lay the linen of the fever- stricken household, waiting
for the wash. The rent of H.'s house, Is. a- week; one bedroom for man, wife, and 6 children. One house let for 8d.
a- week, 14 feet 6 inches long, 7 feet broad, kitchen, 6 feet high; the bedroom without window, fire-place, door, or
opening, except into the lobby; no garden. A man lived here for a little while, with two grown-up daughters and one
grown-up son; father and son slept on the bed, the girls in the passage. Each of the latter had a child while the family
was living here, but one went to the workhouse for her confinement and then came home.



(3.) Buckinghamshire



30 cottages — on 1,000 acres of land — contained here about 130-140 persons. The parish of Bradenham comprises
1,000 acres; it numbered, in 1851, 36 houses and a population of 84 males and 54 females. This inequality of the sexes
was partly remedied in 1861, when they numbered 98 males and 87 females; increase in 10 years of 14 men and 33
women. Meanwhile, the number of houses was one less.

Winslow. Great part of this newly built in good style; demand for houses appears very marked, since very miserable
cots let at Is. to Is. 3d. per week.

Water Eaton. Here the landlords, in view of the increasing population, have destroyed about 20 per cent, of the
existing houses. A poor labourer, who had to go about 4 miles to his work, answered the question, whether he could
not find a cot nearer: "No; they know better than to take a man in with my large family."

Tinker's End, near Winslow. A bedroom in which were 4 adults and 4 children; 1 1 feet long, 9 feet broad, 6 feet 5
inches high at its highest part; another 1 1 feet 3 inches by 9 feet, 5 feet 10 inches high, sheltered 6 persons. Each of
these families had less space than is considered necessary for a convict. No house had more than one bedroom, not
one of them a back-door; water very scarce; weekly rent from Is. 4d. to 2s. In 16 of the houses visited, only 1 man that
earned 10s. a-week. The quantity of air for each person under the circumstances just described corresponds to that
which he would have if he were shut up in a box of 4 feet measuring each way, the whole night. But then, the ancient
dens afforded a certain amount of unintentional ventilation.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (34 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

(4.) Cambridgeshire



Gamblingay belongs to several landlords. It contains the wretchedest cots to be found anywhere. Much straw-plaiting.
"A deadly lassitude, a hopeless surrendering up to filth," reigns in Gamblingay. The neglect in its centre, becomes
mortification at its extremities, north and south, where the houses are rotting to pieces. The absentee landlords bleed
this poor rookery too freely. The rents are very high; 8 or 9 persons packed in one sleeping apartment, in 2 cases 6
adults, each with 1 or 2 children in one small bedroom.



(5.) Essex



In this county, diminutions in the number of persons and of cottages go, in many parishes, hand in hand. In not less
than 22 parishes, however, the destruction of houses has not prevented increase of population, or has not brought
about that expulsion which, under the name "migration to towns," generally occurs. In Fingringhoe, a parish of 3,443
acres, were in 1851, 145 houses; in 1861, only 1 10. But the people did not wish to go away, and managed even to
increase under these circumstances. In 1851, 252 persons inhabited 61 houses, but in 1861, 262 persons were
squeezed into 49 houses. In Basilden, in 1851, 157 persons lived on 1,827 acres, in 35 houses; at the end often years,
180 persons in 27 houses. In the parishes of Fingringhoe, South Fambridge, Widford, Basilden, and Ramsden Crags,
in 1851, 1,392 persons were living on 8,449 acres in 316 houses; in 1861, on the same area, 1,473 persons in 249
houses.



(6.) Herefordshire



This little county has suffered more from the "eviction-spirit" than any other in England. At Nadby, over-crowded
cottages generally, with only 2 bedrooms, belonging for the most part to the farmers. They easily let them for £3 or £4
a-year, and paid a weekly wage of 9s.



(7) Huntingdon



Hartford had, in 1851, 87 houses; shortly after this, 19 cottages were destroyed in this small parish of 1,720 acres;
population in 1831, 452; in 1852, 832; and in 1861, 341. 14 cottages, each with 1 bedroom, were visited. In one, a
married couple, 3 grown-up sons, 1 grown-up daughter, 4 children — in all 10 in another, 3 adults, 6 children. One of
these rooms, in which 8 people slept, was 12 feet 10 inches long, 12 feet 2 inches broad, 6 feet 9 inches high: the
average, without making any deduction for projections into the apartment, gave about 130 cubic feet per head. In the
14 sleeping rooms, 34 adults and 33 children. These cottages are seldom provided with gardens, but many of the
inmates are able to farm small allotments at 10s. or 12s. per rood. These allotments are at a distance from the houses,
which are without privies. The family "must either go to the allotment to deposit their ordures," or, as happens in this
place, saving your presence, "use a closet with a trough set like a drawer in a chest of drawers, and drawn out weekly
and conveyed to the allotment to be emptied where its contents were wanted." In Japan, the circle of life-conditions
moves more decently than this.



(8) Lincolnshire



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (35 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



Langtoft. A man lives here, in Wright's house, with his wife, her mother, and 5 children; the house has a front kitchen,
scullery, bedroom over the front kitchen; front kitchen and bedroom, 12 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches; the whole
ground floor, 21 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches. The bedroom is a garret: the walls run together into the roof like a
sugar-loaf, a dormer-window opening in front. "Why did he live here? On account of the garden? No; it is very small.
Rent? High, Is. 3d. per week. Near his work? No; 6 miles away, so that he walks daily, to and fro, 12 miles. He lived
there, because it was a tenantable cot," and because he wanted to have a cot for himself alone, anywhere, at any price,
and in any conditions. The following are the statistics of 12 houses in Langtoft, with 12 bedrooms, 38 adults, and 36
children.





TWELVE HOUSES IN LANGTOFT


House


No. 1.


No. 2.


No. 3.


No. 4.


No. 5.


No. 6.


No. 7.


No. 8.


No. 9.


No. 10.


No. 11.


No. 12.


Bedrooms.


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


1


Adults.


3


4


4


5


2


5


3


3


2


2


3


2


Children.


5


3


4


4


2


3


3


2





3


3


4


Number of
Persons.


8


7


8


9


4


8


6


5


2


.5


6


6



(9.) Kent



Kennington, very seriously over-populated in 1859, when diphtheria appeared, and the parish doctor instituted a
medical inquiry into the condition of the poorer classes. He found that in this locality, where much labour is
employed, various cots had been destroyed and no new ones built. In one district stood four houses, named birdcages;
each had 4 rooms of the following dimensions in feet and inches:



Kitchen :
Scullery
Bedroom:
Bedroom:



9 ft. 5 by

8 ft. 6 by

8 ft. 5 by

8 ft. 3 by



8 ft. 11 by 6 ft. 6

4 f t . 6 by 6 f t . 6

5 ft. 10 by 6 ft. 3
8 ft. 4 by 6 ft. 3



(10.) Northamptonshire



Brinworth, Pickford and Floore: in these villages in the winter 2030 men were lounging about the streets from want of
work. The farmers do not always till sufficiently the corn and turnip lands, and the landlord has found it best to throw
all his farms together into 2 or 3. Hence want of employment. Whilst on one side of the wall, the land calls for labour,
on the other side the defrauded labourers are casting at it longing glances. Feverishly over-worked in summer, and
half-starved in winter, it is no wonder if they say in their peculiar dialect, "the parson and gentlefolk seem frit to death
at them."

At Floore, instances, in one bedroom of the smallest size, of couples with 4, 5, 6 children; 3 adults with 5 children; a
couple with grandfather and 6 children down with scarlet fever, &c; in two houses with two bedrooms, two families
of 8 and 9 adults respectively.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (36 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



(11.) Wiltshire



Stratton. 31 houses visited, 8 with only one bedroom. Pentill, in the same parish: a cot let at Is. 3d. weekly with 4
adults and 4 children, had nothing good about it, except the walls, from the floor of rough-hewn pieces of stones to the
roof of worn-out thatch.



(12. ) Worcestershire



House-destruction here not quite so excessive; yet from 1851 to 1861, the number of inhabitants to each house on the
average, has risen from 4.2 to 4.6.

Badsey. Many cots and little gardens here. Some of the farmers declare that the cots are "a great nuisance here,
because they bring the poor." On the statement of one gentleman: "The poor are none the better for them; if you build
500 they will let fast enough, in fact, the more you build, the more they want" (according to him the houses give birth
to the inhabitants, who then by a law of Nature press on "the means of housing"). Dr. Hunter remarks: "Now these
poor must come from somewhere, and as there is no particular attraction, such as doles, at Badsey, it must be
repulsion from some other unfit place, which will send them here. If each could find an allotment near his work, he
would not prefer Badsey, where he pays for his scrap of ground twice as much as the farmer pays for his."

The continual emigration to the towns, the continual formation of surplus-population in the country through the
concentration of farms, conversion of arable land into pasture, machinery, &c, and the continual eviction of the
agricultural population by the destruction of their cottages, go hand in hand. The more empty the district is of men, the
greater is its "relative surplus-population," the greater is their pressure on the means of employment, the greater is the
absolute excess of the agricultural population over the means for housing it, the greater, therefore, in the villages is the
local surplus-population and the most pestilential packing together of human beings. The packing together of knots of
men in scattered little villages and small country towns corresponds to the forcible draining of men from the surface of
the land. The continuous superseding of the agricultural labourers, in spite of their diminishing number and the
increasing mass of their products, gives birth to their pauperism. Their pauperism is ultimately a motive to their
eviction and the chief source of their miserable housing which breaks down their last power of resistance, and makes
them more slaves of the landed proprietors and the farmers. [1071 Thus the minimum of wages becomes a law of
Nature to them. On the other hand, the land, in spite of its constant "relative surplus-population," is at the same time
under-populated. This is seen, not only locally at the points where the efflux of men to towns, mines, railroad-making,
&c, is most marked. It is to be seen everywhere, in harvest-time as well as in spring and summer, at those frequently
recurring times when English agriculture, so careful and intensive, wants extra hands. There are always too many
agricultural labourers for the ordinary, and always too few for the exceptional or temporary needs of the cultivation of
the soil. [1081 "Hence we find in the official documents contradictory complaints from the same places of deficiency
and excess of labour simultaneously. The temporary or local want of labour brings about no rise in wages, but a
forcing of the women and children into the fields, and exploitation at an age constantly lowered. As soon as the
exploitation of the women and children takes place on a larger scale, it becomes in turn a new means of making a
surplus-population of the male agricultural labourer and of keeping down his wage. In the east of England thrives a
beautiful fruit of this vicious circle — the so-called gang-system, to which I must briefly return here. [1091

The gang-system obtains almost exclusively in the counties of Lincoln, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk,
and Nottingham, here and there in the neighbouring counties of Northampton, Bedford, and Rutland. Lincolnshire will
serve us as an example. A large part of this county is new land, marsh formerly, or even, as in others of the eastern
counties just named, won lately from the sea. The steam-engine has worked wonders in the way of drainage. What



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (37 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

were once fens and sandbanks, bear now a luxuriant sea of corn and the highest of rents. The same thing holds of the
alluvial lands won by human endeavour, as in the island of Axholme and other parishes on the banks of the Trent. In
proportion as the new farms arose, not only were no new cottages built: old ones were demolished, and the supply of
labour had to come from open villages, miles away, by long roads that wound along the sides of the hills. There alone
had the population formerly found shelter from the incessant floods of the winter-time. The labourers that dwell on the
farms of 400-1,000 acres (they are called "confined labourers") are solely employed on such kinds of agricultural
work as is permanent, difficult, and carried on by aid of horses. For every 100 acres there is, on an average, scarcely
one cottage. A fen farmer, e.g., gave evidence before the Commission of Inquiry: "I farm 320 acres, all arable land. I
have not one cottage on my farm. I have only one labourer on my farm now. I have four horsemen lodging about. We
get light work done by gangs." [1101 The soil requires much light field labour, such as weeding, hoeing, certain
processes of manuring, removing of stones, &c. This is done by the gangs, or organised bands that dwell in the open
villages.

The gang consists of 10 to 40 or 50 persons, women, young persons of both sexes (13-18 years of age, although the
boys are for the most part eliminated at the age of 13), and children of both sexes (6-13 years of age). At the head is
the gang-master, always an ordinary agricultural labourer, generally what is called a bad lot, a scapegrace, unsteady,
drunken, but with a dash of enterprise and savoir-faire. He is the recruiting-sergeant for the gang, which works under
him, not under the farmer. He generally arranges with the latter for piece-work, and his income, which on the average
is not very much above that of an ordinary agricultural labourer, |T111 depends almost entirely upon the dexterity with
which he manages to extract within the shortest time the greatest possible amount of labour from his gang. The
farmers have discovered that women work steadily only under the direction of men, but that women and children,
once set going, impetuously spend their life-force — as Fourier knew — while the adult male labourer is shrewd
enough to economise his as much as he can. The gang-master goes from one farm to another, and thus employs his
gang from 6 to 8 months in the year. Employment by him is, therefore, much more lucrative and more certain for the
labouring families, than employment by the individual farmer, who only employs children occasionally. This
circumstance so completely rivets his influence in the open villages that children are generally only to be hired
through his instrumentality. The lending out of these individually, independently of the gang, is his second trade.

The "drawbacks" of the system are the over-work of the children and young persons, the enormous marches that they
make daily to and from the farms, 5, 6, and sometimes 7 miles distant, finally, the demoralisation of- the gang.
Although the gang-master, who, in some districts is called "the driver," is armed with a long stick, he uses it but
seldom, and complaints of brutal treatment are exceptional. He is a democratic, emperor, or a kind of Pied Piper of
Hamelin. He must therefore be popular with his subjects, and he binds them to himself by the charms of the gipsy life
under his direction. Coarse freedom, a noisy jollity, and obscenest impudence give attractions to the gang. Generally
the gangmaster pays up in a public house; then he returns home at the head of the procession reeling drunk, propped
up right and left by a stalwart virago, while children and young persons bring up the rear, boisterous, and singing
chaffing and bawdy songs. On the return journey what Fourier calls "phanerogamie," is the order of the day. The
getting with child of girls of 13 and 14 by their male companions of the same age, is common. The open villages
which supply the contingent of the gang, become Sodoms and Gomorrahs, [1121 and have twice as high a rate of
illegitimate births as the rest of the kingdom. The moral character of girls bred in these schools, when married women,
was shown above. Their children, when opium does not give them the finishing stroke, are born recruits of the gang.

The gang in its classical form just described, is called the public, common, or tramping gang. For there are also private
gangs. These are made up in the same way as the common gang, but count fewer members, and work, not under a
gang-master, but under some old farm servant, whom the farmer does not know how to employ in any better way. The
gipsy fun has vanished here, but according to all witnesses, the payment and treatment of the children is worse.

The gang-system, which during the last years has steadily increased, [1131 clearly does not exist for the sake of the
gang-master, it exists for the enrichment of the large farmers, [1141 and indirectly of the landlords. [1151 For the
farmer there is no more ingenious method of keeping his labourers well below the normal level, and yet of always
having an extra hand ready for extra work, of extracting the greatest possible amount of labour with the least possible
amount of money [1161 and of making adult male labour "redundant." From the exposition already made, it will be

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (38 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

understood why, on the one hand, a greater or less lack of employment for the agricultural labourer is admitted, while
on the other, the gang-system is at the same time declared "necessary" on account of the want of adult male labour and
its migration to the towns. [117] The cleanly weeded land, and the uncleanly human weeds, of Lincolnshire, are pole
and counterpole of capitalistic production. [1181



F. Ireland

In concluding this section, we must travel for a moment to Ireland. First, the main facts of the case.

The population of Ireland had, in 1841, reached 8,222,664; in 1851, it had dwindled to 6,623,985; in 1861, to
5,850,309; in 1866, to 5 1/2 millions, nearly to its level in 1801. The diminution began with the famine year, 1846, so
that Ireland, in less than twenty years, lost more than 5/16 ths of its people. [1191 Its total emigration from May, 1851,
to July, 1865, numbered 1,591,487: the emigration during the years 1861-1865 was more than half-a-million. The
number of inhabited houses fell, from 1851-1861, by 52,990. From 1851-1861, the number of holdings of 15 to 30
acres increased 61,000, that of holdings over 30 acres, 109,000, whilst the total number of all farms fell 120,000, a
fall, therefore, solely due to the suppression of farms under 15 acres — i.e., to their centralisation.



Table A



LIVE-STOCK


Year


Horses


Cattle


Sheep


Pigs


Total
Number


Decrease


Total
Number


Decrease


Increase


Total
Number


Decrease


Increase


Total
Number


Decrease


Increase


1860


619,811


—


3,606,374


—


—


3,542,080


—


—


1,271,072


—


—


1861


614,232


5,579


3,471,688


134,686


—


3,556,050


—


13,970


1,102,042


169,030


—


1862


602,894


11,338


3,254,890


216,798


—


3,456,132


99,918


—


1,154,324


—


52,282


1863


579,978


22,916


3,144,231


110,659


—


3,308,204


147,982


—


1,067,458


86,866


—


1864


562,158


17,820


3,262,294


—


118,063


3,366,941


—


58,737


1,058,480


8,978


—


1865


547,867


14,291


3,493,414


—


231,120


3,688,742


—


321,801


1,299,893


—


241,413



The decrease of the population was naturally accompanied by a decrease in the mass of products. For our purpose, it
suffices to consider the 5 years from 1861-1865 during which over half-a-million emigrated, and the absolute number
of people sank by more than 1 of a million. From the above table it results: —



Horses Cattle Sheep Pigs


Absolute Decrease Absolute Decrease Absolute Increase Absolute Increase


71,944 112,960 146,662 28,8211



£120]

Let us now turn to agriculture, which yields the means of subsistence for cattle and for men. In the following table is
calculated the decrease or increase for each separate year, as compared with its immediate predecessor. The Cereal
Crops include wheat, oats, barley, rye, beans, and peas; the Green Crops, potatoes, turnips, marigolds, beet-root,
cabbages, carrots, parsnips, vetches. &c.



Table B



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (39 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five





INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CROPS AND GRASS IN ACREAGE


Year


Cereal
Crop


Green
Crop


Grass and
Clover


Flax


Total

Cultivated

Land


Decrease

(Acres)


Decrease

(Acres)


Increase
(Acres)


Decrease

(Acres)


Increase
(Acres)


Decrease

(Acres)


Increase
(Acres)


Decrease

(Acres)


Increase
(Acres)


1861


15,701


36,974


—


47,969


—


—


19,271


81,373


—


1862


72,734


74,785


—


—


6,623


—


2,055


138,841


—


1863


144,719


19,358


—


—


7,724


—


63,922


92,431


—


1864


122,437


2,317


—


—


47,486


—


87,761


—


10,493


1865


72,450


—


25,241


—


68,970


50,159


—


28,398


—


1861-65


428,041


108,193


—


—


82,834


—


122,8501


330,350


—



In the year 1865, 127,470 additional acres came under the heading "grass land," chiefly because the area under the
heading of "bog and waste unoccupied," decreased by 101,543 acres. If we compare 1865 with 1864, there is a
decrease in cereals of 246,667 qrs., of which 48,999 were wheat, 160,605 oats, 29,892 barley, &c: the decrease in
potatoes was 446,398 tons, although the area of their cultivation increased in 1865.

From the movement of population and the agricultural produce of Ireland, we pass to the movement in the purse of its
landlords, larger farmers, and industrial capitalists. It is reflected in the rise and fall of the Income-tax. It may be
remembered that Schedule D. (profits with the exception of those of farmers), includes also the so-called,
"professional" profits — i.e., the incomes of lawyers, doctors, &c; and the Schedules C. and E., in which no special
details are given, include the incomes of employees, officers, State sinecurists, State fundholders, &c.











Table C [121]
















INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CULTIVATION,
PRODUCT PER ACRE, AND TOTAL PRODUCT OF 1865 COMPARED WITH 1864


Product


Acres of
Cultivated Land


Product
per Acre


Total Product


1864


1865


Increase or
Decrease, 1865


1864


1865


Increase

or

Decrease,

1865


1864


1865


Increase or
Decrease, 1865


Wheat


276,483


266,989


—


9,494


cwt.,
13.3


13.0


—


0.3


875,782
Qrs.


826,783
Qrs.


—


48,999
Qrs.


Oats


1,814,886


1,745,228


—


69,658


cwt.,
12.1


12.3


0.2


—


7,826,332
Qrs.


7,659,727
Qrs.


—


166,605
Qrs.


Barley


172,700


177,102


4,402


—


cwt.,
15.9


14.9


—


1.0


761,909
Qrs.


732,017
Qrs.


—


29,892
Qrs.


Bere


8,894


10,091


1,197


—


cwt.,
16.4


14.8


—


1.6


15,160
Qrs.


13,989
Qrs.


—


1,171
Qrs.


Rye


cwt.,
8.5


10.4


1.9


—


12,680
Qrs.


18,314
Qrs.


5,684
Qrs.


—


Potatoes


1,039,724


1,066,260


26,536


—


tons,
4.1


3.6


—


0.5


4,312,388
ts.


3,865,990

ts.


—


446,398
ts.





























http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (40 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. 1 -


- Chapter Twenty-Five






















Turnips


337,355


334,212


—


3,143


tons,
10.3


9.9


—


0.4


3,467,659
ts.


3,301,683
ts.


—


165,976
ts.


Mangold-
wurzel


14,073


14,389


316


—


tons,
10.5


13.3


2.8


—


147,284
ts.


191,937

ts.


44,653
ts.


—


Cabbages


31,821


33,622


1,801


—


tons,
9.3


10.4


1.1


—


297,375
ts.


350,252
ts.


52,877
ts.


—


Flax


301,693


251,433


—


50,260


St.

(14
lb.)
34.2


25.2


—


9.0


64,506

St.


39,561

St.


—


24,945

St.


Hay


1,609,569


1,678,493


68,9241


—


tons,
1.6


1.8


0.2


—


2,607,153

ts.


3,068,707
ts.


461,554
ts.


—



Table D





THE INCOME-TAX ON THE SUBJOINED INCOMES IN POUNDS STERLING

(Tenth Report of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue, Lond. 1866.)




1860


1861


1862


1863


1864


1865


Schedule A.
Rent of Land


13,893,829


13,003,554


13,398,938


13,494,091


13,470,700


13,801,616


Schedule B.
Farmers' Profits.


2,765,387


2,773,644


2,937,899


2,938,923


2,930,874


2,946,072


Schedule D.
Industrial,
&c., Profits


4,891,652


4,836,203


4,858,800


4,846,497


4,546,147


4,850,199


Total Schedules
AtoE


22,962,885


22,998,394


23,597,574


23,658,631


23,236,298


23,930,340



Under Schedule D., the average annual increase of income from 1853-1864 was only 0.93; whilst, in the same period,
in Great Britain, it was 4.58. The following table shows the distribution of the profits (with the exception of those of
farmers) for the years 1864 and 1865: —



Table E \ 1221





SCHEDULE D.
INCOME FROM PROFITS (OVER £60) IN IRELAND




1864
£


1865
£


Total yearly
income of


4,368,610 divided
among 17,467 persons.


4,669,979 divided
among 18,081 persons.


Yearly income

over £60

and under £100


238,726 divided
among 5,015 persons.


222,575 divided
among 4,703 persons.


Of the yearly
total income


1,979,066 divided
among 11,321 persons.


2,028,571 divided
among 12,184 persons.


Remainder of the
total yearly income


2,150,818 divided
among 1,131 persons.


2,418,833 divided
among 1,194 persons.









http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (41 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five



Of these


1,073,906 divided
among 1,010 persons.


1,097,927 divided
among 1,044 persons.


1,076,912 divided
among 121 persons.


1,320,906 divided
among 150 persons.


430,535 divided
among 95 persons.


584,458 divided
among 2 persons.


646,377divided
among 26


736,448 divided
among 28


262,819 divided
among 3


274,528 divided
among 3



England, a country with fully developed capitalist production, and pre-eminently industrial, would have bled to death
with such a drain of population as Ireland has suffered. But Ireland is at present only an agricultural district of
England, marked off by a wide channel from the country to which it yields corn, wool, cattle, industrial and military
recruits.

The depopulation of Ireland has thrown much of the land out of cultivation, has greatly diminished the produce of the
soil, [1231 and, in spite of the greater area devoted to cattle breeding, has brought about, in some of its branches, an
absolute diminution, in others, an advance scarcely worthy of mention, and constantly interrupted by retrogressions.
Nevertheless, with the fall in numbers of the population, rents and farmers' profits rose, although the latter not as
steadily as the former. The reason of this is easily comprehensible. On the one hand, with the throwing of small
holdings into large ones, and the change of arable into pasture land, a larger part of the whole produce was
transformed into surplus-produce. The surplus-produce increased, although the total produce, of which it formed a
fraction, decreased. On the other hand, the money-value of this surplus-produce increased yet more rapidly than its
mass, in consequence of the rise in the English market-price of meat, wool, &c, during the last 20, and especially
during the last 10, years.

The scattered means of production that serve the producers themselves as means of employment and of subsistence,
without expanding their own value by the incorporation of the labour of others, are no more capital than a product
consumed by its own producer is a commodity. If, with the mass of the population, that of the means of production
employed in agriculture also diminished, the mass of the capital employed in agriculture increased, because a part of
the means of production that were formerly scattered, was concentrated and turned into capital.

The total capital of Ireland outside agriculture, employed in industry and trade, accumulated during the last two
decades slowly, and with great and constantly recurring fluctuations; so much the more rapidly did the concentration
of its individual constituents develop. And, however small its absolute increase, in proportion to the dwindling
population it had increased largely.

Here, then, under our own eyes and on a large scale, a process is revealed, than which nothing more excellent could be
wished for by orthodox economy for the support of its dogma: that misery springs from absolute surplus-population,
and that equilibrium is re-established by depopulation. This is a far more important experiment than was the plague in
the middle of the 14th century so belauded of Malthusians. Note further: If only the naivete of the schoolmaster could
apply, to the conditions of production and population of the nineteenth century, the standard of the 14th, this naivete,
into the bargain, overlooked the fact that whilst, after the plague and the decimation that accompanied it, followed on
this side of the Channel, in England, enfranchisement and enrichment of the agricultural population, on that side, in
France, followed greater servitude and more misery. [1241

The Irish famine of 1846 killed more than 1,000,000 people, but it killed poor devils only. To the wealth of the
country it did not the slightest damage. The exodus of the next 20 years, an exodus still constantly increasing, did not,
as, e.g., the Thirty Years' War, decimate, along with the human beings, their means of production. Irish genius
discovered an altogether new way of spiriting a poor people thousands of miles away from the scene of its misery. The
exiles transplanted to the United States, send home sums of money every year as travelling expenses for those left



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (42 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:40]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

behind. Every troop that emigrates one year, draws another after it the next. Thus, instead of costing Ireland
anything, emigration forms one of the most lucrative branches of its export trade. Finally, it is a systematic process,
which does not simply make a passing gap in the population, but sucks out of it every year more people than are
replaced by the births, so that the absolute level of the population falls year by year. [1251

What were the consequences for the Irish labourers left behind and freed from the surplus-population? That the
relative surplus-population is to-day as great as before 1846; that wages are just as low, that the oppression of the
labourers has increased, that misery is forcing the country towards a new crisis. The facts are simple. The revolution in
agriculture has kept pace with emigration. The production of relative surplus-population has more than kept pace with
the absolute depopulation. A glance at table C. shows that the change of arable to pasture land must work yet more
acutely in Ireland than in England. In England the cultivation of green crops increases with the breeding of cattle; in
Ireland, it decreases. Whilst a large number of acres, that were formerly tilled, lie idle or are turned permanently into
grass-land, a great part of the waste land and peat bogs that were unused formerly, become of service for the extension
of cattle-breeding. The smaller and medium farmers — I reckon among these all who do not cultivate more than 100
acres — still make up about 8/10ths of the whole number. [1261 They are one after the other, and with a degree of
force unknown before, crushed by the competition of an agriculture managed by capital, and therefore they
continually furnish new recruits to the class of wage-labourers. The one great industry of Ireland, linen-manufacture,
requires relatively few adult men and only employs altogether, in spite of its expansion since the price of cotton rose
in 1861-1866, a comparatively insignificant part of the population. Like all other great modem industries, it constantly
produces, by incessant fluctuations, a relative surplus-population within its own sphere, even with an absolute increase
in the mass of human beings absorbed by it. The misery of the agricultural population forms the pedestal for gigantic
shirt- factories, whose armies of labourers are, for the most part, scattered over the country. Here, we encounter again
the system described above of domestic industry, which in underpayment and over-work, possesses its own systematic
means for creating supernumerary labourers. Finally, although the depopulation has not such destructive consequences
as would result in a country with fully developed capitalistic production, it does not go on without constant reaction
upon the home-market. The gap which emigration causes here, limits not only the local demand for labour, but also
the incomes of small shopkeepers, artisans, tradespeople generally. Hence the diminution in incomes between £60 and
£100 in Table E.

A clear statement of the condition of the agricultural labourers in Ireland is to be found in the Reports of the Irish Poor
Law Inspectors (1870). [1271 Officials of a government which is maintained only by bayonets and by a state of siege,
now open, now disguised, they have to observe all the precautions of language that their colleagues in England
disdain. In spite of this, however, they do not let their government cradle itself in illusions. According to them the rate
of wages in the country, still very low, has within the last 20 years risen 50-60 per cent., and stands now, on the
average, at 6s. to 9s. per week. But behind this apparent rise, is hidden an actual fall in wages, for it does not
correspond at all to the rise in price of the necessary means of subsistence that has taken place in the meantime. For
proof, the following extract from the official accounts of an Irish workhouse.





AVERAGE WEEKLY COST PER HEAD


Year ended


Provisions and
Necessaries.


Clothing.


TOTAL.


29th Sept., 1849.


Is. 3 l/4d.


3d.


Is. 6 l/4d.


29th Sept., 1869.


2s. 7 l/4d.


6d.


3s. 1 l/4d.



The price of the necessary means of subsistence is therefore fully twice, and that of clothing exactly twice, as much as
they were 20 years before.

Even apart from this disproportion, the mere comparison of the rate of wages expressed in gold would give a result far
from accurate. Before the famine, the great mass of agricultural wages were paid in kind, only the smallest part in
money; to-day, payment in money is the rule. From this it follows that, whatever the amount of the real wage, its



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (43 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

money rate must rise. "Previous to the famine, the labourer enjoyed his cabin ... with a rood, or half-acre or acre of
land, and facilities for ... a crop of potatoes. He was able to rear his pig and keep fowl.... But they now have to buy
bread, and they have no refuse upon which they can feed a pig or fowl, and they have consequently no benefit from
the sale of a pig, fowl, or eggs." f!281 In fact, formerly, the agricultural labourers were but the smallest of the small
farmers, and formed for the most part a kind of rear-guard of the medium and large farms on which they found
employment. Only since the catastrophe of 1846 have they begun to form a fraction of the class of purely
wage-labourers, a special class, connected with its wage-masters only by monetary relations.

We know what were the conditions of their dwellings in 1846. Since then they have grown yet worse. A part of the
agricultural labourers, which, however, grows less day by day, dwells still on the holdings of the farmers in
over-crowded huts, whose hideousness far surpasses the worst that the English agricultural labourers offered us in this
way. And this holds generally with the exception of certain tracts of Ulster; in the south, in the counties of Cork,
Limerick, Kilkenny, &c; in the east, in Wicklow, Wexford, &c; in the centre of Ireland, in King's and Queen's
County,, Dublin, &c; in the west, in Sligo, Roscommon, Mayo, Galway, &c. "The agricultural labourers' huts," an
inspector cries out, "are a disgrace to the Christianity and to the civilisation of this country." [1291 In order to increase
the attractions of these holes for the labourers, the pieces of land belonging thereto from time immemorial, are
systematically confiscated. "The mere sense that they exist subject to this species of ban, on the part of the landlords
and their agents, has ... given birth in the minds of the labourers to corresponding sentiments of antagonism and
dissatisfaction towards those by whom they are thus led to regard themselves as being treated as ... a proscribed race."
[1301

The first act of the agricultural revolution was to sweep away the huts situated on the field of labour. This was done on
the largest scale, and as if in obedience to a command from on high. Thus many labourers were compelled to seek
shelter in villages and towns. There they were thrown like refuse into garrets, holes, cellars and comers, in the worst
back slums. Thousands of Irish families, who according to the testimony of the English, eaten up as these are with
national prejudice, are notable for their rare attachment to the domestic hearth, for their gaiety and the purity of their
home-life, found themselves suddenly transplanted into hotbeds of vice. The men are now obliged to seek work of the
neighbouring farmers and are only hired by the day, and therefore under the most precarious form of wage. Hence
"they sometimes have long distances to go to and from work, often get wet, and suffer much hardship, not
unfrequently ending in sickness, disease and want." [131]

"The towns have had to receive from year to year what was deemed to be the surplus-labour of the rural division;"
[132] and then people still wonder "there is still a surplus of labour in the towns and villages, and either a scarcity or a
threatened scarcity in some of the country divisions." [1331 The truth is that this want only becomes perceptible "in
harvest-time, or during spring, or at such times as agricultural operations are carried on with activity; at other periods
of the year many hands are idle;" [1341 that "from the digging out of the main crop of potatoes in October until the
early spring following ... there is no employment for them;" [1351 and further, that during the active times they "are
subject to broken days and to all kinds of interruptions." [1361

These results of the agricultural revolution — i.e., the change of arable into pasture land, the use of machinery, the
most rigorous economy of labour, &c, are still further aggravated by the model landlords, who, instead of spending
their rents in other countries, condescend to live in Ireland on their demesnes. In order that the law of supply and
demand may not be broken, these gentlemen draw their "labour-supply ... chiefly from their small tenants, who are
obliged to attend when required to do the landlord's work, at rates of wages, in many instances, considerably under the
current rates paid to ordinary labourers, and without regard to the inconvenience or loss to the tenant of being obliged
to neglect his own business at critical periods of sowing or reaping." [1371

The uncertainty and irregularity of employment, the constant return and long duration of gluts of labour, all these
symptoms of a relative surplus-population, figure therefore in the reports of the Poor Law administration, as so many
hardships of the agricultural proletariat. It will be remembered that we met, in the English agricultural proletariat, with
a similar spectacle. But the difference is that in England, an industrial country, the industrial reserve recruits itself
from the country districts, whilst in Ireland, an agricultural country, the agricultural reserve recruits itself from the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (44 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

towns, the cities of refuge of the expelled agricultural, labourers. In the former, the supernumeraries of agriculture are
transformed into factory operatives; in the latter, those forced into the towns, whilst at the same time they press on the
wages in towns, remain agricultural labourers, and are constantly sent back to the country districts in search of work.

The official inspectors sum up the material condition of the agricultural labourer as follows: "Though living with the
strictest frugality, his own wages are barely sufficient to provide food for an ordinary family and pay his rent" and he
depends upon other sources for the means of clothing himself, his wife, and children.... The atmosphere of these
cabins, combined with the. other privations they are subjected to, has made this class particularly susceptible to low
fever and pulmonary consumption." f 1381 After this, it is no wonder that, according to the unanimous testimony of the
inspectors, a sombre discontent runs through the ranks of this class, that they long for the return of the past, loathe the
present, despair of the future, give themselves up "to the evil influence of agitators," and have only one fixed idea, to
emigrate to America. This is the land of Cockaigne, into which the great Malthusian panacea, depopulation, has
transformed green Erin.

What a happy life the Irish factory operative leads one example will show: "On my recent visit to the North of
Ireland," says the English Factory Inspector, Robert Baker, "I met with the following evidence of effort in an Irish
skilled workman to afford education to his children; and I give his evidence verbatim, as I took it from his mouth.
That he was a skilled factory hand, may be understood when I say that he was employed on goods for the Manchester
market. 'Johnson. — I am a beetler and work from 6 in the morning till 1 1 at night, from Monday to Friday. Saturday
we leave off at 6 p. m., and get three hours of it (for meals and rest). I have five children in all. For this work I get 10s.
6d. a week,; my wife works here also, and gets 5s. a week. The oldest girl who is 12, minds the house. She is also
cook, and all the servant we have. She gets the young ones ready for school. A girl going past the house wakes me at
half past five in the morning. My wife gets up and goes along with me. We get nothing (to eat) before we come to
work. The child of 12 takes dare of the little children all the day, and we get nothing till breakfast at eight. At eight we
go home. We get tea once a week; at other times we get stirabout, sometimes of oat-meal, sometimes of Indian meal,
as we are able to get it. In the winter we get a little sugar and water to our Indian meal. In the summer we get a few
potatoes, planting a small patch ourselves;, and when they are done we get back to stirabout. Sometimes we get a little
milk as it may be. So we go on from day to day, Sunday and week day, always the same the year round. I am
always very much tired when I have done at night. We may see a bit of flesh meat sometimes, but very seldom. Three
of our children attend school, for whom we pay Id. a week a head. Our rent is 9d. a week. Peat for firing costs Is. 6d.
a fortnight at the very lowest.'" [T391 Such are Irish wages, such is Irish life!

In fact the misery of Ireland is again the topic of the day in England. At the end of 1866 and the beginning of 1867,
one of the Irish land magnates, Lord Dufferin, set about its solution in The Times. "Wie menschlich von solch grossem
Herrn!"

From Table E. we saw that, during 1864, of £4,368,610 of total profits, three surplus-value makers pocketed only
£262,819; that in 1865, however, out of £4,669,979 total profits, the same three virtuosi of "abstinence" pocketed
£274,528; in 1864, 26 surplus-value makers reached to £646,377; in 1865, 28 surplus-value makers reached to
£736,448; in 1864, 121 surplus-value makers, £1,076,912; in 1865, 150 surplus-value makers, £1,320,906; in 1864,
1,131 surplus-value makers £2,150,818, nearly half of the total annual profit; in 1865, 1,194 surplus-value makers,
£2,418,833, more than half of the total annual profit. But the lion's share, which an inconceivably small number of
land magnates in England, Scotland and Ireland swallow up of the yearly national rental, is so monstrous that the
wisdom of the English State does not think fit to afford the same statistical materials about the distribution of rents as
about the distribution of profits. Lord Dufferin is one of those land magnates. That rent-rolls and profits can ever be
"excessive," or that their plethora is in any way connected with plethora of the people's misery is, of course, an idea as
"disreputable" as "unsound." He keeps to facts. The fact is that, as the Irish population diminishes, the Irish rent-rolls
swell; that depopulation benefits the landlords, therefore also benefits the soil, and, therefore, the people, that mere
accessory of the soil. He declares, therefore, that Ireland is still over-populated, and the stream of emigration still
flows too lazily. To be perfectly happy, Ireland must get rid of at least one-third of a million of labouring men. Let no
man imagine that this lord, poetic into the bargain, is a physician of the school of Sangrado, who as often as he did not
find his patient better, ordered phlebotomy and again phlebotomy, until the patient lost his sickness at the same time



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (45 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

as his blood. Lord Dufferin demands a new blood-letting of one-third of a million only, instead of about two millions;
in fact, without the getting rid of. these, the millennium in Erin is not to be. The proof is easily given.





NUMBER AND EXTENT OF FARMS IN IRELAND IN 1864 [140]




No.


Acres


(1) Farms not
over 1 acre.


48,653


25,394


(2) Farms over 1 ,
not over 5 acres.


82,037


288,916


(3) Farms over 5,
not over 15 acres.


176,368


1,836,310


(4) Farms over 15,
not over 30 acres.


136,578


3,051,343


(5) Farms over 30,
not over 50 acres.


71,961


2,906,274


(6) Farms over 50,
not over 100 acres.


54,247


3,983,880


(7) Farms over
100 acres.


31,927


8,227,807


(8) TOTAL AREA.


—


26,319,924



Centralisation has from 1851 to 1861 destroyed principally farms of the first three categories, under 1 and not over 15
acres. These above all must disappear. This gives 307,058 "supernumerary" farmers, and reckoning the families the
low average of 4 persons, 1,228,232 persons. On the extravagant supposition that, after the agricultural revolution is
complete one-fourth of these are again absorbable, there remain for emigration 921,174 persons. Categories 4, 5, 6, of
over 15 and not over 100 acres, are, as was known long since in England, too small for capitalistic cultivation of corn,
and for sheep-breeding are almost vanishing quantities. On the same supposition as before, therefore, there are further
788,761 persons to emigrate; total, 1,709,532. And as I'appetit vient en mangeant, Rentroll's eyes will soon discover
that Ireland, with 3 1/2 millions, is still always miserable, and miserable because she is over-populated. Therefore her
depopulation must go yet further, that thus she may fulfil her true destiny, that of an English sheep-walk and
cattle-pasture." [1411

Like all good things in this bad world, this profitable method has its drawbacks. With the accumulation of rents in
Ireland, the accumulation of the Irish in America keeps pace. The Irishman, banished by sheep and ox, re-appears on
the other side of the ocean as a Fenian, and face to face with the old queen of the seas rises, threatening and more
threatening, the young giant Republic:

Acerba fata Romanos agunt
Scelusque fraternae necis.



Footnotes

[11 Karl Marx, 1. c, "A egalite d'oppression des masses, plus un pays a de proletaries et plus il est riche." (Colins,
"L'Economie Politique. Source des Revolutions et des Utopies, pretendues Socialistes." Paris, 1857, t. III., p. 331.)
Our "proletarian" is economically none other than the wage-labourer, who produces and increases capital, and is
thrown out on the streets, as soon as he is superfluous for the needs of aggrandigement of "Monsieur capital," as



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (46 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Pecqueur calls this person. "The sickly proletarian of the primitive forest", is a pretty Roscherian fancy. The primitive
forester is owner of the primitive forest, and uses the primitive forest as his property with the freedom of an
orang-outang. He is not, therefore, a proletarian. This would only be the case, if the primitive forest exploited him,
instead of being exploited by him. As far as his health is concerned, such a man would well bear comparison, not only
with the modern proletarian, but also with the syphilitic and scrofulous upper classes. But, no doubt, Herr Wilhelm
Roscher, by "primitive forest" means his native heath of Luneburg.

[21 John Bellers, 1. c, p. 2.

[31 Bernard de Mandeville: "The Fable of the Bees," 5th edition, London, 1728. Remarks, pp. 212, 213, 328.
"Temperate living and constant employment is the direct road, for the poor, to rational happiness" [by which he most
probably means long working-days and little means of subsistence], "and to riches and strength for the state" (viz., for
the landlords, capitalists, and their political dignitaries and agents). ("An Essay on Trade and Commerce," London,
1770, p. 54.)

[41 Eden should have asked, whose creatures then are "the civil institutions"? From his standpoint of juridical illusion,
he does not regard the law as a product of the material relations of production, but conversely the relations of
production as products of the law. Linguet overthrew Montesquieu's illusory "Esprit des lois" with one word: "
L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete."

[51 Eden, 1. c, Vol. 1, book I., chapter 1, pp. 1,2, and preface, p. xx.

[61 If the reader reminds me of Malthus, whose "Essay on Population" appeared in 1798, 1 remind him that this work
in its first form is nothing more than a schoolboyish, superficial plagiary of De Poe, Sir James Steuart, Townsend,
Franklin, Wallace, &c, and does not contain a single sentence thought out by himself. The great sensation this
pamphlet caused, was due solely to party interest. The French Revolution had found passionate defenders in the
United Kingdom; the "principle of population," slowly worked out in the eighteenth century, and then, in the midst of
a great social crisis, proclaimed with drums and trumpets as the infallible antidote to the teachings of Condorcet, &c,
was greeted with jubilance by the English oligarchy as the great destroyer of all hankerings after human development.
Malthus, hugely astonished at his success, gave himself to stuffing into his book materials superficially compiled, and
adding to it new matter, not discovered but annexed by him. Note further: Although Malthus was a parson of the
English State Church, he had taken the monastic vow of celibacy — one of the conditions of holding a Fellowship in
Protestant Cambridge University: "Socios collegiorum maritos esse non permittimus, sed statim postquam quis
uxorem duxerit socius collegii desinat esse." ("Reports of Cambridge University Commission," p. 172.) This
circumstance favourably distinguishes Malthus from the other Protestant parsons, who have shuffled off the command
enjoining celibacy of the priesthood and have taken, "Be fruitful and multiply," as their special Biblical mission in
such a degree that they generally contribute to the increase of population to a really unbecoming extent, whilst they
preach at the same time to the labourers the "principle of population." It is characteristic that the economic fall of man,
the Adam's apple, the urgent appetite, "the checks which tend to blunt the shafts of Cupid," as Parson Townsend
waggishly puts it, that this delicate question was and is monopolised by the Reverends of Protestant Theology, or
rather of the Protestant Church. With the exception of the Venetian monk, Ortes, an original and clever writer, most of
the population-theory teachers are Protestant parsons. For instance, Bruckner, "Theorie du Systeme animal," Leyde,
1767, in which the whole subject of the modern population theory is exhausted, and to which the passing quarrel
between Quesnay and his pupil, the elder Mirabeau, furnished ideas on the same topic; then Parson Wallace, Parson
Townsend, Parson Malthus and his pupil, the arch-Parson Thomas Chalmers, to say nothing of lesser reverend
scribblers in this line. Originally, Political Economy was studied by philosophers like Hobbes, Locke, Hume; by
businessmen and statesmen, like Thomas More, Temple, Sully, De Witt, North, Law, Vanderlint, Cantillon, Franklin;
and especially, and with the greatest success, by medical men like Petty, Barbon, Mandeville, Quesnay. Even in the
middle of the eighteenth century, the Rev. Mr. Tucker, a notable economist of his time, excused himself for meddling
with the things of Mammon. Later on, and in truth with this very "Principle of population," struck the hour of the
Protestant parsons. Petty, who regarded the population as the basis of wealth, and was, like Adam Smith, an outspoken
foe to parsons, says, as if he had a presentiment of their bungling interference, "that Religion best flourishes when the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (47 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Priests are most mortified, as was before said of the Law, which best flourisheth when lawyers have least to do." He
advises the Protestant priests, therefore, if they, once for all, will not follow the Apostle Paul and "mortify" themselves
by celibacy, "not to breed more Churchmen than the Benefices, as they now stand shared out, will receive, that is to
say, if there be places for about twelve thousand in England and Wales, it will not be safe to breed up 24,000
ministers, for then the twelve thousand which are unprovided for, will seek ways how to get themselves a livelihood,
which they cannot do more easily than by persuading the people that the twelve thousand incumbents do poison or
starve their souls, and misguide them in their way to Heaven." (Petty: "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions,"
London, 1667, p. 57.) Adam Smith's position with the Protestant priesthood of his time is shown by the following. In
"A Letter to A. Smith, L.L.D. On the Life, Death, and Philosophy of his Friend, David Hume. By one of the People
called Christians," 4th Edition, Oxford, 1784, Dr. Home, Bishop of Norwich, reproves Adam Smith, because in a
published letter to Mr. Strahan, he "embalmed his friend David" (sc. Hume); because he told the world how "Hume
amused himself on his deathbed with Lucian and Whist," and because he even had the impudence to write of Hume: "I
have always considered him, both in his life-time and since his death, as approaching as nearly to the idea of a
perfectly wise and virtuous man, as, perhaps, the nature of human frailty will permit." The bishop cries out, in a
passion: "Is it right in you, Sir, to hold up to our view as 'perfectly wise and virtuous,' the character and conduct of
one, who seems to have been possessed with an incurable antipathy to all that is called Religion; and who strained
every nerve to explode, suppress and extirpate the spirit of it among men, that its very name, if he could effect it,
might no more be had in remembrance?" (1. c, p. 8.) "But let not the lovers of truth be discouraged. Atheism cannot be
of long continuance." (P. 17.) Adam Smith, "had the atrocious wickedness to propagate atheism through the land (viz.,
by his "Theory of Moral Sentiments"). Upon the whole, Doctor, your meaning is good; but I think you will not
succeed this time. You would persuade us, by the example of David Hume, Esq., that atheism is the only cordial for
low spirits, and the proper antidote against the fear of death.... You may smile over Babylon in ruins and congratulate
the hardened Pharaoh on his overthrow in the Red Sea." (1. c, pp. 21, 22.) One orthodox individual, amongst Adam
Smith's college friends, writes after his death: "Smith's well-placed affection for Hume ... hindered him from being a
Christian.... When he met with honest men whom he liked ... he would believe almost anything they said. Had he been
a friend of the worthy ingenious Horrox he wouid have believed that the moon some times disappeared in a clear sky
without the interposition of a cloud.... He approached to republicanism in his political principles." ("The Bee." By
James Anderson, 18 Vols., Vol. 3, pp. 166, 165, Edinburgh, 1791-93.) Parson Thomas Chalmers has his suspicions as
to Adam Smith having invented the category of "unproductive labourers," solely for the Protestant parsons, inspite of
their blessed work in the vineyard of the Lord.

£72 "The limit, however, to the employment of both the operative and the labourer is the same; namely, the possibility
of the employer realising a profit on the produce of their industry. If the rate of wages is such as to reduce the master's
gains below the average profit of capital, he will cease to employ them, or he will only employ them on condition of
submission to a reduction of wages." (John Wade, 1. c, p. 241.)

[81 Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism to the Russian edition: The MS in the first case says "little" and in the
second case "much"; the correction has been introduced according to the authorised French translation.

[91 Cf. Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," pp. 166, seq.

[101 "If we now return to our first inquiry, wherein it was shown that capital itself is only the result of human labour...
it seems quite incomprehensible that man can have fallen under the domination of capital, his own product; can be
subordinated to it; and as in reality this is beyond dispute the case, involuntarily the question arises: How has the
labourer been able to pass from being master of capital — as its creator — to being its slave?" (Von Thiinen, "Der
isolierte Staat" Part ii., Section ii., Rostock, 1863, pp. 5, 6.) It is Thiinen's merit to have asked this question. His
answer is simply childish.

[121 Note in the 4th German edition. — The latest English and American "trusts" are already striving to attain this
goal by attempting to unite at least all the large-scale concerns in one branch of industry into one great joint- stock
company with a practical monopoly. F. E.

[131 Note in the 3rd German edition. — In Marx's copy there is here the marginal note: "Here note for working out

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (48 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

later; if the extension is only quantitative, then for a greater and a smaller capital in the same branch of business the
profits are as the magnitudes of the capitals advanced. If the quantitative extension induces qualitative change, then
the rate of profit on the larger capital rises simultaneously." F. E.

[141 The census of England and Wales shows: all persons employed in agriculture (landlords, farmers, gardeners,
shepherds, &c, included): 1851, 2,011,447; 1861, 1,924,110. Fall, 87,337. Worsted manufacture: 1851, 102,714
persons; 1861, 79,242. Silk weaving: 1851, 111,940; 1861, 101,678. Calico-printing: 1851, 12,098; 1861, 12,556. A
small rise that, in the face of the enormous extension of this industry and implying a great fall proportionally in the
number of labourers employed. Hat-making: 1851, 15,957; 1861, 13,814. Straw-hat and bonnet- making: 1851,
20,393; 1861, 18,176. Malting: 1851, 10,566; 1861, 10,677. Chandlery, 1851, 4,949; 1861, 4,686. This fall is due,
besides other causes, to the increase in lighting by gas. Comb-making — 1851, 2,038; 1861, 1,478. Sawyers: 1851,
30,552; 1861, 31,647 — a small rise in consequence of the increase of sawing-machines. Nail-making: 1851, 26,940;
1861, 26,130 — fall in consequence of the competition of machinery. Tin and copper-mining: 1851, 31,360; 1861,
32,041. On the other hand: Cotton- spinning and weaving: 1851, 371,777; 1861, 456,646. Coal-mining: 1851, 183,389,
1861, 246,613, "The increase of labourers is generally greatest, since 1851, in such branches of industry in which
machinery has not up to the present been employed with success." (Census of England and Wales for 1861. Vol. 111.
London, 1863, p. 36.)

\ 15] Added in the 4th German edition. — The law of progressive diminution of the relative magnitude of variable
capital and its effect on the condition of the class of wage-workers is conjectured rather than understood by some of
the prominent economists of the classical school. The greatest service was rendered here by John Barton, although he,
like all the rest, lumps together constant and fixed capital, variable and circulating capital. He says:

"The demand for labour depends on the increase of circulating, and not of fixed capital. Were it true that the
proportion between these two sorts of capital is the same at all times, and in all circumstances, then, indeed, it follows
that the number of labourers employed is in proportion to the wealth of the state. But such a proposition has not the
semblance of probability. As arts are cultivated, and civilisation is extended, fixed capital bears a larger and larger
proportion to circulating capital. The amount of fixed capital employed in the production of a piece of British muslin
is at least a hundred, probably a thousand times greater than that employed in a similar piece of Indian muslin. And
the proportion of circulating capital is a hundred or thousand times less ... the whole of the annual savings, added to
the fixed capital, would have no effect in increasing the demand for labour." (John Barton, "Observations on the
Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes of Society." London, 1817, pp. 16, 17.) "The
same cause which may increase the net revenue of the country may at the same time render the population redundant,
and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 469.) With increase of capital, "the demand [for
labour] will be in a diminishing ratio." (Ibid., p. 480, Note.) "The amount of capital devoted to the maintenance of
labour may vary, independently of any changes in the whole amount of capital.... Great fluctuations in the amount of
employment, and great suffering may become more frequent as capital itself becomes more plentiful." (Richard Jones,
"An Introductory Lecture on Pol. Econ.," Lond. 1833, p. 13) "Demand [for labour] will rise... not in proportion to the
accumulation of the general capital.... Every augmentation, therefore, in the national stock destined for reproduction,
comes, in the progress of society, to have less and less influence upon the condition of the labourer." (Ramsay, 1. c,
pp. 90, 91.)

[16] H. Merivale. "Lectures on Colonisation and Colonies," 1841, Vol. I , p. 146.

[17] Malthus, "Principles of Political Economy," pp. 215, 319, 320. In this work, Malthus finally discovers, with the
help of Sismondi, the beautiful Trinity of capitalistic production: over-production, over-population, over-consumption
— three very delicate monsters, indeed. Cf. F. Engels, "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," 1. c, p, 107,
et seq.

[18] Harriet Martineau, "A Manchester Strike," 1832, p. 101.

[19] Even in the cotton famine of 1863 we find, in a pamphlet of the operative cottonspinners of Blackburn, fierce
denunciations of over-work, which, in consequence of the Factory Acts, of course only affected adult male labourers.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (49 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

"The adult operatives at this mill have been asked to work from 12 to 13 hours per day, while there are hundreds who
are compelled to be idle who would willingly work partial time, in order to maintain their families and save their
brethren from a premature grave through being overworked.... We," it goes on to say, "would ask if the practice of
working over-time by a number of hands, is likely to create a good feeling between masters and servants. Those who
are worked over-time feel the injustice equally with those who are condemned to forced idleness. There is in the
district almost sufficient work to give to all partial employment if fairly distributed. We are only asking what is right
in requesting the masters generally to pursue a system of short hours, particularly until a better state of things begins
to dawn upon us, rather than to work a portion of the hands over-time, while others, for want of work, are compelled
to exist upon charity." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 31, 1863," p. 8.) The author of the "Essay on Trade and
Commerce" grasps the effect of a relative surplus-population on the employed labourers with his usual unerring
bourgeois instinct. "Another cause of idleness in this kingdom is the want of a sufficient number of labouring hands
.... Whenever from an extraordinary demand for manufactures, labour grows scarce, the labourers feel their own
consequence, and will make their masters feel it likewise — it is amazing; but so depraved are the dispositions of
these people, that in such cases a set of workmen have combined to distress the employer by idling a whole day
together." ("Essay, &c," pp. 27, 28.) The fellows in fact were hankering after a rise in wages.

[201 Economist, Jan. 21. 1860.

[211 Whilst during the last six months of 1866, 80-90,000 working people in London were thrown out of work, the
Factory Report for that same half year says: "It does not appear absolutely true to say that demand will always produce
supply just at the moment when it is needed. It has not done so with labour, for much machinery has been idle last
year for want of hands." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. 81.)

[221 Opening address to the Sanitary Conference, Birmingham, January 15th, 1875, by J. Chamberlain, Mayor of the
town, now (1883) President of the Board of Trade.

[231 781 towns given in the census for 1861 for England and Wales "contained 10,960,998 inhabitants, while the
villages and country parishes contained 9,105,226. In 1851, 580 towns were distinguished, and the population in them
and in the surrounding country was nearly equal. But while in the subsequent ten years the population in the villages
and the country increased half a million, the population in the 580 towns increased by a million and a half (1,554,067).
The increase of the population of the country parishes is 6.5 per cent., and of the towns 17.3 per cent. The difference
in the rates of increase is due to the migration from country to town. Three-fourths of the total increase of population
has taken place in the towns." ("Census. &c," pp. 11 and 12.)

[241 "Poverty seems favourable to generation." (A. Smith.) This is even a specially wise arrangement of God,
according to the gallant and witty Abbe Galiani "Iddio af che gli uomini che esercitano mestieri di prima utiliti
nascono abbondantemente." (Galiani, 1. c, p. 78.) "Misery up to the extreme point of famine and pestilence, instead of
checking, tends to increase population." (S. Laing, "National Distress," 1844, p. 69.) After Laing has illustrated this by
statistics, he continues: "If the people were all in easy circumstances, the world would soon be depopulated."

[251 "De jour en jour il deviant done plus clair que les rapports de production dans lesquels se meut la bourgeoisie
n'ont pas un caractere un, un catactere simple, mais un caractere de duplicite; que dans les memes rapports dans
lesquels se produit la richesse, la misere se produit aussi; que dans les memes rapports dans lesquels il y a
developpement des forces productives, il y a une force productive de repression; que ces rapports ne produisent la
richesse bourgeoise, e'est-a-dire la richesse de la classe bourgeoise, qu'en aneantissant continuellement la richesse des
membres integrants de cette classe et en produisant un proletariat toujours croissant." (Karl Marx: "Misere de la
Philosophic" p. 116.)

[261 G. Ortes: "Delia Economia Nazionale libri sei, 1777," in Custodi, Parte Moderna, t. xxi, pp. 6, 9, 22, 25, etc.
Ortes says, 1. c, p. 32: "In luoco di progettar sistemi inutili per la felicita de'popoli, mi limitero a investigate la region
delta loro infelicita."

[271 "A Dissertation on the Poor Laws. By a Well-wisher of Mankind. (The Rev. J. Townsend) 1786," republished



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (50 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Lond. 1817, pp. 15, 39, 41. This "delicate" parson, from whose work just quoted, as well as from his "Journey through
Spain," Malthus often copies whole pages, himself borrowed the greater part of his doctrine from Sir James Steuart,
whom he however alters in the borrowing. E.g., when Steuart says: "Here, in slavery, was a forcible method of making
mankind diligent," [for the non-workers] ... "Men were then forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for others], "because
they were slaves of others; men are now forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for non-workers] "because they are the
slaves of their necessities," he does not thence conclude, like the fat holder of benefices, that the wage-labourer must
always go fasting. He wishes, on the contrary, to increase their wants and to make the increasing number of their
wants a stimulus to their labour for the "more delicate."

[28] Storch, 1. c, t. iii, p. 223.

[291 Sismondi, 1. c, pp. 79, 80, 85.

[30] Destutt de Tracy, 1. c, p. 231: "Les nations pauvres, c'est la ou le peuple est a son aise; et les nations riches, c'est
la ou il est ordinairement pauvre."

[31] "Tenth Report of the Commissioners of H. M. Inland Revenue." Lond., 1866. p. 38.

[321 Ibidem.

[33] These figures are sufficient for comparison, but, taken absolutely, are false, since, perhaps, £100,000,000 of
income are annually not declared. The complaints of the Inland Revenue Commissioners of systematic fraud,
especially on the part of the commercial and industrial classes, are repeated in each of their reports. So e.g., "A
Joint-stock company returns £6,000 as assessable profits, the surveyor raises the amount to £88,000, and upon that
sum duty is ultimately paid. Another company which returns £190,000 is finally compelled to admit that the true
return should be £250,000." (Ibid., p, 42.)

[34] "Census, &c," 1. c, p. 29. John Bright's assertion that 150 landlords own half of England, and 12 half the Scotch
soil, has never been refuted.

135] "Fourth Report, &c, of Inland Revenue." Lond., 1860, p. 17.

f36] These are the net incomes after certain legally authorised abatements.

[37] At this moment, March, 1867, the Indian and Chinese market is again overstocked by the consignments of the
British cotton manufacturers. In 1866 a reduction in wages of 5 per cent, took place amongst the cotton operatives. In
1867, as consequence of a similar operation, there was a strike of 20,000 men at Preston. [Added in the 4th German
edition. — That was the prelude to the crisis which broke out immediately afterwards. — F. E.]

[38] "Census, &C," 1. c, P. 11.

f39] Gladstone in the House of Commons, Feb. 13th, 1843. Times, Feb. 14th, 1843 — "It is one of the most
melancholy features in the social state of this country that we see, beyond the possibility of denial, that while there is
at this moment a decrease in the consuming powers of the people, an increase of the pressure of privations and
distress; there is at the same time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, an increase of the
luxuriousness of their habits, and of their means of enjoyment." (Hansard, 13th Feb.)

[40] Gladstone in the House of Commons, April 16th, 1863. Morning Star, April 17th.

[41] See the official accounts in the Blue book: "Miscellaneous Statistics of the United Kingdom," Part vi., London,
1866, pp. 260-273, passim. Instead of the statistics of orphan asylums, &c, the declamations of the ministerial
journals in recommending dowries for the Royal children might also serve. The greater dearness of the means of
subsistence is never forgotten there.

[42] Gladstone, House of Commons, 7th April, 1864. — "The Hansard version runs: Again, and yet more at large —
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (51 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

what is human life, but, in the majority of cases, a struggle for existence.' The continual crying contradictions in
Gladstone's Budget speeches of 1863 and 1864 were characterised by an English writer by the following quotation
from Boileau:

"Voila I'homme en effet. II va du blanc au noir,
II condamne au matin ses sentiments du soir.
Importun a tout autre, a soi-meme incommode,
II change a tout moment d' esprit comme de mode. "

("The Theory of Exchanges, &c," London, 1864, p. 135.)

[431 H. Fawcett, 1. c, pp. 67-82. As to the increasing dependence of labourers on the retail shopkeepers, this is the
consequence of the frequent oscillations and interruptions of their employment.

[441 Wales here is always included in England.

[451 A peculiar light is throwm on the advance made since the time of Adam Smith, by the fact that by him the word
"workhouse" is still occasionally used as synonymous with "manufactory"; e.g., the opening of his chapter on the
division of labour; "those employed in every different branch of the work can often be collected into the same
workhouse."

I46J "Public Health. Sixth Report, 1864," p. 13.

147] I.e., p. 17.

148J I.e., p. 13.

[491 1. c, Appendix, p. 232.

15011. c, pp. 232, 233.

£511 I.e., pp. 14, 15.

[521 "In no particular have the rights of persons been so avowedly and shamefully sacrificed to the rights of property
as in regard to the lodging of the labouring class. Every large town may be looked upon as a place of human sacrifice,
a shrine where thousands pass yearly through the fire as offerings to the moloch of avarice," S. Laing, 1. c, p. 150.

[531 "Public Health, Eighth Report. 1866." p. 14, note.

[541 1. c, p. 89. With reference to the children in these colonies, Dr. Hunter says: "People are not now alive to tell us
how children were brought up before this age of dense agglomerations of poor began, and he would be a msh prophet
who should tell us what future behaviour is to be expected from the present growth of children, who, under
circumstances probably never before paralleled in this country, are now completing their education for future practice,
as 'dangerous classes' by sitting up half the night with persons of every age, half naked, drunken, obscene, and
quarrelsome." (1. c, p. 56.)

[551 1. a, p. 62.

[561 "Report of the Officer of Health of St. Martins-in-the-Fields, 1865.

[571 Public Health, Eighth Report, 1866," p. 91.

15811. c, p. 88.

[591 I.e., p. 88.

[601 I.e., p. 89.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (52 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five
[61] 1. c, p. 55 and 56.
£621 I.e., p. 149.
1631 I.e., p. 50.
I64J



COLLECTING AGENTS LIST (BRADFORD) .

Houses

Vulcan Street, No. 122 1 room

Lumiev Street, No. 13 1 room

Bower Street, No. 41 1 room

Portland Street. No. 112 1 room

Hardy Street, No. 17 1 room

North Street, No. 18 1 room

North Street, No. 17 1 room

Wymer Street, No. 19 1 room

Jowett Street, No. 56 1 room

George Street, No. 150 1 room

Rifle Court Marygate, No. 11 1 room

Marshall Street, No. 28 1 room

Marshall Street, No. 49 1 room

George Street, No. 128 1 room

George Street, No. 130 1 room

Edward Street, No. 4 1 room

George Street, No. 49 1 room

York Street, No. 34, 1 room

Salt Pie Street (bottom) 2 room

Cellars

Regent Square 1 cella

Acre Street 1 cella

33 Roberts Court 1 cella

Back Pratt Street 1 cella

used as a brazier's shop

27 Ebenezer Street 1 cella

1. c., p. 111. (no male



16 persons

11 persons

11 persons
10 persons

10 persons
16 persons
13 persons

8 adults

12 persons
3 families

11 persons
10 persons

3 families

18 persons

16 persons

17 persons
2 families
2 families

26 persons

r 8 persons

r 7 persons

r 7 persons

r 7 persons

r 6 persons
above 18 ) .



I65J I.e., p. 114.

[66J I.e., p. 50.

[671 "Public Health. Seventh Report. 1865," p. 18.

I68J I.e., p. 165.

f691 1. c., p. 18, Note. — The Relieving Officer of the Chapel-en-le-Frith Union reported to the Registar-General as
follows: — "At Doveholes, a number of small excavations have been made into a large hillock of lime ashes (the
refuse of lime-kilns), and which are used as dwellings, and occupied by labourers and others employed in the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (53 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

construction of a railway now in course of construction through that neighbourhood. The excavations are small and
damp, and have no drains or privies about them, and not the slightest means of ventilation except up a hole pulled
through the top, and used for a chimney. In consequence of this defect, small-pox has been raging for some time, and
some deaths [amongst the troglodytes] have been caused by it." (1. c, note 2.)

[701 The details given at the end of Part IV. refer especially to the labourers in coal mines. On the still worse condition
in metal mines, see the very conscientious Report of the Royal Commission of 1864.

£711 I.e., pp. 180, 182.

[721 I.e., pp. 515, 517.

£7311. c, p. 16.

[741 "Wholesale starvation of the London Poor.... Within the last few days the walls of London have been placarded
with large posters, bearing the following remarkable announcement: — 'Fat oxen! Starving men! The fat oxen from
their palace of glass have gone to feed the rich in their luxurious abode, while the starving men are left to rot and die
in their wretched dens.' The placards bearing these ominous words are put up at certain intervals. No sooner has one
set been defaced or covered over, than a fresh set is placarded in the former, or some equally public place.... This ...
reminds one of the secret revolutionary associations which prepared the French people for the events of 1789.... At
this moment, while English workmen with their wives and children are dying of cold and hunger, there are millions of
English gold — the produce of English labour — being invested in Russian, Spanish, Italian, and other foreign
enterprises." — Reynolds' Newspaper, January 20th, 1867.

[751 James E. Thorold Rogers. (Prof, of Polit. Econ. in the University of Oxford.) "A History of Agriculture and
Prices in England." Oxford, 1866, v. 1, p. 690. This work, the fruit of patient and diligent labour, contains in the two
volumes that have so far appeared, only the period from 1259 to 1400. The second volume contains simply statistics.
It is the first authentic "History of Prices" of the time that we possess.

[761 "Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor-Rates: or a comparative view of the prices of labour and provisions."
Lond., 1777, pp. 5, 7 1.

[771 Dr. Richard Price: "Observations on Reversionary Payments," 6th Ed. By W. Morgan, Lond., 1803, v. 11., pp.
158, 159. Price remarks on p. 159: "The nominal price of daylabour is at present no more than about four times, or, at
most, five times higher than it was in the year 1514. But the price of corn is seven times, and of flesh-meat and
raiment about fifteen times higher. So far, therefore, has the price of labour been even from advancing in proportion to
the increase in the expenses of living, that it does not appear that it bears now half the proportion to those expenses
that it did bear."

[781 Barton, 1. c, p. 26. For the end of the 18th century cf. Eden, 1. c.

T791 Parry, 1. c, p. 86.

I80J id., p. 213.

I8JJ S. Laing, 1. c, p. 62.

£821 "England and America." Lond., 1833, Vol. 1, p. 47.

[831 The landed aristocracy advanced themselves to this end, of course per Parliament, funds from the State Treasury,
at a very low rate of interest, which the farmers have to make good at a much higher rate.

[841 London Economist, May 29th, 1845, p. 290.

[851 The decrease of the middle-class farmers can be seen especially in the census category: "Farmer's son, grandson,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (54 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

brother, nephew, daughter, granddaughter, sister, niece"; in a word, the members of his own family, employed by the
farmer. This category numbered, in 1851, 216,851 persons; in 1861, only 176,151. From 1851 to 1871, the farms
under 20 acres fell by more than 900 in number; those between 50 and 75 acres fell from 8,253 to 6,370; the same
thing occurred with all other farms under 100 acres. On the other hand, during the same twenty years, the number of
large farms increased; those of 300-500 acres rose from 7,771 to 8,410, those of more than 500 acres from 2,755 to
3,914, those of more than 1,000 acres from 492 to 582.

[861 The number of shepherds increased from 12,517 to 25,559.

[871 Census, 1. c, p. 36.

[881 Rogers, 1. c, p. 693, p. 10. Mr. Rogers belongs to the Liberal School, is a personal friend of Cobden and Bright,
and therefore no laudator temporis acti.

[891 "Public Health. Seventh Report," 1865, p. 242. It is therefore nothing unusual either for the landlord to raise a
labourer's rent as soon as he hears that he is earnitig a little more, or for the farmer to lower the wage of the labourer,
"because his wife has found a trade," 1. c.

[90J I.e., p. 135.

191] I.e., p. 134.

[921 "Report of the Commissioners ... relating to Transportation and Penal Servitude," Lond., 1863, pp. 42, 50.

[931 1- c., p. 77. "Memorandum by the Lord Chief Justice."

[941 1. c, Vol. 11, Minutes of Evidence.

[95] 1. c, Vol. 1. Appendix, p. 280.

[961 1. c, PP. 274, 275.

[971 "Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, pp. 238, 249, 261, 262.

[98] 1. a, p. 262.

[991 1- c., p. 17. The English agricultural labourer receives only 1/4 as much milk, and 1/2 as much bread as the Irish.
Arthur Young in his "Tour in Ireland," at the beginning of this century, already noticed the better nourishment of the
latter. The reason is simply this, that the poor Irish farmer is incomparably more humane than the rich English. As
regards Wales, that which is said in the text holds only for the southwest. All the doctors there agree that the increase
of the death-rate through tuberculosis, scrofula, etc., increases in intensity with the deterioration of the physical
condition of the population, and all ascribe this deterioration to poverty. "His (the farm labourer's) keep is reckoned at
about five pence a day, but in many districts it was said to be of much less cost to the farmer" [himself very poor]....
"A morsel of the salt meat or bacon, ... salted and dried to the texture of mahogany, and hardly worth the difficult
process of assimilation ... is used to flavour a large quantity of broth or gruel, of meal and leeks, and day after day this
is the labourer's dinner." The advance of industry resulted for him, in this harsh and damp climate, in "the
abandonment of the solid homespun clothing in favour of the cheap and so-called cotton goods," and of stronger
drinks for so-called tea. "The agriculturist, after several hours' exposure to wind and rain, pins his cottage to sit by a
fire of peat or of balls of clay and small coal kneaded together, from which volumes of carbonic and sulphurous acids
are poured forth. His walls are of mud and stones, his floor the bare earth which was there before the hut was built, his
roof a mass of loose and sodden thatch. Every crevice is topped to maintain warmth, and in an atmosphere of diabolic
odour, with a mud fioor, with his only clothes drying on his back, he often sups and sleeps with his wife and children.
Obstetricians who have passed parts of the night in such cibins have described how they found their feet sinking in the
mud of the floor, and they were forced (easy task) to drill a hole through the wall to effect a little private respiration. It
was attested by numerous witnesses in various grades of life, that to these insanitary influences, and many more, the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (55 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

underfed peasant was nightly exposed, and of the result, a debilitated and scrofulous people, there was no want of
evidence.... The statements of the relieving officers of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire show in a striking way the
same state of things. There is besides "a plague more horrible still, the great number of idiots." Now a word on the
climatic conditions. "A strong south-west wind blows over the whole country for 8 or 9 months in the year, bringing
with it torrents of rain, which discharge principally upon the western slopes of the hills. Trees are rare, except in
sheltered places, and where not protected, are blown out of all shape. The cottages generally crouch under some bank,
or often in a ravine or quarry, and none but the smallest sheep and native cattle can live on the pastures.... The young
people migrate to the eastern mining districts of Glamorgan and Monmouth. Carmarthenshire is the breeding ground
of the mining population and their hospital. The population can therefore barely maintain its numbers." Thus in
Cardiganshire:

1851 1861



Males 45,155 44,446

Females 52,459 52,955



97,614 97,401
Dr. Hunter's Report in "Public Health, Seventh Report. 1865," pp. 498-502, passim.

[1001 In 1865 this law was improved to some extent. It will soon be learnt from experience that tinkering of this sort is
of no use.

[1011 In order to understand that which follows, we must remember that "Close Villages" are those whose owners are
one or two large landlords. "Open villages," those whose soil belongs to many smaller landlords. It is in the latter that
building speculators can build cottages and lodging-houses.

[1021 A show-village of this kind looks very nice, but is as unreal as the villages that Catherine II. saw on her journey
to the Crimea. In recent times the shepherd, also has often been banished from these show- villages; e.g., near Market
Harboro is sheep-farm of about 500 acres, which only employs the labour of one man. To reduce the long trudges over
these wide plains, the beautiful pastures of Leicester and Northampton, the shepherd used to get a cottage on the farm.
Now they give him a thirteenth shilling a week for lodging, that he must find far away in an open village.

[1031 "The labourers' houses (in the open villages, which, of course, are always overcrowded) are usually in rows,
built with their backs against the extreme edge of the plot of land which the builder could call his, and on this account
are not allowed light and air, except from the front." (Dr. Hunter's Report, 1. c, p. 135.) Very often the beerseller or
grocer of the village is at the same time the letter of its houses. In this case the agricultural labourer finds in him a
second master, besides the farmer. He must be his customer as well as his tenant. "The hind with his 10s. a week,
minus a rent of £4 a year ... is obliged to buy at the seller's own terms, his modicum of tea, sugar, flour, soap, candies,
and beer." (1. c, p. 132.) These open villages form, in fact, the "penal settlements" of the English agricultural
proletariat. Many of the cottages are simply lodging-houses, through which all the rabble of the neighbourhood passes.
The country labourer and his family who had often, in a way truly wonderful, preserved, under the foulest conditions,
a thoroughness and purity of character, go, in these, utterly to the devil. It is, of course, the fashion amongst the
aristocratic shylocks to shrug their shoulders pharisaically at the building speculators, the small landlords, and the
open villages. They know well enough that their "close villages" and "show- villages" are the birth-places of the open
villages, and could not exist without them. "The labourers ... were it not for the small owners, would, for by far the
most part, have to sleep under the trees of the farms on which they work." (1. c, p. 135.) The system of "open" and
"closed" villages obtains in all the Midland counties and throughout the East of England.

[1041 "The employer ... is ... directly or indirectly securing to himself the profit on a man employed at 10s. a week,
and receiving from this poor hind £4 or £5 annual rent for houses not worth £20 in a really free market, but maintained
at their artificial value by the power of the owner to say 'Use my house, or go seek a hiring elsewhere without a
character from me....' Does a man wish to better himself, to go as a plate-layer on the railway, or to begin quarry- work,
the same power is ready with 'Work for me at this low rate of wages or begone at a week's notice; take your pig with

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (56 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

you, and get what you can for the potatoes growing in your garden.' Should his interest appear to be better served by
it, an enhanced rent is sometimes preferred in these cases by the owner (i.e., the farmer) as the penalty for leaving his
service." (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 132.)

[1051 "New married couples are no edifying study for grown-up brothers and sisters: and though instances must not be
recorded, sufficient data are remembered to warrant the remark, that great depression and sometimes death are the lot
of the female participator in the offence of incest." (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 137.) A member of the rural police who had
for many years been a detective in the worst quarters of London, says of the girls of his village: "their boldness and
shamelessness I never saw equalled during some years of police life and detective duty in the worst parts of London
.... They live like pigs, great boys and girls, mothers and fathers, all sleeping in one room, in many instances." ("Child.
Empl. Com. Sixth Report, 1867," p. 77 sq. 155.)

ri061 "Public Health. Seventh Report, 1865," pp. 9, 14 passim.

[1071 "The heaven-bom employment of the hind gives dignity even to his position. He is not a slave, but a soldier of
peace, and deserves his place in married men's quarters to be provided by the landlord, who has claimed a power of
enforced labour similar to that the country demands of the soldier. He no mote receives market-price for his work than
does the soldier. Like the soldier he is caught young, ignorant, knowing only his own trade, and his own locality.
Early marriage and. the operation of the various laws of settlement affect the one as enlistment and the Mutiny Act
affect the other." (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 132.) Sometimes an exceptionally soft-hearted landlord relents as the solitude he
has created. "It is a melancholy thing to stand alone in one's country," said Lord Leicester, when complimented on the
completion of Hookham. "I look around and not a house is to be seen but mine. I am the giant of Giant Castle, and
have eat up all my neighhours."

[1081 A similar movement is seen during the last ten years in France; in proportion as capitalist production there takes
possession of agriculture, it drives the "surplus" agricultural population into the towns. Here also we find deterioration
in the housing and other conditions at the source of the surplus-population. On the special "proletariat foncier," to
which this system of parcelling out the land has given rise, see, among others, the work of Colins, already quoted, and
Karl Marx "Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte." 2nd edition. Hamburg, 1869, pp. 56, &c. In 1846, the
town population in France was represented by 24.42, the agricultural by 75.58; in 1861, the town by 28.86, the
agricultural by 71.14 per cent. During the last 5 years, the diminution of the agricultural percentage of the population
has been yet more marked. As early as 1846, Pierre Dupont in his "Ouvriers" sang:

Mai vetus, logos dans des trous,
Sous les combles, dans les decombres,
Nous vivons avoc les hiboux
Et les laffons, amis des ombres.

[1091 "Sixth and last Report of the Children's Employment Commission," published at the end of March, 1867. It
deals solely with the agricultural gang-system.

rilOl "Child. Emp. Comm., VI. Report." Evidence 173, p. 37.

[1111 Some gang-masters, however, have worked themselves up to the position of farmers of 500 acres, or proprietors
of whole rows of houses.

[1121 "Half the girls of Ludford have been ruined by going out" (in gangs). 1. c, p. 6, § 32.

[1131 "They (gangs) have greatly increased of late years. In some places they are said to have been introduced at
comparatively late dates; in others where gangs ... have been known for many years ... more and younger children are
employed in them." (1. c, p. 79, § 174).

[1141 "Small farmers never employ gangs." "It is not on poor land, but on land which affords rent of from 40 to 50
shillings, that women and children are employed in the greatest numbers." (1. c, pp. 17, 14.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (57 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

[1151 To one of these gentlemen the taste of his rent was so grateful that he indignantly declared to the Commission of
Inquiry that the whole hubbub was only due to the name of the system. If instead of "gang" it were called "the
Agricultural Juvenile Industrial Self-supporting Association," everything would be all right.

[1161 "Gang work is cheaper than other work; that is why they are employed," says a former gang-master (1. c, p. 17,
§ 14 )."The gang-system is decidedly the cheapest for the farmer, and decidedly the worst for the children," says a
farmer (1. c, p. 16, § 3.)

[1171 "Undoubtedly much of the work now done by children in gangs used to be done by men and women. More men
are out of work now where children and women are employed than formerly." (1. c, p. 43, n. 202.) On the other hand,
"the labour question in some agricultural districts, particularly the arable, is becoming so serious in consequence of
emigration, and the facility afforded by railways for getting to large towns that I (the "I" is the steward of a great lord)
think the services of children are most indispensable," (1. c, p. 80, n. 180.) For the "labour question" in English
agricultural districts, differently from the rest of the civilised world, means the landlords' and farmers' question, viz.,
how is it possible, despite an always increasing exodus of the agricultural folk, to keep up a sufficient relative
surplus-population in the country, and by means of it keep the wages of the agricultural labourer at a minimum?

[1181 The "Public Health Report," where in dealing with the subject of children's mortality, the gang-system is treated
in passing, remains unknown to the press, and, therefore, to the English public. On the other hand, the last report of
the "Child. Empl. Comm." afforded the press sensational copy always welcome. Whilst the Liberal press asked how
the fine gentlemen and ladies, and the well-paid clergy of the State Church, with whom Lincolnshire swarms, could
allow such a system to arise on their estates, under their very eyes, they who send out expressly missions to the
Antipodes, "for the improvement of the morals of South Sea Islanders" — the more refined press confined itself to
reflections on the coarse degradation of the agricultural population who are capable of selling their children into such
slavery! Under the accursed conditions to which these "delicate" people condemn the agricultural labourer, it would
not be surprising if he ate his own children. What is really wonderful is the healthy integrity of character, he has, in
great part, retained. The official reports prove that the parents, even in the gang districts, loathe the gang-system.
"There is much in the evidence that shows that the parents of the children would, in many instances, be glad to be
aided by the requirements of a legal obligation, to resist the pressure and the temptations to which they are often
subject. They are liable to be urged, at times by the parish officers, at times by employers, under threats of being
themselvat discharged, to be taken to work at an age when ... school attendance ... would be manifestly to their greater
advantage.... All that time and strength wasted; all the suffering from extra and unprofitable fatigue produced to the
labourer and to his children; every instance in which the parent may have traced the moral ruin of his child to fhe
undermining of delicacy by the over-crowding of cottages, or to the contaminating influences of the public gang, must
have been so many incentives to feelings in the minds of the labouring poor which can be well understood, and which
it would be needless to particularise. They must be conscious that much bodily and mental pain has thus been inflicted
upon them from causes for which they were in no way answerable; to which, had it been in their power, they would
have in no way consented; and against which they were powerless to struggle." (1. c, p. xx., § 82, and xxiii., n. 96.)

ri!91 Population of Ireland, 1801, 5,319,867 persons; 1811, 6,084,996; 1821, 6,869,544; 1831, 7,828,347; 1841,
8,222,664.

[1201 The result would be found yet more unfavourable if we went further back. Thus: Sheep in 1865, 3,688,742, but
in 1856, 3,694,294. Pigs in 1865, 1,299,893, but in 1858, 1,409,883.

[1211 The data of the text are put together from the materials of the "Agricultural Statistics, Ireland, General Abstracts,
Dublin," for the years 1860, el seq., and "Agricultural Statistics, Ireland. Tables showing the estimated average
produce, &c, Dublin, 1866." These statistics are official, and laid before Parliament annually.

Note to 2nd edition. The official statistics for the year 1872 show, as compared with 1871, a decrease in area under
cultivation of 134,915 acres. An increase occurred in the cultivation of green crops, turnips, mangold-wurzel, and the
like; a decrease in the area under cultivation for wheat of 16,000 acres; oats, 14,000; barley and rye, 4,000; potatoes,
66,632; flax, 34,667; grass, clover, vetches, rape-seed, 30,000. The soil under cultivation for wheat shows for the last

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (58 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

5 years the following stages of decrease: — 1868, 285,000 acres; 1869, 280,000; 1870, 259,000; 1871, 244,000; 1872,
228,000. For 1872 we find, in round numbers, an increase of 2,600 horses, 80,000 horned cattle, 68,609 sheep, and a
decrease of 236,000 pigs.

11221 The total yearly income under Schedule D. is different in this table from that which appears in the preceding
ones, because of certain deductions allowed by law.

[1231 If the product also diminishes relatively per acre, it must not be forgotten that for a century and a half England
has indirectly exported the soil of Ireland, without as much as allowing its cultivators the means for making up the
constituents of the soil that had been exhausted.

IT 241 As Ireland is regarded as the promised land of the "principle of population," Th. Sadler, before the publication
of his work on population, issued his famous book, "Ireland, its Evils and their Remedies." 2nd edition, London, 1829.
Here, by comparison of the statistics of the individual provinces, and of the individual counties in each province, he
proves that the misery there is not, as Malthus would have it, in proportion to the number of the population, but in
inverse ratio to this.

1T251 Between 1851 and 1874, the total number of emigrants amounted to 2,325,922.

|T261 According to a table in Murphy's "Ireland Industrial, Political and Social," 1870, 94.6 per cent, or the holdings
do not reach 100 acres, 5.4 exceed 100 acres.

[1271 "Reports from the Poor Law Inspectors on the Wages of Agricultural Labourers in Dublin," 1870. See also
"Agricultural labourers (Ireland). Return, etc." 8 March, 1861, London, 1862.

[128] 1. c, pp. 29, 1.

£12911. a, p. 12.

JT30J I.e., p. 12.

£1311 I.e., p. 25.

£1321 I.e., p. 27.

£13311. a, p. 25.

£13411. c, p. 1.

JT35J1. c, pp. 31,32.

JT36J I.e., p.. 25.

[1371 1. c, p. 30.

£13811. c, pp. 21, 13.

ri391 "Rept. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. 96.

[1401 The total area includes also peat, bogs, and waste land.

[1411 How the famine and its consequences have been deliberately made the most of, both by the individual landlords
and by the English legislature, to forcibly carry out the agricultural revolution and to thin the population of Ireland
down to the proportion satisfactory to the landlords, I shall show more fully in Vol. III. of this work, in the section on
landed property. There also I return to the condition of the small farmers and the agricultural labourers. At present,
only one quotation. Nassau W. Senior says, with other things, in his posthumous work, "Journals, Conversations and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (59 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Five

Essays relating to Ireland." 2 vols. London, 1868; Vol. II., p. 282. "Well," said Dr. G., "we have got our Poor Law and
it is a great instrument for giving the victory to the landlords. Another, and a still more powerful instrument is
emigration.... No friend to Ireland can wish the war to be prolonged [between the landlords and the small Celtic
farmers] — still less, that it should end by the victory of the tenants. The sooner it is over — the sooner Ireland
becomes a grazing country, with the comparatively thin population which a grazing country requires, the better for all
classes." The English Corn Laws of 1815 secured Ireland the monopoly of the free importation of corn into Great
Britain. They favoured artificially, therefore, the cultivation of corn. With the abolition of the Corn Laws in 1846, this
monopoly was suddenly removed. Apart from all other circumstances, this event alone was sufficient to give a great
impulse to the turning of Irish arable into pasture land, to the concentration of arms, and to the eviction of small
cultivators. After the fruitfulness of the Irish soil had been praised from 1815 to 1846, and proclaimed loudly as by
Nature herself destined for the cultivation of wheat, English agronomists, economists, politicians, discover suddenly
that it is good for nothing but to produce forage. M. Leonce de Lavergne has hastened to repeat this on the other side
of the Channel. It takes a "serious" man, a la Lavergne, to be caught by such childishness.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-Six: The Secret of Primative Accumulation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch25.htm (60 of 60) [23/08/2000 16:19:41]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Six

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIII:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX:

THE SECRET OF PRIMATIVE ACCUMULATION



We have seen how money is changed into capital; how through capital surplus-value is made, and from
surplus-value more capital. But the accumulation of capital pre-supposes surplus-value; surplus-value
pre-supposes capitalistic production; capitalistic production presupposes the pre-existence of
considerable masses of capital and of labor-power in the hands of producers of commodities. The whole
movement, therefore, seems to turn in a vicious circle, out of which we can only get by supposing a
primitive accumulation (previous accumulation of Adam Smith) preceding capitalistic accumulation; an
accumulation not the result of the capitalistic mode of production, but its starting point.

This primitive accumulation plays in Political Economy about the same part as original sin in theology.
Adam bit the apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human race. Its origin is supposed to be explained when
it is told as an anecdote of the past. In times long gone-by there were two sorts of people; one, the
diligent, intelligent, and, above all, frugal elite; the other, lazy rascals, spending their substance, and
more, in riotous living. The legend of theological original sin tells us certainly how man came to be
condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow; but the history of economic original sin reveals to
us that there are people to whom this is be no means essential. Never mind! Thus it came to pass that the
former sort accumulated wealth, and the latter sort had at last nothing to sell except their own skins. And
from this original sin dates the poverty of the great majority that, despite all its labor, has up to now
nothing to sell but itself, and the wealth of the few that increases constantly although they have long
ceased to work. Such insipid childishness is every day preached to us in the defence of property. M.
Thiers, e.g., had the assurance to repeat it with all the solemnity of a statesman to the French people,
once so spirituel. But as soon as the question of property crops up, it becomes a sacred duty to proclaim
the intellectual food of the infant as the one thing fit for all ages and for all tages of development. In
actual history it is notorious that conquest, enslavement, robbery, murder, briefly force, play the great
part. In the tender annals of Political Economy, the idyllic reigns from time immemorial. Right and
"labor" were from all time the sole means of enrichment, the present year of course always excepted. As
a matter of fact, the methods of primitive accumulation are anything but idyllic.

In themselves money and commodities are no more capital than are the means of production and of
subsistence. They want transforming into capital. But this transformation itself can only take place under



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch26.htm (1 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:45]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Six

certain circumstances that centre in this, viz., that two very different kinds of commodity-possessors
must come face to face and into contact, on the one hand, the owners of money, means of production,
means of subsistence, who are eager to increase the sum of values they possess, by buying other people's
labor-power; on the other hand, free laborers, the sellers of their own labor-power, and therefore the
sellers of labor. Free laborers, in the double sense that neither they themselves form part and parcel of the
means of production, as in the case of slaves, bondsmen, &c, nor do the means of production belong to
them, as in the case of peasant-proprietors; they are, therefore, free from, unencumbered by, any means
of production of their own. With this polarization of th e market for commodities, the fundamental
conditions of capitalist production are given. The capitalist system pre-supposes the complete separation
of the laborers from all property in the means by which they can realize their labor. As soon as capitalist
production is once on its own legs, it not only maintains this separation, but reproduces it on a
continually extending scale. The process, therefore, that clears the way for the capitalist system, can be
none other than the process which takes away from the laborer the possession of his means of
production; a process that transforms, on the one hand, the social means of subsistence and of production
into capital, on the other, the immediate producers into wage-laborers. The so-called primitive
accumulation, therefore, is nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer from the
means of production. It appears as primitive, because it forms the pre-historic stage of capital and of the
mode of production corresponding with it.

The economic structure of capitalist society has grown out of the economic structure of feudal society.
The dissolution of the latter set free the elements of the former.

The immediate producer, the laborer, could only dispose of his own person after he had ceased to be
attached to the soil and ceased to be the slaver, serf, or bondsman of another. To become a free seller of
labor-power, who carries his commodity wherever he finds a market, he must further have escaped from
the regime of the guilds, their rules for apprentices and journeymen, and the impediments of their labor
regulations. Hence, the historical movement which changes the producers into wage-workers, appears, on
the one hand, as their emancipation from serfdom and from the fetters of the guilds, and this side alone
exists for our bourgeois historians. But, on the other hand, these new freedmen became sellers of
themselves only after they had been robbed of all their own means of production, and of all the
guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal arrangements. And the history of this, their
expropriation, is written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and fire.

The industrial capitalists, these new potentates, had on their part not only to disgrace the guild maters of
handicrafts, but also the feudal lords,the possessors of the sources of wealth. In this respect, their
conquest of social power appears as the fruit of a victorious struggle both against feudal lordship and its
revolting prerogatives, and against the guilds and the fetters they laid on the free development of
production and the free exploitation of man by man. The chevaliers d'industrie, however, only succeeded
in supplanting the chevaliers of the sword by making use of events of which they themselves were
wholly innocent. They have risen by means as vile as those by which the Roman freedman once on a
time made himself the master of his patronus.

The starting-point of the development that gave rise to the wage-laborer as well as to the capitalist, was
the servitude of the laborer. The advance consisted in a change of form of this servitude, in the
transformation of feudal exploitation into capitalist exploitation. To understand its march, we need not go
back very far. Although we come across the first beginnings of capitalist production as early as the 14th
or 15th century, sporadically, in certain towns of the Mediterranean, the capitalistic era dates from the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch26.htm (2 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:45]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Six

16th century. Wherever it appears, the abolition of serfdom has been long effected, and the highest
development of the middle ages, the existence of sovereign towns, has been long on the wane.

In the history of primitive accumulation, all revolutions are epoch-making that act as levers for the
capital class in course of formation; but, above all, those moments when great masses of men are
suddenly and forcibly torn from their means of subsistence, and hurled as free and "unattached"
proletarians on the labor market. The expropriation of the agricultural producer, of the peasant, from the
soil, is the basis of the whole process. The history of this expropriation, in different countries, assumes
different aspects, and runs through its various phases in different orders of succession, nd at different
periods. In England alone, which we take as our example, has it the classic form. \l]



Footnotes

T 1 1 In Italy, where capitalistic production developed earliest, the dissolution of serfdom also took place
earlier than elsewhere. The serf was emancipated in that country before he had acquired any prescriptive
right to the soil. His emancipation at once transformed him into a free proletarian, who, moreover, found
his master ready and waiting for him in the towns, for the most part handed down as legacies from the
Roman time. When the revolution of the world-market, about the end of the 15th century, annihilated
Northern Italy's commercial supremacy, a movement in the reverse direction set in. The laborers of the
towns were driven en masse into the country, and gave an impulse, never before seen, to the petite
culture, carried on in the form of gardening.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Seven: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch26.htm (3 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:45]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIM:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN:

EXPROPRIATION OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION FROM THE

LAND



In England, serfdom had practically disappeared in the last part of the 14th century. The immense
majority of the population [11 consisted then, and to a still larger extent, in the 15th century, of free
peasant proprietors, whatever was the feudal title under which their right of property was hidden. In the
larger seignorial domains, the old bailiff, himself a serf, was displaced by the free farmer. The
wage-labourers of agriculture consisted partly of peasants, who utilised their leisure time by working on
the large estates, partly of an independent special class of wage-labourers, relatively and absolutely few
in numbers. The latter also were practically at the same, time peasant farmers, since, besides their wages,
they had allotted to them arable land to the extent of 4 or more acres, together with their cottages,
Besides they, with the rest of the peasants, enjoyed the usufruct of the common land, which gave pasture
to their cattle, furnished them with timber, fire-wood, turf, &c. [2] In all countries of Europe, feudal
production is characterised by division of the soil amongst the greatest possible number of
sub-feudatories. The might of the feudal lord, like that of the sovereign, depended not on the length of his
rent-roll, but on the number of his subjects, and the latter depended on the number of peasant proprietors.
[31 Although, therefore, the English land, after the Norman Conquest, was distributed in gigantic
baronies, one of which often included some 900 of the old Anglo-Saxon lordships, it was bestrewn with
small peasant properties, only here and there interspersed with great seignorial domains. Such conditions,
together with the prosperity of the towns so characteristic of the 15th century, allowed of that wealth of
the people which Chancellor Fortescue so eloquently paints in his "Laudes legum Angliae"; but it
excluded the possibility of capitalistic wealth.

The prelude of the revolution that laid the foundation of the capitalist mode of production, was played in
the last third of the 15th, and the first decade of the 16th century. A mass of free proletarians was hurled
on the labour-market by the breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers, who, as Sir James Steuart well
says, "everywhere uselessly filled house and castle." Although the royal power, itself a product of
bourgeois development, in its strife after absolute sovereignty forcibly hastened on the dissolution of
these bands of retainers, it was by no means the sole cause of it. In insolent conflict with king and
parliament, the great feudal lords created an incomparably larger proletariat by the forcible driving of the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (1 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

peasantry from the land, to which the latter had the same feudal right as the lord himself, and by the
usurpation of the common lands. The rapid rise of the Flemish wool manufactures, and the corresponding
rise in the price of wool in England, gave the direct impulse to these evictions. The old nobility had been
devoured by the great feudal wars. The new nobility was the child of its time, for which money was the
power of all powers. Transformation of arable land into sheep-walks was, therefore, its cry. Harrison, in
his "Description of England, prefixed to Holinshed's Chronicles," describes how the expropriation of
small peasants is ruining the country. "What care our great encroachers?" The dwellings of the peasants
and the cottages of the labourers were razed to the ground or doomed to decay. "If," says Harrison, "the
old records of euerie manour be sought it will soon appear that in some manour seventeene, eighteene, or
twentie houses are shrunk ... that England was neuer less furnished with people than at the present.... Of
cities and townes either utterly decaied or more than a quarter or half diminished, though some one be a
little increased here or there; of townes pulled downe for sheepe-walks, and no more but the lordships
now standing in them.... I could saie somewhat." The complaints of these old chroniclers are always
exaggerated, but they reflect faithfully the impression made on contemporaries by the revolution in the
conditions of production. A comparison of the writings of Chancellor Fortescue and Thomas More
reveals the gulf between the 15th and 16th century. As Thornton rightly has it, the English working-class
was precipitated without any transition from its golden into its iron age.

Legislation was terrified at this revolution. It did not yet stand on that height of civilization where the
"wealth of the nation" (i.e., the formation of capital, and the reckless exploitation and impoverishing of
the mass of the people) figure as, the ultima Thule of all state-craft. In his history of Henry VII., Bacon
says: "Inclosures at that time (1489) began to be more frequent, whereby arable land (which could not be
manured without people and families) was turned into pasture, which was easily rid by a few herdsmen;
and tenancies for years, lives, and at will (whereupon much of the yeomanry lived) were turned into
demesnes. This bred a decay of people, and (by consequence) a decay of towns, churches, tithes, and the
like... . In remedying of this inconvenience the king's wisdom was admirable, and the parliament's at that
time ... they took a course to take away depopulating enclosures, and depopulating pasturage." An Act of
Henry VII., 1489, cap. 19, forbad the destruction of all "houses of husbandry" to which at least 20 acres
of land belonged. By an Act, 25 Henry VIII., the same law was renewed, it recites, among other things,
that many farms and large flocks of cattle, especially of sheep, are concentrated in the hands of a few
men, whereby the rent of land has much risen and tillage has fallen off, churches and houses have been
pulled down, and marvellous numbers of people have been deprived of the means wherewith to maintain
themselves and their families. The Act, therefore, ordains the rebuilding of the decayed farmsteads, and
fixes a proportion between corn land and pasture land, &c. An Act of 1533 recites that some owners
possess 24,000 sheep, and limits the number to be owned to 2,000. [4J The cry of the people and the
legislation directed, for 150 years after Henry VII., against the expropriation of the small farmers and
peasants, were alike fruitless. The secret of their inefficiency Bacon, without knowing it, reveals to us.
"The device of King Henry VII.," says Bacon, in his "Essays, Civil and Moral," Essay 29, "was profound
and admirable, in making farms and houses of husbandry of a standard; that is, maintained with such a
proportion of land unto them as may breed a subject to live in convenient plenty, and no servile
condition, and to keep the plough in the hands of the owners and not mere hirelings." [5] What the
capitalist system demanded was, on the other hand, a degraded and almost servile condition of the mass
of the people, the transformation of them into mercenaries, and of their means of labour into capital.
During this transformation period, legislation also strove to retain the 4 acres of land by the cottage of the
agricultural wage-labourer, and forbad him to take lodgers into his cottage. In the reign of James L, 1627,
Roger Crocker of Front Mill, was condemned for having built a cottage on the manor of Front Mill

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (2 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

without 4 acres of land attached to the same in perpetuity. As late as Charles I.'s reign, 1638, a royal
commission was appointed to enforce the carrying out of the old laws, especially that referring to the 4
acres of land. Even in Cromwell's time, the building of a house within 4 miles of London was forbidden
unless it was endowed with 4 acres of land. As late as the first half of the 1 8th century complaint is made
if the cottage of the agricultural labourer has not an adjunct of one or two acres of laud. Nowadays he is
lucky if it is furnished with a little garden, or if he may rent, far away from his cottage, a few roods.
"Landlords and farmers," says Dr. Hunter, "work here hand in hand. A few acres to the cottage would
make the labourers too independent." \6]

The process of forcible expropriation of the people received in the ]6th century a new and frightful
impulse from the Reformation, and from the consequent colossal spoliation of the church property. The
Catholic church was, at the time of the Reformation, feudal proprietor of a great part of the English land.
The suppression of the monasteries, &c, hurled their inmates into the proletariat. The estates of the
church were to a large extent given away to rapacious royal favourites, or sold at a nominal price to
speculating farmers and citizens, who drove out, en masse, the hereditary sub-tenants and threw their
holdings into one. The legally guaranteed property of the poorer folk in a part of the church's tithes was
tacitly confiscated. [7] "Pauper ubique jacet," cried Queen Elizabeth, after a journey through England. In
the 43rd year of her reign the nation was obliged to recognise pauperism officially by the introduction of
a poor-rate. "The authors of this law seem to have been ashamed to state the grounds of it, for [contrary
to traditional usage] it has no preamble whatever." [8} By the 16th of Charles I., ch. 4, it was declared
perpetual, and in fact only in 1834 did it take a new and harsher form. [9] These immediate results of the
Reformation were not its most lasting ones. The property of the church formed the religious bulwark of
the traditional conditions of landed property. With its fall these were no longer tenable. |T01

Even in the last decade of the 17th century, the yeomanry, the class of independent peasants, Were more
numerous than the class of farmers. They had formed the backbone of Cromwell's strength, and, even
according to the confession of Macaulay, stood in favourable contrast to the drunken squires and to their
servants, the country clergy, who had to marry their masters' cast-off mistresses. About 1750, the
yeomanry had disappeared, fill and so had, in the last decade of the 18th century, the last trace of the
common land of the agricultural labourer. We leave on one side here the purely economic causes of the
agricultural revolution. We deal only with the forcible means employed.

After the restoration of the Stuarts, the landed proprietors carried, by legal means, an act of usurpation,
effected everywhere on the Continent without any legal formality. They abolished the feudal tenure of
land, i.e., they got rid of all its obligations to the State, "indemnified" the State by taxes on the peasantry
and the rest of the mass of the people, vindicated for themselves the rights of modem private property in
estates to which they had only a feudal title, and, finally, passed those laws of settlement, which, mulatis
mutandis, had the same effect on the English agricultural labourer, as the edict of the Tartar Boris
Godunof on the Russian peasantry.

The "glorious Revolution" brought into power, along with William of Orange, the landlord and capitalist
appropriators of surplus- value. \\2\ They inaugurated the new era by practising on a colossal scale thefts
of state lands, thefts that had been hitherto managed more modestly. These estates were given away, sold
at a ridiculous figure, or even annexed to private estates by direct seizure. |T31 All this happened without
the slightest observation of legal etiquette. The Crown lands thus fraudulently appropriated, together with
the robbery of the Church estates, as far as these had not been lost again during the republican revolution,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (3 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

form the basis of the to-day princely domains of the English oligarchy. |T41 The bourgeois capitalists
favoured the operation with the view, among others, to promoting free trade in land, to extending the
domain of modern agriculture on the large farm-system, and to increasing their supply of the free
agricultural proletarians ready to hand. Besides, the new landed aristocracy was the natural ally of the
new bankocracy, of the newly-hatched haute finance, and of the large manufacturers, then depending on
protective duties. The English bourgeoisie acted for its own interest quite as wisely as did the Swedish
bourgeoisie who, reversing the process, hand in hand with their economic allies, the peasantry, helped
the kings in the forcible resumption of the Crown lands from the oligarchy. This happened since 1604
under Charles X. and Charles XL

Communal property — always distinct from the State property just dealt with — was an old Teutonic
institution which lived on under cover of feudalism. We have seen how the forcible usurpation of this,
generally accompanied by the turning of arable into pasture land, begins at the end of the 15th and
extends into the 16th century. But, at that time, the process was carried on by means of individual acts of
violence against which legislation, for a hundred and fifty years, fought in vain. The advance made by
the 18th century shows itself in this, that the law itself becomes now the instrument of the theft of the
people's land, although the large farmers make use of their little independent methods as well. f!51 The
parliamentary form of the robbery is that of Acts for enclosures of Commons, in other words, decrees by
which the landlords grant themselves the people's land as private property, decrees of expropriation of
the people. Sir F. M. Eden refutes his own crafty special pleading, in which he tries to represent
communal property as the private property of the great landlords who have taken the place of the feudal
lords, when he, himself, demands a "general Act of Parliament for the enclosure of Commons"
(admitting thereby that a parliamentary coup d'etat is necessary for its transformation into private
property), and moreover calls on the legislature for the indemnification for the expropriated poor. |T61

Whilst the place of the independent yeoman was taken by tenants at will, small farmers on yearly leases,
a servile rabble dependent on the pleasure of the landlords, the systematic robbery of the Communal
lands helped especially, next to the theft of the State domains, to swell those large farms, that were called
in the 18th century capital farms f!71 or merchant farms, fl81 and to "set free" the agricultural population
as proletarians for manufacturing industry.

The 18th century, however, did not yet recognise as fully as the 19th, the identity between national
wealth and the poverty of the people. Hence the most vigorous polemic, in the economic literature of that
time, on the "enclosure of commons." From the mass of materials that lie before me, I give a few extracts
that will throw a strong light on the circumstances of the time. "In several parishes of Hertfordshire,"
writes one indignant person, "24 farms, numbering on the average 50-150 acres, have been melted up
into three farms." f!91 "In Northamptonshire and Leicestershire the enclosure of common lands has taken
place on a very large scale, and most of the new lordships, resulting from the enclosure, have been turned
into pasturage, in consequence of which many lordships have not now 50 acres ploughed yearly, in
which 1,500 were ploughed formerly. The ruins of former dwelling-houses, barns, stables, &c," are the
sole traces of the former inhabitants. "An hundred houses and families have in some open-field villages
dwindled to eight or ten.... The landholders in most parishes that have been enclosed only 15 or 20 years,
are very few in comparison of the numbers who occupied them in their open-field state. It is no
uncommon thing for 4 or 5 wealthy graziers to engross a large enclosed lordship which was before in the
hands of 20 or 30 farmers, and as many smaller tenants and proprietors. All these are hereby thrown out
of their livings with their families and many other families who were chiefly employed and supported by



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (4 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

them." r201 It was not only the land that lay waste, but often land cultivated either in common or held
under a definite rent paid to the community, that was annexed by the neighbouring landlords under
pretext of enclosure. "I have here in view enclosures of open fields and lands already improved. It is
acknowledged by even the writers in defence of enclosures that these diminished villages increase the
monopolies of farms, raise the prices of provisions, and produce depopulation ... and even the enclosure
of waste lands (as now carried on) bears hard on the poor, by depriving them of a part of their
subsistence, and only goes towards increasing farms already too large." f211 "When," says Dr. Price,
"this land gets into the hands of a few great farmers, the consequence must be that the little farmers"
(earlier designated by him "a multitude of little proprietors and tenants, who maintain themselves and
families by the produce of the ground they occupy by sheep kept on a common, by poultry, hogs, &c,
and who therefore have little occasion to purchase any of the means of subsistence") "will be converted
into a body of men who earn their subsistence by working for others, and who will be under a necessity
of going to market for all they want.... There will, perhaps, be more labour, because there will be more
compulsion to it.... Towns and manufactures will increase, because more will be driven to them in quest
of places and employment. This is the way in which the engrossing of farms naturally operates. And this
is the way in which, for many years, it has been actually operating in this kingdom." f221 He sums up the
effect of the enclosures thus: "Upon the whole, the circumstances of the lower ranks of men are altered in
almost every respect for the worse. From little occupiers of land, they are reduced to the state of
day-labourers and hirelings; and, at the same time, their subsistence in that state has become more
difficult." [231 In fact, usurpation of the common lands and the revolution in agriculture accompanying
this, told so acutely on the agricultural labourers that, even according to Eden, between 1765 and 1780,
their wages began to fall below the minimum, and to be supplemented by official poor-law relief. Their
wages, he says, "were not more than enough for the absolute necessaries of life."

Let us hear for a moment a defender of enclosures and an opponent of Dr. Price. "Not is it a consequence
that there must be depopulation, because men are not seen wasting their labour in the open field.... If, by
converting the little farmers into a body of men who must work for others, more labour is produced, it is
an advantage which the nation" (to which, of course, the "converted" ones do not belong) "should wish
for ... the produce being greater when their joint labours are employed on one farm, there will be a
surplus for manufactures, and by this means manufactures, one of the mines of the nation, will increase,
in proportion to the quantity of corn produced." f241

The stoical peace of mind with which the political economist regards the most shameless violation of the
"sacred rights of property" and the grossest acts of violence to persons, as soon as they are necessary to
lay the foundations of the capitalistic mode of production, is shown by Sir F. M. Eden, philanthropist and
tory to boot. The whole series of thefts, outrages, and popular misery, that accompanied the forcible
expropriation of the people, from the last third of the 15th to the end of the 18th century, lead him merely
to the comfortable conclusion: "The due proportion between arable land and pasture had to be
established. During the whole of the 14th and the greater part of the 15th century, there was one acre of
pasture to 2, 3, and even 4 of arable land. About the middle of the 16th century the proportion was
changed of 2 acres of pasture to 2, later on, of 2 acres of pasture to one of arable, until at last the just
proportion of 3 acres of pasture to one of arable land was attained."

In the 19th century, the very memory of the connexion between the agricultural labourer and the
communal property had, of course, vanished. To say nothing of more recent times, have the agricultural
population received a farthing of compensation for the 3,51 1,770 acres of common land which between



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (5 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

1801 and 1831 were stolen from them and by parliamentary devices presented to the landlords by the
landlords?

The last process of wholesale expropriation of the agricultural population from the soil is, finally, the
so-called clearing of estates, i.e., the sweeping men off them. All the English methods hitherto
considered culminated in "clearing." As we saw in the picture of modern conditions given in a former
chapter, where there are no more independent peasants to get rid of, the "clearing" of cottages begins; so
that the agricultural labourers do not find on the soil cultivated by them even the spot necessary for their
own housing. But what "clearing of estates" really and properly signifies, we learn only in the promised
land of modern romance, the Highlands of Scotland. There the process is distinguished by its systematic
character, by the magnitude of the scale on which it is carried out at one blow (in Ireland landlords have
gone to the length of sweeping away several villages at once; in Scotland areas as large as German
principalities are dealt with), finally by the peculiar form of property, under which the embezzled lands
were held.

The Highland Celts were organised in clans, each of which was the owner of the land on which it was
settled. The representative of the clan, its chief or "great man," was only the titular owner of this
property, just as the Queen of England is the titular owner of all the national soil. When the English
government succeeded in suppressing the intestine wars of these "great men," and their constant
incursions into the Lowland plains, the chiefs of the clans by no means gave up their time-honored trade
as robbers; they only changed its form. On their own authority they transformed their nominal right into a
right of private property, and as this brought them into collision with their clansmen, resolved to drive
them out by open force. "A king of England might as well claim to drive his subjects into the sea," says
Professor Newman. f251 This revolution, which began in Scotland after the last rising of the followers of
the Pretender, can be followed through its first phases in the writings of Sir James Steuart \26\ and James
Anderson. \21~\ In the 18th century the hunted-out Gaels were forbidden to emigrate from the country,
with a view to driving them by force to Glasgow and other manufacturing towns. f281 As an example of
the method f291 obtaining in the 19th century, the "clearing" made by the Duchess of Sutherland will
suffice here. This person, well instructed in economy, resolved, on entering upon her government, to
effect a radical cure, and to turn the whole country, whose population had already been, by earlier
processes of the like kind, reduced to 15,000, into a sheep-walk. From 1814 to 1820 these 15,000
inhabitants, about 3,000 families, were systematically hunted and rooted out. All their villages were
destroyed and burnt, all their fields turned into pasturage. British soldiers enforced this eviction, and
came to blows with the inhabitants. One old woman was burnt to death in the flames of the hut, which
she refused to leave. Thus this fine lady appropriated 794,000 acres of land that had from time
immemorial belonged to the clan. She assigned to the expelled inhabitants about 6,000 acres on the
sea-shore — 2 acres per family. The 6,000 acres had until this time lain waste, and brought in no income
to their owners. The Duchess, in the nobility of her heart, actually went so far as to let these at an average
rent of 2s. 6d. per acre to the clansmen, who for centuries had shed their blood for her family. The whole
of the stolen clanland she divided into 29 great sheep farms, each inhabited by a single family, for the
most part imported English farm-servants. In the year 1835 the 15,000 Gaels were already replaced by
131,000 sheep. The remnant of the aborigines flung on the sea-shore tried to live by catching fish. They
became amphibious and lived, as an English author says, half on land and half on water, and withal only
half on both. £301

But the brave Gaels must expiate yet more bitterly their idolatry, romantic and of the mountains, for the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (6 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

"great men" of the clan. The smell of their fish rose to the noses of the great men. They scented some
profit in it, and let the sea-shore to the great fishmongers of London. For the second time the Gaels were
hunted out. f3 11

But, finally, part of the sheep-walks are turned into deer preserves. Every one knows that there are no
real forests in England. The deer in the parks of the great are demurely domestic cattle, fat as London
aldermen. Scotland is therefore the last refuge of the "noble passion." "In the Highlands," says Somers in
1848, "new forests are springing up like mushrooms. Here, on one side of Gaick, you have the new forest
of Glenfeshie; and there on the other you have the new forest of Ardverikie. In the same line you have
the Black Mount, an immense waste also recently, erected. From east to west — from the neighbourhood
of Aberdeen to the crags of Oban — you have now a continuous line of forests; while in other parts of
the Highlands there are the new forests of Loch Archaig, Glengarry, Glenmoriston, &c. Sheep were
introduced into glens which had been the seats of communities of small farmers; and the latter were
driven to seek subsistence on coarser and more sterile tracks of soil. Now deer are supplanting sheep; and
these are once more dispossessing the small tenants, who will necessarily be driven down upon still
coarser land and to more grinding penury. Deer-forests f321 and the people cannot co-exist. One or other
of the two must yield. Let the forests he increased in number and extent during the next quarter of a
century, as they have been in the last, and the Gaels will perish from their native soil.... This movement
among the Highland proprietors is with some a matter of ambition ... with some love of sport ... while
others, of a more practical cast, follow the trade in deer with an eye solely to profit. For it is a fact, that a
mountain range laid out in forest is, in many cases, more profitable to the proprietor than when let as a
sheep-walk.... The huntsman who wants a deer-forest limits his offers by no other calculation than the
extent of his purse.... Sufferings have been inflicted in the Highlands scarcely less severe than those
occasioned by the policy of the Norman kings. Deer have received extended ranges, while men have
been hunted within a narrower and still narrower circle.... One after one the liberties of the people have
been cloven down.... And the oppressions are daily on the increase.... The clearance and dispersion of the
people is pursued by the proprietors as a settled principle, as an agricultural necessity, just as trees and
brushwood are cleared from the wastes of America or Australia; and the operation goes on in a quiet,
businesslike way, &c." f331

The spoliation of the church's property, the fraudulent alienation of the State domains, the robbery of the
common lands, the usurpation of feudal and clan property, and its transformation into modern private
property under circumstances of reckless terrorism, were just so many idyllic methods of primitive
accumulation. They conquered the field for capitalistic agriculture, made the soil part and parcel of
capital, and created for the town industries the necessary supply of a "free" and outlawed proletariat.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "The petty proprietors who cultivated their own fields with their own hands, and enjoyed a modest
competence... then formed a much more important part of the nation than at present. If we may trust the
best statistical writers of that age, not less than 160,000 proprietors who, with their families, must have
made up more than a seventh of the whole population, derived their subsistence from little freehold
estates. The average income of these small landlords ... was estimated at between £60 and £70 a year. It
was computed that the number of persons who tilled their own land was greater than the number of those

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (7 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

who farmed the land of others." Macaulay: "History of England," 10th ed, 1854, 1, pp. 333, 334'. Even in
the last third of the 17th century, 4/5 of the English people were agricultural. (1. c, p. 413.) I quote
Macaulay, because as systematic falsifier of history he minimises as much as possible facts of this kind.

\2] We must never forget that even the serf was not only the owner, if but a tribute-paying owner, of the
piece of land attached to his house, but also a co-possessor of the common land. "Le paysan (in Silesia,
under Frederick II.) est serf." Nevertheless, these serfs possess common lands, "on n'a pas pu encore
engager les Silesiens au partage des communes, tandis que dans la Nouvelle Marche, ii n'y a guare de
village ou ce partage ne soit execute avec le plus grand succes." (Mirabeau: "De la Monarchic
Prussienne." Londres, 1788, t. ii, pp. 125, 126.)

\3] Japan, with its purely feudal organisation of landed property and its developed petite culture, gives a
much truer picture of the European middle ages than all our history books, dictated as these are, for the
most part, by bourgeois prejudices. It is very convenient to be "liberal" at the expense of the middle ages.

[4J In his "Utopia," Thomas More says, that in England "your shepe that were wont to be so meke and
tame, and so smal eaters, now, as I heare saye, become so great devourers and so wylde that they eate up,
and swallow downe, the very men themselfes." "Utopia," transl. by Robinson, ed., Arber, Lond., 1869, p.
41.

[51 Bacon shows the connexion between a free, well-to-do peasantry and good infantry. "This did
wonderfully concern the might and mannerhood of the kingdom to have farms as it were of a standard
sufficient to maintain an able body out of penury, and did in effect amortise a great part of the lands of
the kingdom unto the hold and occupation of the yeomanry or middle people, of a condition between
gentlemen, and cottagers and peasants.... For it hath been held by the general opinion of men of best
judgment in the wars ... that the principal strength of an army consisteth in the infantry or foot. And to
make good infantry it requireth men bred, not in a servile or indigent fashion, but in some free and
plentiful manner. Therefore, if a state run most to noblemen and gentlemen, and that the husbandman and
ploughmen be but as their workfolk and labourers, or else mere cottagers (which are but hous'd beggars),
you may have a good cavalry, but never good stable bands of foot.... And this is to be seen in France, and
Italy, and some other parts abroad, where in effect all is noblesse or peasantry ... insomuch that they are
inforced to employ mercenary bands of Switzers and the like, for their battalions of foot; whereby also it
comes to pass that those nations have much people and few soldiers." ("The Reign of Henry Vll."
Verbatim reprint from Kennet's England. Ed. 1719. Lond., 1870, p. 308.)

\6\ Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 134. "The quantity of land assigned (in the old laws) would now be judged too
great for labourers, and rather as likely to convert them into small farmers." (George Roberts: "The
Social History of the People of the Southern Counties of England in Past Centuries." Lond., 1856, pp.
184-185.)

[7] "The right of the poor to share in the tithe, is established by the tenour of ancient statutes." (Tuckett, 1.
c, Vol. II., pg. 804-805.)

[81 William Cobbett: "A History of the Protestant Reformation," § 471.

[9J The "spirit" of Protestantism may be seen from the following, among other things. In the south of
England certain landed proprietors and well-to-do farmers put their heads together and propounded ten
questions as to the right interpretation of the poor-law of Elizabeth. These they laid before a celebrated

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (8 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

jurist of that time, Sergeant Snigge (later a judge under James I.) for his opinion. "Question 9 — Some of
the more wealthy farmers in the parish have devised a skilful mode by which all the trouble of executing
this Act (the 43rd of Elizabeth) might be avoided. They have proposed that we, shall erect a prison in the
parish, and then give notice to the neighbourhood, that if any persons are disposed to farm the poor of
this parish, they do give in sealed proposals, on a certain day, of the lowest price at which they will take
them off our hands; and that they will be authorised to refuse to any one unless he be shut up in the
aforesaid prison. The proposers of this plan conceive that there will be found in the adjoining counties,
persons, who, being unwilling to labour and not possessing substance or credit to take a farm or ship, so
as to live without labour, may be induced to make a very advantageous offer to the parish. If any of the
poor perish under the contractor's care, the sin will lie at his door, as the parish will have done its duty by
them. We are, however, apprehensive that the present Act (43 rd of Elizabeth) will not warrant a
prudential measure of this kind; but you are to learn that the rest of the freeholders, of the county, and of
the adjoining county of B, will very readily join in instructing their members to propose an Act to enable
the parish to contract with a person to lock up and work the poor; and to declare that if any person shall
refuse to be so locked up and worked, he shall be entitled to no relief. This, it is. hoped, will prevent
persons in distress from wanting relief, and be the means of keeping down parishes." (R. Blakey: "The
History of Political Literature from the Earliest Times.". Lond., 1855, Vol. II., pp. 84-85.) In, Scotland,
the abolition of serfdom took place some centuries later than in England. Even in 1698, Fletcher of
Saltoun, declared in the Scotch parliament, "The number of beggars in Scotland is reckoned at not less
than 200,000. The only remedy that I, a republican on principle, can suggest, is to restore the old state of
serfdom, to make slaves of all those who are unable to provide for their own subsistence." Eden, 1. c,
Book I., ch. 1, pp. 60-61, says, "The decrease of villenage seems necessarily to have been the era of the
origin of the poor. Manufactures and commerce are the two parents of our national poor." Eden, like our
Scotch republican on principle, errs only in this: not the abolition of villenage, but the abolition of the
property of the agricultural labourer in the soil made him a proletarian, and eventually a pauper. In
France, where the expropriation was effected in another way, the ordonnance of Moulins, 1566, and the
Edict of 1656, correspond to the English poor-laws.

f 101 Professor Rogers, although formerly Professor of Political Economy in the University of Oxford, the
hotbed of Protestant orthodoxy, in his preface to the "History of Agriculture" lays stress on the fact of the
pauperisation of the mass of the people by the Reformation.

fill "A Letter to Sir. T. C. Bunbury, Bart., on the High Price of Provisions. By a Suffolk Gentleman."
Ipswich, 1795, p. 4. Even the fanatical advocate of the system of large farms, the author of the "Inquiry
into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions," London, 1773, p. 139, says: "I most lament
the loss of our yeomanry, that set of men who really kept up the independence of this nation; and sorry I
am to see their lands now in the hands of monopolising lords, tenanted out to small farmers, who hold
their leases on such conditions as to be little better than vassals ready to attend a summons on every
mischievous occasion."

fl21 On the private moral character of this bourgeois hero, among other things: "The large grant of lands
in Ireland to Lady Orkney, in 1695, is a public instance of the king's affection, and the lady's influence ....
Lady Orkney's endearing offices are supposed to have been — foeda labiorum ministerial (In the Sloane
Manuscript Collection, at the British Museum, No. 4224. The Manuscript is entitled: "The character and
behaviour of King William, Sunderland, etc., as represented in Original Letters to the Duke of
Shrewsbury from Somers Halifax, Oxford, Secretary Vernon, etc." It is full of curiosa.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (9 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

f 131 "The illegal alienation of the Crown Estates, partly by sale and partly by gift, is a scandalous chapter
in English history ... a gigantic fraud on the nation." (F. W. Newman, "Lectures on Political Economy."
London, 1851, pp. 129, 130.) [For details as to how the present large landed proprietors of England came
into their possessions see "Our Old Nobility. By Noblesse Oblige." London, 1879. — F. E.

f 141 Read, e.g., E. Burke's Pamphlet on the ducal house of Bedford, whose offshoot was Lord John
Russell, the "tomtit of Liberalism."

[151 "The farmers forbid cottagers to keep any living creatures besides themselves and children, under
the pretence that if they keep any beasts or poultry, they will steal from the farmers' barns for their
support; they also say, keep the cottagers poor and you will keep them industrious, &c, but the real fact I
believe, is that the farmers may have the whole right of common to themselves." ("A Political Inquiry
into the Consequences of Enclosing Waste Lands." London, 1785, p. 75.)

ri61 Eden, 1. c, preface.

f 171 "Capital Farms." Two letters on the Flour Trade and the Dearness of Corn. By a person in business.
London, 1767, pp. 19, 20.

f 181 "Merchant Farms." "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions." London,
1767, p. 1 1. Note.-This excellent work, that was published anonymously, is by the Rev. Nathaniel
Forster.

f 191 Thomas Wright: "A Short Address to the Public on the Monopoly of Large Farms," 1779, pp. 2, 3.

f201 Rev. Addington: "Inquiry into the Reasons for or against Enclosing Open Fields," London, 1772, pp.
37, 43 passim.

f211 Dr. R. Price, 1. c, v. ii., p. 155, Forster, Addington, Kent, Price, and James Anderson, should be read
and compared with the miserable prattle of Sycophant MacCulloch in his catalogue: "The Literature of
Political Economy," London, 1845.

[22J Price, 1. c, p. 147.

f231 Price, 1. c, p. 159. We are reminded of ancient. Rome. "The rich had got possession, of the greater
part of the undivided land. They trusted in the conditions of the time, that these possessions would not be
again taken from them, and bought, therefore, some of the pieces of land lying near theirs, and belonging
to the poor, with the acquiescence of their owners, and took some by force, so that they now were
cultivating widely extended domains, instead of isolated fields. Then they employed slaves in agriculture
and cattle-breeding, because freemen would have been taken from tabour for military service. The
possession of slaves brought them great gain, inasmuch as these, on account of their immunity from
military service, could freely multiply and have a multitude of children. Thus the powerful men drew all
wealth to themselves, and all the land swarmed with slaves. The Italians, on the other hand, were always
decreasing in number, destroyed as they were by poverty, taxes, and military service. Even when times of
peace came, they were doomed to complete inactivity, because the rich were in possession of the soil,
and used slaves instead of freemen in the tilling of it." (Appian: "Civil Wars," 1.7.) This passage refers to
the time before the Licinian rogations. Military service, which hastened to so great an extent the ruin of
the Roman plebeians, was also the chief means by which, as in a forcing-house, Charlemagne brought

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (10 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

about the transformation of free German peasants into serfs and bondsman.

f241 "An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions, &c," pp. 124, 129. To the
like effect, but with an opposite tendency: "Working-men are driven from their cottages and forced into
the towns to seek for employment; but then a larger surplus is obtained, and thus capital is augmented."
("The Perils of the Nation," 2nd ed. London, 1843, p. 14.)

[251 I.e., p. 132.

f261 Steuart says: "If you compare the rent of these lands" (he erroneously includes in this economic
category the tribute of the taskmen to the clanchief) "with the extent, it appears very small. If you
compare it with the numbers fed upon the farm, you will find that an estate in the Highlands maintains,
perhaps, ten times as many people as another of the same value in good and fertile province." (1. c, vol.
i., ch. xvi., p. 104.)

f271 James Anderson: "Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National Industry, &c,"
Edinburgh, 1777.

\2S] In 1860 the people expropriated by force were exported to Canada under false pretences. Some fled
to the mountains and neighbouring islands. They were followed by the police, came to blows with them
and escaped.

f291 "In the Highlands of Scotland," says Buchanan, the commentator on Adam Smith, 1814, "the
ancient state of property is daily subverted.... The landlord, without regard to the hereditary tenant (a
category used in error here), now offers his land to the highest bidder, who, if he is an improver, instantly
adopts a new system of cultivation. The land, formerly overspread with small tenants or labourers, was
peopled in proportion to its produce, but under the new system of improved cultivation and increased
rents, the largest possible produce is obtained at the least possible expense: and the useless hands being,
with this view, removed, the population is reduced, not to what the land will maintain, but to what it will
employ. The dispossessed tenants either seek a subsistence in the neighbouring towns," &c. (David
Buchanan — "Observations on, &c, A. Smith's Wealth of Nations." Edinburgh, 1814, vol. iv., p. 144.)
"The Scotch grandees dispossessed families as they would grub up coppice-wood, and they treated
villages and their people as Indians harassed with wild beasts do, in their vengeance, a jungle with
tigers.... Man is bartered for a fleece or a carcase of mutton, nay, held cheaper.... Why, how much worse
is it than the intention of the Moguls, who, when they had broken into the northern provinces of China,
proposed in council to exterminate the inhabitants, and convert the land into pasture. This proposal many
Highland proprietors have effected in their own country against their own countrymen." (George Ensor:
"An Inquiry Concerning the Population of Nations." Lond,. 1818, pp. 215, 216.)

r301 When the present Duchess of Sutherland entertained Mrs. Beecher Stowe, authoress of "Uncle
Tom's Cabin," with great magnificence in London to show her sympathy for the Negro slaves of the
American republics sympathy that she prudently forgot, with her fellow-aristocrats, during the civil war,
in which every "noble" English heart beat for the slave-owner — I gave in the New York Tribune the
facts about the Sutherland slaves. (Epitomised in part by Carey in "The Slave Trade." Philadelphia, 1853,
pp. 203, 204.) My article was reprinted in a Scotch newspaper, and led to a pretty polemic between the
latter and the sycophants of the Sutherlands.

f3 11 Interesting details on this fish trade will be found in Mr. David Urquhart's Portfolio, series. Nassau

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (11 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

W. Senior, in his posthumous work, already quoted, terms "the proceedings in. Sutherlandshire one of
the most beneficent clearings since the memory of man." (1. c.)

f321 The deer-forests of Scotland contain not a single tree. The sheep are driven from, and then the deer
driven to, the naked hills, and then it is called a deer-forest. Not even timber-planting and real forest
culture.

f331 Robert Somers: "Letters from the Highlands: or the Famine of 1847." London, 1848, pp. 12-28
passim. These letters originally appeared in The Times. The English economists of course explained the
famine of the Gaels in 1847, by their over-population. At all events, they "were pressing on their
food-supply." The "clearing of estates," or as it is called in Germany, "Bauernlegen," occurred in
Germany especially after the 30 years' war, and led to peasant-revolts as late as 1790 in Kursachsen. It
obtained especially in East Germany. In most of the Prussian provinces, Frederick II. for the first time
secured right of property for the peasants. After the conquest of Silesia he forced the landlords to rebuild
the huts, barns, etc., and to provide the peasants with cattle and implements. He wanted soldiers for his
army and tax-payers for his treasury. For the rest, the pleasant life that the t led under Frederick's system
of finance and hodgepodge rule of despotism, bureaucracy and feudalism, may be seen from the
following quotation from his admirer, Mirabeau: "Le lin fait done une des grandes richesses du
cultivateur dans le Nord de I'Allemagne. Malheureusement pour l'espece humaine, ce n'est qu'une
ressource contre la misere et non un moyen de bien-etre. Les impots directs, les corvees, les servitudes de
tout genre, ecrasent le cultivateur allemand, qui paie encore des impots indirects dans tout ce qu'il achete
... et pour comble de mine, il n'ose pas vendre sea productions ou et comme il le veut; it n'ose pas acheter
ce dont it a besoin aux marchands qui pourraieni le lui livrer au meilleur prix. Toutes ces causes le
ruinent insensiblement, et if se trouverait hors d'etat de payer les impots directs a l'echeance sans la
filerie; elle lui offre une ressource, en occupant utilement sa femme, ses enfants, ses servants, ses valets,
et lui-meme; mais quelle penible vie, meme aidee de ce secours. En ete, il travaille comme un forcat au
labourage et a la recolte; il se couche a 9 heures et se leve a deux, pour suffire aux travaux; en hiver il
devrait reparer ses forces par un plus grand repos; mais ii manquera de grains pour le pain et les
semailles, s'il se defait des denrees qu'il faudrait vendre pour payer les impots. II aut done filer pour
suppleer a ce vide .... ii faut y apporter la plus grande assiduite. Aussi le paysan se couche-t-ii en hiver a
minuit, une heure, et se leve a cinq on six; on bien il se couche a neuf, et se leve a deux, et cela tons les
jours de la vie si cc n'est le dimanche. Ces exces de veille et de travail usent la nature humaine, et de la
vien qu'hommes et femmes vieillissent beaucoup plutot dans les campagnes que dans les villes."
(Mirabeau, 1. c, t. III. pp. 212 sqq.)

Note to the second edition. In April 1866, 18 years after the publication of the work of Robert Somers
quoted above, Professor Leone Levi gave a lecture before the Society of Arts on the transformation of
sheep-walks into deer-forest, in which he depicts the advance in the devastation of the Scottish
Highlands. He says, with other things: "Depopulation and transformation into sheep-walks were the most
convenient means for getting an income without expenditure.... A deer-forest in place of a sheep-walk
was a common change in the Highlands. The landowners turned out the sheep as they once turned out the
men from their estates, and welcomed the new tenants-the wild beasts and the feathered birds.... One can
walk from the Earl of Dalhousie's estates in Forfarshire to John o'Groats, without ever leaving forest
land.... In many of these woods the fox, the wild cat, the marten, the polecat, the weasel and the Apline
hare are common; whilst the rabbit, the squirrel and the rat have lately made their way into the country.
Immense tracts of land, much of which is described in the statistical account of Scotland as having a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (12 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Seven

pasturage in richness and extent of very superior description, are thus shut out from all cultivation and
improvement, and are solely devoted to the sport of a few persons for a very brief period of the year. "
The London Economist of June 2, 1866, says, "Amongst the items of news in a Scotch paper of last
week, we read.... 'One of the finest sheep farms in Sutherlandshire, for which a rent of £1,200 a year was
recently offered, on the expiry of the existing lease this year, is to be converted into a deer-forest.' Here
we see the modern instincts of feudalism ... operating pretty much as they did when the Norman
Conqueror ... destroyed 36 villages to create the New Forest.... Two millions of acres ... totally laid
waste, embracing within their area some of the most fertile lands of Scotland. The natural grass of Glen
Tilt was among the most nutritive in the country of Perth. The deer-forest of Ben Aulder was by far the
best grazing ground in the wide district of Badenoch; a part of the Black Mount forest was the best
pasture for black-faced sheep in Scotland. Some idea of the ground laid waste for purely sporting
purposes in Scotland may be formed from the fact that it embraced an area larger than the whole country
of Perth. The resources of the forest of Ben Aulder might give some idea of the loss sustained from the
forced desolations. The ground would pasture 15,000 sheep, and as it was not more than one-thirtieth
part of the old forest ground in Scotland ... it might, &c .... All that forest land is as totally
unproductive.... It might thus as well have been submerged under the waters of the German Ocean....
Such extemporised wildernesses or deserts ought to be put down by the decided interference of the
Legislature."



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Eight: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th
Century. Forcing Down of Wages by Acts of Parliament



Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch27.htm (13 of 13) [23/08/2000 16:19:53]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIM:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT:

BLOODY LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED, FROM THE
END OF THE 15TH CENTURY. FORCING DOWN OF WAGES BY
ACTS OF PARLIAMENT



The proletariat created by the breaking up. of the bands of feudal retainers and by the forcible
expropriation of the people from the soil, this "free" proletariat could not possibly be absorbed by the
nascent manufactures as fast as it was thrown upon the world. On the other hand, these men, suddenly
dragged from their wonted mode of life, could not as suddenly adapt themselves to the discipline of their
new condition. They were turned en masse into beggars, robbers, vagabonds, partly from inclination, in
most cases from stress of circumstances. Hence at the end of the 15th and during the whole of the 16th
century, throughout Western Europe a bloody legislation against vagabondage. The fathers of the present
working-class were chastised for their enforced transformation into vagabonds and paupers. Legislation
treated them as "voluntary" criminals, and assumed that it depended on their own good will to go on
working under the old conditions that no longer existed.

In England this legislation began under Henry VII.

Henry VIII. 1530: Beggars old and unable to work receive a beggar's licence. On the other hand,
whipping and imprisonment for sturdy vagabonds. They are to be tied to the cart-tail and whipped until
the blood streams from their bodies, then to swear an oath to go back to their birthplace or to where they
have lived the last three years and to "put themselves to labour." What grim irony! In 27 Henry VIII. the
former statute is repeated, but strengthened with new clauses. For the second arrest for vagabondage the
whipping is to be repeated and half the ear sliced off; but for the third relapse the offender is to be
executed as a hardened criminal and enemy of the common weal.

Edward VI.: A statute of the first year of his reign, 1547, ordains that if anyone refuses to work, he shall
be condemned as a slave to the person who has denounced him as an idler. The master shall feed his
slave on bread and water, weak broth and such refuse meat as he thinks fit. He has the right to force him
to do any work, no matter how disgusting, with whip and chains. If the slave is absent a fortnight, he is
condemned to slavery for life and is to be branded on forehead or back with the letter S; if he runs away
thrice, he is to be executed as a felon. The master can sell him, bequeath him, let him out on hire as a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (1 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

slave, just as any other personal chattel or cattle. If the slaves attempt anything against the masters, they
are also to be executed. Justices of the peace, on information, are to hunt the rascals down. If it happens
that a vagabond has been idling about for three days, he is to be taken to his birthplace, branded with a
red-hot iron with the letter V on the breast and be set to work, in chains, in the streets or at some other
labour. If the vagabond gives a false birthplace, he is then to become the slave for life of this place, of its
inhabitants, or its corporation, and to be branded with an S. All persons have the right to take away the
children of the vagabonds and to keep them as apprentices, the young men until the 24th year, the girls
until the 20th. If they run away, they are to become up to this age the slaves of their masters, who can put
them in irons, whip them, &c, if they like. Every master may put an iron ring round the neck, arms or
legs of his slave, by which to know him more easily and to be more certain of him. £1} The last part of
this statute provides, that certain poor people may be employed by a place or by persons, who are willing
to give them food and drink and to find them work. This kind of parish-slaves was kept up in England
until far into the 19th century under the name of "roundsmen."

Elizabeth, 1572: Unlicensed beggars above 14 years of age are to be severely flogged and branded on
the left ear unless some one will take them into service for two years; in case of a repetition of the
offence, if they are over 18, they are to be executed, unless some one will take them into service for two
years; but for the third offence they are to be executed without mercy as felons. Similar statutes: 18
Elizabeth, c. 13, and another of 1597. \2]

James 1: Any one wandering about and begging is declared a rogue and a vagabond. Justices of the
peace in petty sessions are authorised to have them publicly whipped and for the first offence to imprison
them for 6 months, for the second for 2 years. Whilst in prison they are to be whipped as much and as
often as the justices of the peace think fit.... Incorrigible and dangerous rogues are to be branded with an
R on the left shoulder and set to hard labour, and if they are caught begging again, to be executed without
mercy. These statutes, legally binding until the beginning of the 18th century, were only repealed by 12
Anne, c. 23.

Similar laws in France, where by the middle of the 17th century a kingdom of vagabonds (truands) was
established in Paris. Even at the beginning of Louis XVI.'s reign (Ordinance of July 13th, 1777) every
man in good health from 16 to 60 years of age, if without means of subsistence and not practising a trade,
is to be sent to the galleys. Of the same nature are the statute of Charles V. for the Netherlands (October,
1537), the first edict of the States and Towns of Holland (March 10, 1614), the "Plakaat" of the United
Provinces (June 26, 1649), &c.

Thus were the agricultural people, first forcibly expropriated from the soil, driven from their homes,
turned into vagabonds, and then whipped, branded, tortured by laws grotesquely terrible, into the
discipline necessary for the wage system

It is not enough that the conditions of labour are concentrated in a mass, in the shape of capital, at the one
pole of society, while at the other are grouped masses of men, who have nothing to sell but their
labour-power. Neither is it enough that they are compelled to sell it voluntarily. The advance of capitalist
production develops a working-class, which by education, tradition, habit, looks upon the conditions of
that mode of production as self-evident laws of Nature. The organisation of the capitalist process of
production, once fully developed, breaks down all, resistance. The constant generation of a relative
surplus-population keeps the law of supply and demand of labour, and therefore keeps wages, in a rut
that corresponds with the wants of capital. The dull compulsion of economic relations completes the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (2 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

subjection of the labourer to the capitalist. Direct force, outside economic conditions, is of course still
used, but only exceptionally. In the ordinary run of things, the labourer can be left to the "natural laws of
production," i.e., to his dependence on capital, a dependence springing from, and guaranteed in
perpetuity by, the conditions of production themselves ' . It is otherwise during the historic genesis of
capitalist production. The bourgeoisie, at its rise, wants and uses the power of the state to "regulate"
wages, i.e., to force them within the limits suitable for surplus-value making, to lengthen the
working-day and to keep the labourer himself in the normal degree of dependence. This is an essential
element of the so-called primitive accumulation.

The class of wage-labourers, which arose in the latter half of the 14th century, formed then and in the
following century only a very small part of the population, well protected in its position by the
independent peasant proprietary in the country and the guild-organisation in the town. In country and
town master and workmen stood close together socially. The subordination of labour to capital was only
formal — i.e., the mode of production itself had as yet no specific capitalistic character. Variable capital
preponderated greatly over constant. The demand for wage-labour grew', therefore, rapidly with every
accumulation of capital, whilst the supply of wage-labour followed but slowly. A large part of the
national product, changed later into a fund of capitalist accumulation, then still entered into the
consumption-fund of the labourer.

Legislation on wage-labour (from the first, aimed at the exploitation of the labourer and, as it advanced,
always equally hostile to him), £31 is started in England by the Statute of Labourers, of Edward III., 1349.
The ordinance of 1350 in France, issued in the name of King John, corresponds with it. English and
French legislation run parallel and are identical in purport. So far as the labour-statutes aim at
compulsory extension of the working-day, I do not return to them, as this point was treated earlier ( Chap.
X., Section 5 ).

The Statute of Labourers was passed at the urgent instance of the House of Commons. A Tory says
naively: " Formerly the poor demanded such high wages as to threaten industry and wealth. Next, their
wages are so low as to threaten industry and wealth equally and perhaps more, but in another way." £4J A
tariff @f wages was fixed by law for town and country, for piece-work and day-work. The agricultural
labourers were to hire themselves out by the year, the town ones "in open market." It was forbidden,
under pain of imprisonment, to pay higher wages than those fixed by the statute, but the taking of higher
wages was more severely punished than the giving them. [So also in Sections 18 and 19 of the Statute of
Apprentices of Elizabeth, ten days' imprisonment is decreed for him that pays the higher wages, but
twenty-one days for him that receives them.] A statute of 1360 increased the penalties and authorised the
masters to extort labour at the legal rate of wages by corporal punishment. All combinations, contracts,
oaths, &c. by which masons and carpenters reciprocally bound themselves, were declared null and void.
Coalition of the labourers is treated as a heinous crime from the 14th century to 1825, the year of the
repeal of the laws against Trades' Unions. The spirit of the Statute of Labourers of 1349 and of its
offshoots, comes out clearly in the fact, that indeed a maximum of wages is dictated by the State, but on
no account a minimum.

In the 16th century, the condition of the labourers had, as we know, become much worse. The money
wage rose, but not in proportion to the depreciation of money and the corresponding rise in the prices of
commodities. Wages, therefore, in reality fell. Nevertheless, the laws for keeping them down remained in
force, together with the ear-clipping and branding of those "whom no one was willing to take into
service." By the Statute of Apprentices 5 Elizabeth, c. 3, the justices of the peace were empowered to fix

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (3 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

certain wages and to modify them according to the time of the year and the price of commodities. James
1. extended these regulations of labour also to weavers, spinners, and all possible categories of workers.
[51 George II. extended the laws against coalitions of labourers to manufacturers. In the manufacturing
period par excellence, the capitalist mode of production had become sufficiently strong to render legal
regulation of wages as impracticable as it was unnecessary; but the ruling classes were unwilling in case
of necessity to be without the weapons of the old arsenal. Still, 8 George II. forbade a higher day's wage
than 2s. 7 l/2d. for journeymen tailors in and around London, except in cases of general mourning; still,
13 George 111., c. 68, gave the regulation of the wages of silk-weavers to the justices of the peace; still, in
1706, it required two judgments of the higher courts to decide, whether the mandates of justices of the
peace as to wages held good also for non-agricultural labourers; still, in 1799, an act of Parliament
ordered that the wages of the Scotch miners should continue to be regulated by a statute of Elizabeth and
two Scotch acts of 1661 and 1671. How completely in the meantime circumstances had changed, is
proved by an occurrence unheard-of before in the English Lower House. In that place, where for more
than 400 years laws had been made for the maximum, beyond which wages absolutely must not rise,
Whitbread in 1796 proposed a legal minimum wage for agricultural labourers. Pitt opposed this, but
confessed that the "condition of the poor was cruel." Finally, in 1813, the laws for the regulation of
wages were repealed. They were an absurd anomaly, since the capitalist regulated his factory by his
private legislation,, and could by the poor-rates make up the wage of the agricultural labourer to the
indispensable minimum. The provisions of the labour statutes as to contracts between master and
workman, as to giving notice and the like, which only allow of a civil action against the
contract-breaking master, but on the contrary permit a criminal action against the contract-breaking
workman, are to this hour (1873) in full force. The barbarous laws against Trades' Unions fell, in 1825
before the threatening bearing of the proletariat. Despite this, they fell only in part. Certain beautiful
fragments of the old statute vanished only in 1859. Finally, the act of Parliament of June 29, 1871, made
a pretence of removing the last traces of this class of legislation by legal recognition of Trades' Unions.
But an act of Parliament of the same date (an act to amend the criminal law relating to violence, threats,
and molestation), re-established, in point of fact, the former state of things in a new shape. By this
Parliamentary escamotage the means which the labourers could use in a strike or lock-out were
withdrawn from the laws common to all citizens, and placed under exceptional penal legislation, the
interpretation of which fell to the masters themselves in their capacity as justices of the peace. Two years
earlier, the same House of Commons and the same Mr. Gladstone in the well-known straightforward
fashion brought in a bill for the abolition of all exceptional penal legislation against the working-class.
But this was never allowed to go beyond the second reading, and the matter was thus protracted until at
last the "great Liberal 'party," by an alliance with the Tories, found courage to turn against the very
proletariat that had carried it into power. Not content with this treachery, the "great Liberal party"
allowed the English judges, ever complaisant in the service of the ruling classes, to dig up again the
earlier laws against "conspiracy," and to apply them to coalitions of labourers. We see that only against
its will and under the pressure of the masses did the English Parliament give up the laws against Strikes
and Trades' Unions, after it had itself, for 500 years, held, with shameless egoism, the position of a
permanent Trades' Union of the capitalists against the labourers.

During the very first storms of the revolution, the French bourgeoisie dared to take away from the
workers the right of association but just acquired. By a decree of June 14, 1791, they declared all
coalition of the workers as "an attempt against liberty and the declaration of the rights of man,"
punishable by a fine of 500 livres, together with deprivation of the rights of an active citizen for one year.
[61 This law which, by means of State compulsion, confined the struggle between capital and labour

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (4 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

within limits comfortable for capital, has outlived revolutions and changes of dynasties. Even the Reign
of Terror left it untouched. It was but quite recently struck out of the Penal Code. Nothing is more
characteristic than the pretext for this bourgeois coup d'etat. "Granting," says Chapelier, the reporter of
the Select Committee on this law, "that wages ought to be a little higher than they are, ... that they ought
to be high enough for him that receives them, to be free from that state of absolute dependence due to the
want of the necessaries of life, and which is almost that of slavery," yet the workers must not be allowed
to come to any understanding about their own interests, nor to act in common and thereby lessen their
"absolute dependence, which is almost that of slavery;" because, forsooth, in doing this they injure "the
freedom of their cidevant masters, the present entrepreneurs," and because a coalition against the
despotism of the quondam masters of the corporations is — guess what! — is a restoration of the
corporations abolished by the French constitution. ]T[



Footnotes

JT[ The author of the "Essay on Trade, etc.," 1770, says, "In the reign of Edward VI. indeed the English
seem to have set, in good earnest, about encouraging manufactures and employing the poor. This we
learn from a remarkable statute which runs thus: 'That all vagrants shall be branded, &c...'" 1. c, p. 5.

\2] Thomas More says in his "Utopia": "Therfore that on covetous and unsatiable cormaraunte and very
plage of his native contrey maye compasse aboute and inclose many thousand akers of grounde together
within one pale or hedge, the husbandman be thrust owte of their owne, or els either by coneyne and
fraude, or by violent oppression they be put besydes it, or by wrongs and iniuries they be so weried that
they be compelled to sell all: by one meanes, therfore, or by other, either by hooke or crooke they muste
needes departe awaye, poore, selye, wretched soules, men, women, husbands, wiues, fatherlesse children,
widowes, wofull mothers with their yonge babes, and their whole households smal in substance, and
muche in numbre, as husbandrye requireth many handes, Awaye thei trudge, I say, owte of their knowen
accustomed houses, fyndynge no place to reste in. All their housholde stuffe, which is very little woorthe,
thoughe it might well abide the sale: yet beeynge sodainely thruste owte, they be constrayned to sell it for
a thing of nought. And when they haue wandered abrode tyll that be spent, what cant they then els doe
but steale, and then iustly pardy be hanged, or els go about beggyng. And yet then also they be caste in
prison as vagaboundes, because they go aboute and worke not: whom no man wyl set a worke though
thei neuer so willyngly profre themselues therto."

Of these poor fugitives of whom Thomas More says that they were forced to thieve, "7,200 great and
petty thieves were put to death," in the reign of Henry VIII. (Holinshed, "Description of England," Vol.
1, p. 186.) In Elizabeth's time, "rogues were trussed up apace, and that there was not one year commonly
wherein three or four hundred were not devoured and eaten up by the gallowes." (Strype's "Annals of the
Reformation and Establishment of Religion and other Various Occurrences in the Church of England
during Queen Elizabeth's Happy Reign." Second ed., 1725, Vol. 2.)

According to this same Strype, in Somersetshire, in one year, 40 persons were executed, 35 robbers burnt
in the hand, 37 whipped, and 183 discharged as "incottigible vagabonds." Nevertheless, he is of opinion
that this large number of prisoners does not comprise even a fifth of the actual criminals, thanks to the
negligence of the justices and the foolish compassion of the people; and the other counties of England



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (5 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Eigth

were not better off in this respect than Somersetshire, while some were even worse.

[3] "Whenever the legislature attempts to regulate the differences between masters and their workmen, its
counsellors are always the masters," says A. Smith. "L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete." says Linguet.

\4] "Sophisms of Free Trade." By a Barrister. Lond., 1850, p. 206. He adds maliciously: "We were ready
enough to interfere for the employer, can nothing now be done for the employed?"

\5] From a clause of Statute 2 James I., c. 6, we see that certain clothmakers took upon themselves to
dictate, in their capacity of justices of the peace, the official tariff of wages in their own shops. In
Germany, especially after the Thirty Years' War, statutes for keeping down wages were general. "The
want of servants and labourers was very troublesome to the landed proprietors in the depopulated
districts. All villagers were forbidden to let rooms to single men and women; all the latter were to be
reported to the authorities and cast into prison if they were unwilling to become servants, even if they
were employed at any other work, such as sowing seeds for the peasants at a daily wage, or even buying
and selling corn. (Imperial privileges and sanctions for Silesia, I., 25.) For a whole century in the decrees
of the small German potentates a bitter cry goes up attain and again about the wicked and impertinent
mbble that will not reconcile itself to its hard lot, will not be content with the legal wage; the individual
landed proprietors are forbidden to pay more than the State had fixed by a tariff. And yet the conditions
of service were at times better after war than 100 years later; the farm servants of Silesia had, in 1652,
meat twice a week, whilst even in our century, districts are known where they have it only three times a
year. Further, wages after the war were higher than in the following century." (G. Freytag.)

[61 Article I. of this law runs: "L'aneantissement de toute esp&e de corporations du meme etat et
profession etant l'une des bases fondamentales de la constitution francaise, ii est defendu de les retablir
de fait sous quelque pretexte et sous quelque forme que ce soit." Article IV. declares, that if "des citoyens
attaches aux memes professions, arts et metiers prenaient des deliberations, faisaient entre eux des
conventions tendantes i refuser de concert ou a n'accorder qu'a un prix determine le secours de leur
industrie ou de leurs travaux, les dites deliberations et conventions... seront declarees
inconstitutionnelles, attentatoires a la liberte et a la declaration des droits de I'homme, &c"; felony,
therefore, as in the old labour-statutes. ("Revolutions de Paris," Paris, 1791, t. Ill, p. 523.)

[71 Buchez et Roux: — "Histoire Parlementaire," t. x., p. 195.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twenty-Nine: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch28.htm (6 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:19:57]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Nine

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIII:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE:

GENESIS OF THE CAPITALIST FARMER



Now that we have considered the forcible creation of a class of outlawed proletarians, the bloody
discipline that turned them into wage-laborers, the disgraceful action of the State which employed the
police to accelerate the accumulation of capital by increasing the degree of exploitation of labor, the
question remains: whence came the capitalists originally? For the expropriation of the agricultural
population creates, directly, none but the greatest landed proprietors. As far, however, as concerns the
genesis of the farmer, we can, so to say, put our hand on it, because it is a slow process evolving through
many centuries. The serfs, as well as the free small proprietors, held land under very different tenures,
and were therefore emancipated under very different economic conditions. In England the first form of
the farmer is the bailiff, himself a serf. His position is similar to that of the old Roman villicus, only in a
more limited sphere of action. During the second half of the 14th century he is replaced by a farmer,
whom the landlord provided with seed, cattle and implements. His condition is not very different from
that of the peasant. Only he exploits more wage-labor. Soon he becomes a metayer, a half-farmer. He
advances one part of the agricultural stock, the landlord the other. The two divide the total product in
proportions determined by contract. This form quickly disappears in England, to give the place to the
farmer proper, who makes his own capital breed by employing wage-laborers, and pays a part of the
surplus-product, in money or in kind, to the landlord as rent. So long, during the 15th century, as the
independent peasant and the farm-laborer working for himself as well as for wages, enriched themselves
by their own labor, the circumstances of the farmer, and his field of production, were equally mediocre.
The agricultural revolution which commenced in the last third of the 15 th century, and continued during
almost the whole of the 16th (excepting, however, its last decade), enriched him just as speedily as it
impoverished the mass of the agricultural people. £1}

The usurpation of the common lands allowed him to augment greatly his stock of cattle, almost without
cost, whilst they yielded him a richer supply of manure for the tillage of the soil. To this was added in the
16th century a very important element. At that time the contracts for farms ran for a long time, often for
99 years. The progressive fall in the value of the precious metals, and therefore of money, brought the
farmers golden fruit. Apart from all the other circumstances discussed above, it lowered wages. A portion
of the latter was now added to the profits of the farm. The continuous rise in the price of corn, wool,
meat, in a word of all agricultural produce, swelled the money capital of the farm without any action on

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch29.htm (1 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:59]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Nine

his part, whilst the rent he paid (being calculated on the old value of money) diminished in reality. [2]
Thus they grew rich at the expense both of their laborers and their landlords. No wonder, therefore, that
England, at the end of the 16th century, had a class of capitalist farmers, rich, considering the
circumstances of the time. [3]



Footnotes

T 1 1 Harrison in his "Description of England", says "although peradventure foure pounds of old rent be
improved to fortie, toward the end of his term, if he have not six or seven yeares rent lieng by him, fiftie
or a hundred pounds, yet will the farmer thinke his gaines verie small."

[21 On the influence of the depreciation of money in the 16th century, on the different classes of society,
see "A Compendium of Briefe Examination of Certayne Ordinary Complaints of Divers of our
Countrymen in these our Days", by W. S. Gentleman (London 1581). The dialogue form of this work led
people for a long time to ascribe it to Shakespeare, and even in 1751, it was published under his name. Its
author is William Stafford. In one place the knight reasons as follows: Knight: You, my neighbor, the
husbandman, you Maister Mercer, and you Goodman Cooper, with other artificers, may save yourselves
metely well. For as much as all things are dearer than they were, so much do you arise in the pryce of
your wares and occupations that ye sell agayne. But we have nothing to sell whereby we might advance
ye price there of, to countervaile those things that we must buy agayne." In another place, the knight asks
the doctor: I pray you, what be those sorts that ye meane. And first, of those that ye thinke should have
no losse thereby? Doctor: I mean all those that live by buying and selling, for as they buy deare, the sell
thereafter. Knight: What is the next sort that ye say would win by it? Doctor: Marry, all such as have
takings of fearmes in their owne manurance [cultivation] at the old rent, for where they pay after the olde
rate they sell after the newe — that is, they paye for theire lande good cheape, and sell all things growing
thereof deare. Knight: What sorte is that which, ye sayde should have greater losse hereby, than these
men had profit? Doctor: It is all noblemen, gentlemen, and all other that live either by a stinted rent or
stypend, or do not manure [cultivate] the ground, or doe occupy no buying and selling."

[3] In France, the regisseur, steward, collector of dues for the feudal lords during the earlier part of the
middle ages, soon became an homme d'affaires, who by extortion, cheating, &c, swindled himself into a
capitalist. These regisseurs themselves were sometimes noblemen. E.g., "C'est li compte que messire
Jacques de Thoraine, chevalier chastelain sor Besancon rent es-seigneur tenant les comptes a Dijon pour
monseigneur le due et comte de Bourgoigne, des rentes appartenant a la dite chastellenie, depuis xxve
jour de decembre MCCCLIX jusqu'au xxviiie jour de decembre MCCCLX." (Alexis Monteil: "Traite de
Materiaux Manuscrits etc.", pp. 234, 235.) Already it is evident here how in all spheres of social life the
lion's share falls to the middleman. In the economic domain, e.g., financiers, stock-exchange speculators,
merchants, shopkeepers skim the cream; in civil matters, the lawyer fleeces his clients; in politics the
representative is of more importance than the voters, the minister than the sovereign; in religion, God is
pushed into the background by the "Mediator", and the latter again is shoved back by the priests, the
inevitable middlemen between the good shepherd and his sheep. In France, as in England, the great
feudal territories were divided into innumerable small homesteads, but under conditions incomparably
more favorable for the people. During the 14th century arose the farms or terriers. Their number grew
constantly, far beyond 100,000. They paid rents varying from 1/12 to 1/5 of the product in money or in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch29.htm (2 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:59]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twenty-Nine

kind. These farms were fiefs, sub-fiefs, &c., according the value and extent of the domains, many of
them only containing a few acres. But these farmers had rights of jurisdiction in some degree over the
dwellers on the soil; there were four grades. The oppression of the agricultural population under all these
petty tyrants will be understood. Monteil says that there were once in France 160,000 judges, where
today, 4,000 tribunals, including justices of the peace, suffice.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirty: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market
for Industrial Capital



Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch29.htm (3 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:19:59]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIM:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER THIRTY:

REACTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION ON INDUSTRY.

CREATION OF THE HOME-MARKET FOR INDUSTRIAL CAPITAL



The expropriation and expulsion of the agricultural population, intermittent but renewed again and again,
supplied, as we saw, the town industries with a mass of proletarians entirely connected with the corporate
guilds and unfettered by them; a fortunate circumstance that makes old A. Anderson (not to be
confounded with James Anderson), in his "History of Commerce", believe in the direct intervention of
Providence. We must still pause a moment on this element of primitive accumulation. The thinning-out
of the independent, self-supporting peasants not only brought about the crowding together of the
industrial proletariat, in the way that Geoffrey Saint Hilaire explained the condensation of cosmical
matter at one place, by its rarefaction at another. JJJ In spite of the smaller number of its cultivators, the
soil brought forth as much or more produce, after as before, because the revolution in the conditions of
landed property was accompanied by improved methods of culture, greater co-operation, concentration
of the means of production, &c, and because not only were the agricultural wage-laborers put on the
strain more intensely [21, but the field of production on which they worked for themselves became more
and more contracted. With the setting free of a part of the agricultural population, therefore, their former
means of nourishment were also set free. They were now transformed into material elements of variable
capital. The peasant, expropriated and cast adrift, must buy their value in the form of wages, from his
new master, the industrial capitalist, that which holds good of the means of subsistence holds with the
raw materials of industry dependent upon home agriculture. They were transformed into an element of
constant capital. Suppose, e.g., a part of the Westphalian peasants, who, at the time of Frederick II, all
span flax, forcibly expropriated and hunted from the soil; and the other part that remained, turned into
day-laborers of large farmers. At the same time arise large establishments for flax-spinning and weaving,
in which the men "set free" now work for wages. The flax looks exactly as before. Not a fibre of it is
changed, but a new social soul has popped into its body. It forms now a part of the constant capital of the
master manufacturer. Formerly divided among a number of small producers, who cultivated it
themselves and with their families spun it in retail fashion, it is now concentrated in the hand of one
capitalist, who sets others to spin and weave it for him. The extra labor expended in flax-spinning
realized itself formerly in extra income to numerous peasant families, or maybe, in Frederick II's time, in
taxes pour le roi de Prusse. It realizes itself now in profit for a few capitalists, the spindles and looms,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch30.htm (1 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:20:02]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty

formerly scattered over the face of the country, are now crowded together in a few great labor-barracks,
together with the laborers and the raw material. And spindles, looms, raw material, are now transformed
from means of independent existence for the spinners and weavers, into means for commanding them
and sucking out of them unpaid labor. [3] One does not perceive, when looking at the large
manufactories and the large farms, that they have originated from the throwing into one of many small
centres of production, and have been built up by the expropriation of many small independent producers.
Nevertheless, the popular intuition was not at fault. In the time of Mirabeau, the lion of the Revolution,
the great manufactories were still called manufactures reunies, workshops thrown into one, as we speak
of field thrown into one. Says Mirabeau: "We are only paying attention to the grand manufactories, in
which hundreds of men work under a director and which are commonly called manufactures reunies.
Those where a very large number of laborers work, each separately and on his own account, are hardly
considered; they are placed at an infinite distance from the others. This is a great error, as the latter alone
make a really important object of national prosperity.... The large workshop (manufacture reunie) will
enrich prodigiously one or two entrepreneurs, but the laborers will only be journeymen, paid more or
less, and will not have any share in the success of the undertaking. In the discrete workshop (manufacture
separee), on the contrary, no one will become rich, but many laborers will be comfortable; the saving and
the industrious will be able to amass a little capital, to put by a little for a birth of a child, for an illness,
for themselves or their belongings. The number of saving and industrious laborers will increase, because
they will see in good conduct, in activity, a means of essentially bettering their condition, and not of
obtaining a small rise in wages that can never be of any importance of the future, and whose sole result is
to place men in the position to live a little better, but only from day to day.... The large workshops,
undertakings of certain private persons who pay laborers from day to day to work for their gain, may be
able to put these private individuals at their ease, but they will never be an object worth the attention of
governments. Discrete workshops, for the most part combined with cultivation of small holdings, are the
only free ones." [41 The expropriation and eviction of a part of the agricultural population not only set
free for industrial capital, the laborers, their means of subsistence, and material for labor; it also created
the home-market.

In fact, the events that transformed the small peasants into wage-laborers, and their means of subsistence
and of labor into material elements of capital, created, at the same time, a home-market for the latter.
Formerly, the peasant family produced the means of subsistence and the raw materials, which they
themselves, for the most part, consumed. These raw materials and means of subsistence have now
become commodities; the large farmer sells them, he finds his market in manufactures. Yarn, inen,
coarse woollen stuffs — things whose raw materials had been within the reach of every peasant family,
had been spun and woven by it for its own use — were now transformed into articles of manufacture, to
which the country districts at once served for markets. The many scattered customers, whom stray
artisans until now had found in the numerous small producers working on their own account, concentrate
themselves now into one great market provided for by industrial capital. [51 Thus, hand in hand with the
expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, with their separation from their means of production, goes
the destruction of rural domestic industry, the process of separation between manufacture and
agriculture. And only the destruction of rural domestic industry can give the internal market of country
that extension and consistence which the capitalist mode of production requires. Still the manufacturing
period, properly so called, does not succeed in carrying out this transformation radically and completely.
It will be remembered that manufacture, properly so called, conquers but partially the domain of national
production, and always rests on the handicrafts of the town and the domestic industry of the rural districts
as its ultimate basis. If it destroys these in one form, in particular branches, at certain points, it calls them

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch30.htm (2 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:20:02]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty

up again elsewhere, because it needs them for the preparation of raw material up to a certain point. It
produces, therefore, a new class of small villagers who, while following the cultivation of the soil as an
accessary calling, find their chief occupation in industrial labor, the products of which they sell to the
manufacturers directly, or through the medium of merchants. This is one, though not the chief, cause of a
phenomenon which, at first, puzzles the student of english history .[6] From the last third of the 15th
century he finds continually complaints, only interrupted at certain intervals, about the encroachment of
capitalist farming in the country districts, and the progressive destruction of the peasantry. On the other
hand, he always finds this peasantry turning up again, although in diminished number, and always under
worse conditions. The chief reason is: England is at one time chiefly a cultivator of corn, at another
chiefly a breeder of cattle, in alternate periods, and with these the extent, supplies, in machinery, the
lasting basis of capitalistic agriculture, expropriates radically the enormous majority of the agricultural
population, and completes the separation between agriculture and rural domestic industry, whose roots
— spinning and weaving — it tears up. £71 It therefore also, for the first tie, conquers for industrial
capital the entire home-market. £8£



Footnotes

m In his "Notions de Philosophic Naturelle". Paris, 1838.

[21 A point that Sir James Steuart emphasizes.

[3J "Je permettrai," says the capitalist, "que vous ayez l'honneur de me servir, a condition que vous me
donnez le peu qui vous la peine que je prends de vous commander." (J. J. Rousseau: "Discours sur
l'Economie Politique.")

[41 Mirabeau, I.e., till, pp.20- 109 passim. That Mirabeau considers the separate workshops more
economical and productive than the "combined", and sees in the latter merely artificial exotics under
government cultivation, is explained by the position at that time of a great part of the continental
manufactures.

[51 "Twenty pounds of wool converted unobtrusively into yearly clothing of a laborer's family by its own
industry in the intervals of other works — this makes no show; but bring it to market, send it to the
factory, thence to the broker, thence to the dealer, and you will have great commercial operations, and
nominal capital engaged to the amount of twenty times its value.... The working-class is thus emersed to
support a wretched factory population, a parastical shop-keeping class, and a fictitious commercial,
monetary, and financial system." (David Urquhart, I.e., p. 120.)

[61 Cromwell's time forms an exception. So long as the Republic lasted, the mass of the English people
of all grades rose from the degradation into which they had sunk under the Tudors.

[71 Tuckett is aware that the modern woollen industry has sprung, with the introduction of machinery,
from manufacture proper and from the destruction of rural and domestic industries.

"The plough, the yoke, were 'the invention of gods, and the occupation of heroes'; are the loom, the
spindle, the distaff, of less noble parentage. You sever the distaff and the plough, the spindle and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch30.htm (3 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:20:02]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty

the yoke, and you get factories and poor-houses, credit and panics, two hostile nations, agriculture
and commercial." (David Urquhart, I.e., p. 122.)

But now comes Carey, and cries out upon England, surely not with unreason, that it is trying to turn
every other country into a mere agricultural nation, whose manufacturer is to be England. He pretends
that in this way Turkey has been ruined, because "the owners and occupants of land have never been
permitted by England to strengthen themselves by the formation of that natural alliance between the
plough and the loom, the hammer and the harrow." ("The Slave Trade", p. 125.) According to him,
Urquhart himself is one of the chief agents in the ruin of Turkey, where he had made Free-trade
propaganda in the English interest. The best of it is that Carey, a great Russophile by the way, wants to
prevent the process of separation by that very system of protection which accelerates it.

\S] Philanthropic English economists, like Mill, Rogers, Goldwin Smith, Fawcett, &c, and liberal
manufacturers like John Bright & Co., ask the English landed proprietors, as God asked Cain after Abel,
Where are our thousands of freeholders gone? But where do you come from, then? From the destruction
of those freeholders. Why don't you ask further, where are the independent weavers, spinners, and
artisans gone?



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirty-One: Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch30.htm (4 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:20:02]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIII:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE:

GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST



The genesis of the industrial £1} capitalist did not proceed in such a gradual way as that of the farmer.
Doubtless many small guild-masters, and yet more independent small artisans, or even wage-labourers,
transformed themselves into small capitalists, and (by gradually extending exploitation of wage-labour
and corresponding accumulation) into full-blown capitalists. In the infancy of capitalist production,
things often happened as in the infancy of medieval towns, where the question, which of the escaped
serfs should be master and which servant, was in great part decided by the earlier or later date of their
flight. The snail's pace of this method corresponded in no wise with the commercial requirements of the
new world-market that the great discoveries of the end of the 15th century created. But the middle ages
had handed down two distinct forms of capital, which mature in the most different economic social
formations, and which before the era of the capitalist mode of production, are considered as capital quand
meme — usurer's capital and merchant's capital.

"At present, all the wealth of society goes first into the possession of the capitalist ... he pays the
landowner his rent, the labourer his wages, the tax and tithe gatherer their claims, and keeps a large,
indeed the largest, and a continually augmenting share, of the annual produce of labour for himself. The
capitalist may now be said to be the first owner of all the wealth of the community, though no law has
conferred on him the right to this property... this change has been effected by the taking of interest on
capital ... and it is not a little curious that all the law-givers of Europe endeavoured to prevent this by
statutes, viz., statutes against usury.... The power of the capitalist over all the wealth of the country is a
complete change in the right of property, and by what law, or series of laws, was it effected?" [2J The
author should have remembered that revolutions are not made by laws.

The money capital formed by means of usury and commerce was prevented from turning into industrial
capital, in the country by the feudal constitution, in the towns by the guild organisation. [3] These fetters
vanished with the dissolution of feudal society, with the expropriation and partial eviction of the country
population. The new manufactures were established at Weapons, or at inland points beyond the control
of the old municipalities and their guilds. Hence in England an embittered struggle of the corporate
towns against these new industrial nurseries.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of
the aboriginal population, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of
Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of
capitalist production. These idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of primitive accumulation. On
their heels treads the commercial war of the European nations, with the globe for a theatre. It begins with
the revolt of the Netherlands from Spain, assumes giant dimensions in England's Anti-Jacobin War, and
is still going on in the opium wars against China, &c.

The different momenta of primitive accumulation distribute themselves now, more or less in
chronological order, particularly over Spain, Portugal, Holland, France, and England. In England at the
end of the 17th century, they arrive at a systematical combination, embracing the colonies, the national
debt, the modern mode of taxation, and the protectionist system. These methods depend in part on brute
force, e.g., the colonial system. But, they all employ the power of the State, the concentrated and
organised force of society, to hasten, hot-house fashion, the process of transformation of the feudal mode
of production into the capitalist mode, and to shorten the transition. Force is the midwife of every old
society pregnant with a new one. It is itself an economic power.

Of the Christian colonial system, W. Howitt, a man who makes a speciality of Christianity, says: "The
barbarities and desperate outrages of the so-called Christian race, throughout every region of the world,
and upon every people they have been able to subdue, are not to be paralleled by those of any other race,
however fierce, however untaught, and however reckless of mercy and of shame, in any age of the earth."
\4] The history of the colonial administration of Holland — and Holland was the head capitalistic nation
of the 17th century — "is one of the most extraordinary relations of treachery, bribery, massacre, and
meanness" [5] Nothing is more characteristic than their system of stealing men, to get slaves for Java.
The men stealers were trained for this purpose. The thief, the interpreter, and the seller, were the chief
agents in this trade, native princes the chief sellers. The young people stolen, were thrown into the secret
dungeons of Celebes, until they were ready for sending to the slave-ships. An official report says: "This
one town of Macassar, e.g., is full of secret prisons, one more horrible than the other, crammed with
unfortunates, victims of greed and tyranny fettered in chains, forcibly torn from their families." To secure
Malacca, the Dutch corrupted the Portuguese governor. He let them into the town in 1641. They hurried
at once to his house and assassinated him, to "abstain" from the payment of £21,875, the price of his
treason. Wherever they set foot, devastation and depopulation followed. Banjuwangi, a province of Java,
in 1750 numbered over 80,000 inhabitants, in 1811 only 18,000. Sweet commerce!

The English East India Company, as is well known, obtained, besides the political rule in India, the
exclusive monopoly of the tea-trade, as well as of the Chinese trade in general, and of the transport of
goods to and from Europe. But the coasting trade of India and between the islands, as well as the internal
trade of India, were the monopoly of the higher employes of the company. The monopolies of salt,
opium, betel and other commodities, were inexhaustible mines of wealth. The employes themselves fixed
the price and plundered at will the unhappy Hindus. The Governor-General took part in this private
traffic. His favourites received contracts under conditions whereby they, cleverer than the alchemists,
made gold out of nothing. Great fortunes sprang up like mushrooms in a day; primitive accumulation
went on without the advance of a shilling. The trial of Warren Hastings swarms with such cases. Here is
an instance. A contract for opium was given to a certain Sullivan at the moment of his departure on an
official mission to a part of India far removed from the opium district. Sullivan sold his contract to one
Binn for £40,000; Binn sold it the same day for £60,000, and the ultimate purchaser who carried out the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

contract declared that after all he realised an enormous gain. According to one of the lists laid before
Parliament, the Company and its employes from 1757-1766 got £6,000,000 from the Indians as gifts.
Between 1769 and 1770, the English manufactured a famine by buying up all the rice and refusing to sell
it again, except at fabulous prices. \6]

The treatment of the aborigines was, naturally, most frightful in plantation-colonies destined for export
trade only, such as the West Indies, and in rich and well-populated countries, such as Mexico and India,
that were given over to plunder. But even in the colonies properly so called, the Christian character of
primitive accumulation did not belie itself. Those sober virtuosi of Protestantism, the Puritans of New
England, in 1703, by decrees of their assembly set a premium of £40 on every Indian scalp and every
captured red-skin: in 1720 a premium of £100 on every scalp; in 1744, after Massachusetts-Bay had
proclaimed a certain tribe as rebels, the following prices: for a male scalp of 12 years and upwards £100
(new currency), for a male prisoner £105, for women and children prisoners £50, for scalps of women
and children £50. Some decades later, the colonial system took its revenge on the descendants of the
pious pilgrim fathers, who had grown seditious in the meantime. At English instigation and for English
pay they were tomahawked by red-skins. The British Parliament proclaimed bloodhounds and scalping as
"means that God and Nature had given into its hand."

The colonial system ripened, like a hot-house, trade and navigation. The "societies Monopolia" of Luther
were powerful levers for concentration of capital. The colonies secured a market for the budding
manufactures, and, through the monopoly of the market, an increased accumulation. The treasures
captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, enslavement, and murder, floated back to the
mother-country and were there turned into capital. Holland, which first fully developed the colonial
system, in 1648 stood already in the acme of its commercial greatness. It was "in almost exclusive
possession of the East Indian trade and the commerce between the south-east and north-west of Europe.
Its fisheries, marine, manufactures, surpassed those of any other country. The total capital of the
Republic was probably more important than that of all the rest of Europe put together." Giilich forgets to
add that by 1648, the people of Holland were more over-worked, poorer and more brutally oppressed
than those of all the rest of Europe put together.

To-day industrial supremacy implies commercial supremacy. In the period of manufacture properly so
called, it is, on the other hand, the commercial supremacy that gives industrial predominance. Hence the
preponderant role that the colonial system plays at that time. It was "the strange God" who perched
himself on the altar cheek by jowl with the old Gods of Europe, and one fine day with a shove and a kick
chucked them all of a heap. It proclaimed surplus-value making as the sole end and aim of humanity.

The system of public credit, i.e., of national debts, whose origin we discover in Genoa and Venice as
early as the middle ages, took possession of Europe generally during the manufacturing period. The
colonial system with its maritime trade and commercial wars served as a forcing-house for it. Thus it first
took root in Holland. National debts, i.e., the alienation of the state- whether despotic, constitutional or
republican-marked with its stamp the capitalistic era. The only part of the so-called national wealth that
actually enters into the collective possessions of modern peoples is their national debt. J7] Hence, as a
necessary consequence, the modern doctrine that a nation becomes the richer the more deeply it is in
debt. Public credit becomes the credo of capital. And with the rise of national debt-making, want of faith
in the national debt takes the place of the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which may not be forgiven.

The public debt becomes one of the most powerful levers of primitive accumulation. As with the stroke



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

of an enchanter's wand, it endows barren money with the power of breeding and thus turns it into capital,
without the necessity of its exposing itself to the troubles and risks inseparable from its employment in
industry or even in usury. The state-creditors actually give nothing away, for the sum lent is transformed
into public bonds, easily negotiable, which go on functioning in their hands just as so much hard cash
would. But further, apart from the class of lazy annuitants thus created, and from the improvised wealth
of the financiers, middlemen between the government and the nation-as also apart from the tax-farmers,
merchants, private manufacturers, to whom a good part of every national loan renders the service of a
capital fallen from heaven-the national debt has given rise to joint-stock companies, to dealings in
negotiable effects of all kinds, and to agiotage, in a word to stock-exchange gambling and the modern
bankocracy.

At their birth the great banks, decorated with national titles, were only associations of private speculators,
who placed themselves by the side of governments, and, thanks to the privileges they received, were in a
position to advance money to the State. Hence the accumulation of the national debt has no more
infallible measure than the successive rise in the stock of these banks, whose full development dates from
the founding of the Bank of England in 1694. The Bank of England began with lending its money to the
Government at 8%; at the same time it was empowered by Parliament to coin money out of the same
capital, by lending it again to the public in the form of banknotes. It was allowed to use these notes for
discounting bills, making advances on commodities, and for buying the precious metals. It was not long
ere this credit-money, made by the bank itself, became, the coin in which the Bank of England made its
loans to the State, and paid, on account of the State, the interest on the public debt. It was not enough that
the bank gave with one hand and took back more with the other; it remained, even whilst receiving, the
eternal creditor of the nation down to the last shilling advanced. Gradually it became inevitably the
receptacle of the metallic hoard of the country, and the centre of gravity of all commercial credit. What
effect was produced on their contemporaries by the sudden uprising of this brood of bankocrats,
financiers, rentiers, brokers, stock-jobbers, &c, is proved by the writings of that time, e.g., by
Bolingbroke's. £8}

With the national debt arose an international credit system, which often conceals one of the sources of
primitive accumulation in this or that people. Thus the villainies of the Venetian thieving system formed
one of the secret bases of the capital-wealth of Holland to whom Venice in her decadence lent large sums
of money. So also was it with Holland and England. By the beginning of the 18th century the Dutch
manufactures were far outstripped. Holland had ceased to be the nation preponderant in commerce and
industry. One of its main lines of business, therefore, from 1701-1776, is the lending out of enormous
amounts of capital, especially to its great rival England. The same thing is going on to-day between
England and the United States. A great deal of capital, which appears to-day in the United States without
any certificate of birth, was yesterday, in England, the capitalised blood of children.

As the national debt finds its support in the public revenue, which must cover the yearly payments for
interest, &c, the modern system of taxation was the necessary complement of the system of national
loans. The loans enable the government to meet extraordinary expenses, without the tax-payers feeling it
immediately, but they necessitate, as. a consequence, increased taxes. On the other hand, the raising of
taxation caused by the accumulation of debts contracted one after another, compels the government
always to have recourse to new loans for new extraordinary expenses. Modern fiscality, whose pivot is
formed by taxes on the most necessary means of subsistence (thereby increasing their price), thus
contains within itself the germ of automatic progression. Over-taxation is not an incident, but rather a
principle. In Holland, therefore, where this system was first inaugurated, the great patriot, DeWitt, has in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

his "Maxims" extolled it as the best system for making the wage-labourer submissive, frugal, industrious,
and overburdened with labour. The destructive influence that it exercises on the condition of the
wage-labourer concerns us less however, here, than the forcible expropriation, resulting from it, of
peasants, artisans, and in a word, all elements of the lower middle-class. On this there are not two
opinions, even among the bourgeois economists. Its expropriating efficacy is still further heightened by
the system of protection, which forms one of its integral parts.

The great part that the public debt, and the fiscal system corresponding with it, has played in the
capitalisation of wealth and the expropriation of the masses, has led many writers, like Cobbett,
Doubleday and others, to seek in this, incorrectly, the fundamental cause of the misery of the modern
peoples.

The system of protection was an artificial means of manufacturing manufacturers, of expropriating
independent labourers, of capitalising the national means of production and subsistence, of forcibly
abbreviating the transition from the medieval to the modern mode of production. The European states
tore one another to pieces about the patent of this invention, and, once entered into the service of the
surplus-value makers, did not merely lay under contribution in the pursuit of this purpose their own
people, indirectly through protective duties, directly through export premiums. They also forcibly rooted
out, in their dependent countries, all industry, as, e.g., England did. with the Irish woollen manufacture.
On the continent of Europe, after Colbert's example, the process was much simplified. The primitive
industrial capital, here, came in part directly out of the state treasury. "Why," cries Mirabeau, "why go so
far to seek the cause of the manufacturing glory of Saxony before the war? 180,000,000 of debts
contracted by the sovereigns!" [9]

Colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, commercial wars, &c, these children of the true
manufacturing period, increase gigantically during the infancy of Modem Industry. The birth of the latter
is heralded by a great slaughter of the innocents. Like the royal navy, the factories were recruited by
means of the press-gang. Blase as Sir F. M. Eden is as to the horrors of the expropriation of the
agricultural population from the soil, from the last third of the 15th century to his own time; with all the
self-satisfaction with which he rejoices in this process, "essential" for establishing capitalistic agriculture
and "the due proportion between arable and pasture land" — he does not show, however, the same
economic insight in respect to the necessity of child-stealing and child-slavery for the transformation of
manufacturing exploitation into factory exploitation, and the establishment of the "true relation" between
capital and labour-power. He says: "It may, perhaps, be worthy the attention of the public to consider,
whether any manufacture, which, in order to be carried on successfully, requires that cottages and
workhouses should be ransacked for poor children; that they should be employed by turns during the
greater part of the night and robbed of that rest which, though indispensable to all, is most required by
the young; and that numbers of both sexes, of different ages and dispositions, should be collected
together in such a manner that the contagion of example cannot but lead to profligacy and debauchery;
will add to the sum of individual or national felicity?" flOl

"In the counties of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and more particularly in Lancashire," says Fielden, "the
newly-invented machinery was used in large factories built on the sides of streams capable of turning the
water-wheel. Thousands of hands were suddenly required in these places, remote from towns; and
Lancashire, in particular, being, till then, comparatively thinly populated and barren, a population was all
that she now wanted. The small and nimble fingers of little children being by very far the most in
request, the custom instantly sprang up of procuring apprentices from the different parish workhouses of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

London, Birmingham, and elsewhere. Many, many thousands of these little, hapless creatures were sent
down into the north, being from the age of 7 to the age of 13 or 14 years old. The custom was for the
master to clothe his apprentices and to feed and lodge them in an "apprentice house" near the factory;
overseers were appointed to see to the works, whose interest it was to work the children to the utmost,
because their pay was in proportion to the quantity of work that they could exact. Cruelty was, of course,
the consequence. ... In many of the manufacturing districts, but particularly, I am afraid, in the guilty
county to which I belong [Lancashire], cruelties the most heart-rending were practised upon the
unoffending and friendless creatures who were thus consigned to the charge of master-manufacturers;
they were harassed to the brink of death by excess of labour ... were flogged, fettered and tortured in the
most exquisite refinement of cruelty; ... they were in many cases starved to the bone while flogged to
their work and ... even in some instances ... were driven to commit suicide.... The beautiful and romantic
valleys of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Lancashire, secluded from the public eye, became the dismal
solitudes of torture, and of many a murder. The profits of manufacturers were enormous; but this only
whetted the appetite that it should have satisfied, and therefore the manufacturers had recourse to an
expedient that seemed to secure to them those profits without any possibility of limit; they began the
practice of what is termed "night-working," that is, having tired one set of hands, by working them
throughout the day, they had another set ready to go on working throughout the night; the day-set getting
into the beds that the night-set had just quilted, and in their turn again, the night-set getting into the beds
that the day-set quilted in the morning. It is a common tradition in Lancashire, that the beds never get
cold."

With the development of capitalist production during the manufacturing period, the public opinion of
Europe had lost the last remnant of shame and conscience. The nations bragged cynically of every
infamy that served them as a means to capitalistic accumulation. Read, e.g., the naive Annals of
Commerce of the worthy A. Anderson. Here it is trumpeted forth as a triumph of English statecraft that at
the Peace of Utrecht, England extorted from the Spaniards by the Asiento Treaty the privilege of being
allowed to ply the negro-trade, until then only carried on between Africa and the English West Indies,
between Africa and Spanish America as well. England thereby acquired the right of supplying Spanish
America until 1743 with 4,800 negroes yearly. This threw, at the same time, an official cloak over British
smuggling. Liverpool waxed fat on the slave-trade. This was its method of primitive accumulation. And,
even to the present day, Liverpool "respectability" is the Pindar of the slave-trade which — compare the
work of Aikin [1795] already quoted — "has coincided with that spirit of bold adventure which has
characterised the trade of Liverpool and rapidly carried it to its present state of prosperity; has occasioned
vast employment for shipping and sailors, and greatly augmented the demand for the manufactures of the
country" (p. 339). Liverpool employed in the slave-trade, in 1730, 15 ships; in 1751, 53; in 1760, 74; in
1770, 96; and in 1792, 132. f 121

Whilst the cotton industry introduced child-slavery in England, it gave in the United States a stimulus to
the transformation of the earlier, more or less patriarchal slavery, into a system of commercial
exploitation. In fact, the veiled slavery of the wage-workers in Europe needed, for its pedestal, slavery
pure and simple in the new world. '

Tantae molis erat, to establish the "eternal laws of Nature" of the capitalist mode of production, to
complete the process of separation between labourers and conditions of labour, to transform, at one
pole, the social means of production and subsistence into capital, at the opposite pole, the mass of the
population into wage-labourers, into "free labouring poor, " that artificial product of modern society.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

[13] If money, According to Augier, [14] "comes into the world with a congenita] Mood- stain on one
cheek, " capita] comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with Mood and dirt. [15]



Footnotes

[21 Industrial here in contradistinction to agricuUural In the "categoric" sense the farmer is an
industrial capitalist as much as the manufacturer.

[2] "The Natura] and Artificial Rights of Property Contrasted. " Lond., 1832, pp. 98-99. Author of the
anonymous work: "Th. Hodgskin. "

[3] Even as ]ate as 1 794, the smaU cloth-makers of Leeds sent a deputation to Parliament, with a petition
for a law to forbid any merchant from becoming a manufacturer. (Dr. Aikin, I. c.)

[4] William Howitt: "Colonisation and Christianity: A Popular History of the Treatment of the Natives
by the Europeans in all their Colonies. " London, 1838, p. 9. On the treatment of the slaves there is a
good compilation in Charles Comte, "Traite de la Legislation. " 3me ed. Bruxelles, 1837. This subject one
must study in detail, to see what the bourgeoisie makes of itself and of the labourer, wherever it can,
without restraint, model the world after its own image.

[51 Thomas Stamford Raffles, late Lieut-Gov. of that island: "The History of Java, "Lond., 1817.

[61 In the year 1866 more than a million Hindus died of hunger in the province of Orissa alone.
Nevertheless, the attempt was made to enrich the Indian treasury by the price at which the necessaries of
life were sold to the starving people.

[7] William Cobbett remarks that in England all public institutions are designated "royal"; as
compensation for this, however, there is the "national" debt.

[81 "Si les Tartares inondaient I'Europe aujourd'hui, ilfaudrait Men des affaires pour leurfaire entendre
ce que c'est qu'un financier parmi nous. " Montesquieu, "Esprit des lois, " t. iv., p. 33, ed. Londres, 1769.

[91 Mirabeau, I. c, t. vi., p. 101.

[101 Eden, I. c, Vol. I, Book II, Ch. 1., p. 421.

[Ill John Fielden, I. c, pp. 5, 6. On the earlier infamies of the factory system, cf Dr. Aikin (I 795), I. c,
p. 219. and Gisbome: "Enquiry into the Duties of Men, " 1795 Vol. II When the steam-engine
transplanted the factories from the country waterfalls to the middle of towns, the "abstemious"
surplus-value maker found the child-material ready to his hand, without being forced to seek slaves from
the workhouses. When Sir R. Peel (father of the "minister of plausibility"), brought in his bill for the
protection of children, in 1815, Francis Homer, lumen of the Billion Committee and intimate friend of
Ricardo, said in the House of Commons: "It is notorious, that with a bankrupt's effects, a gang, if he
might use the word, of these children had been put up to sale, and were advertised publicly as part of the
property. A most atrocious instance had been brought before the Court of King's Bench two years before,
in which a number of these boys, apprenticed by a parish in London to one manufacturer, had been

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-One

transferred to another, and had been found by some benevolent persons in a state of absolute famine.
Another case more horrible had come to his knowledge while on a [Parliamentary] Committee ... that
not many years ago, an agreement had been made between a London parish and a Lancashire
manufacturer, by which it was stipulated, that with every 20 sound children one idiot should be taken. "

[121 In 1790, there were in the English West Indies ten slaves for one free man, in the French fourteen

for one, in the Dutch twenty-three for one. (Henry Brougham: "An Inquiry into the Colonial Policy of the
European Powers. " Edin. 1803, vol. II., p. 74.)

[131 The phrase, "labouring poor, " is found in English legislation from the moment when the class of
wage-labourers becomes noticeable. This term is used in opposition, on the one hand, to the "idle poor, "
beggars, etc., on the other to those labourers, who, pigeons not yet plucked, are still possessors of their
own means of labour. From the Statute Book it passed into Political Economy, and was handed down by
Culpeper, J. Child, etc., to Adam Smith and Eden. After this, one can judge of the good faith of the
"execrable political cant-monger, " Edmund Burke, when he called the expression, "labouring poor, " —
"execrable political cant. " This sycophant who, in the pay of the English oligarchy, played the romantic
laudator temporis acti against the French Revolution, just as, in the pay of the North American Colonies,
at the beginning of the American troubles, he had played the Liberal against the English oligarchy, was
an out and out vulgar bourgeois. "The laws of commerce are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws
of God. " (E. Burke, I. c, pp. 31, 32.) No wonder that, true to the laws of God and of Nature, he always
sold himself in the best market. A very good portrait of this Edmund Burke, during his liberal time, is to
be found in the writings of the Rev. Mr. Tucker. Tucker was a parson and a Tory, but, for the rest, an
honourable man and a competent political economist. In face of the infamous cowardice of character
that reigns to-day, and believes most devoutly in "the laws of commerce, " it is our bounden duty again
and again to brand the Burkes, who only differ from their successors in one thing — talent.

[141 Marie Angier: "T>u Credit Public." Paris, 1842.

[151 "Capital is said by a Quarterly Reviewer to fly turbulence and strife, and to be timid, which is very
true; but this is very incompletely stating the question. Capital eschews no profit, or very small profit,
just as Nature was formerly said to abhor a vacuum. With adequate profit, capital is very bold. A certain
10 per cent, will ensure its employment anywhere; 20 per cent, certain will produce eagerness; 50 per
cent., positive audacity; 100 per cent, will make it ready to trample on all human laws; 300 per cent.,
and there is not a crime at which it will scruple, nor a risk it will not run, even to the chance of its owner
being hanged. If turbulence and strife will bring a profit, it will freely encourage both. Smuggling and
the slave-trade have amply proved all that is here stated. " (T J. Dunning, I. c, pp. 35, 36.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirty-Two: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch31.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:20:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty Two

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIII:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO:

HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION



What does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.e., its historical genesis, resolve itself into? In so far as
it is not immediate transformation of slaves and serfs into wage-laborers, and therefore a mere change of
form, it only means the expropriation of the immediate producers, i.e., the dissolution of private property
based on the labor of its owner. Private property, as the antithesis to social, collective property, exists
only where the means of labor and the external conditions of labor belong to private individuals. But
according as these private individuals are laborers or not laborers, private property has a different
character. The numberless shades, that it at first sight presents, correspond to the intermediate stages
lying between these two extremes. The private property of the laborer in his means of production is the
foundation of petty industry, whether agricultural, manufacturing, or both; petty industry, again, is an
essential condition for the development of social production and of the free individuality of the laborer
himself. Of course, this petty mode of production exists also under slavery, serfdom, and other states of
dependence. But it flourishes, it lets loose its whole energy, it attains its adequate classical form, only
where the laborer is the private owner of his own means of labor set in action by himself: the peasant of
the land which he cultivates, the artisan of the tool which he handles as a virtuoso. This mode of
production pre-supposes parcelling of the soil and scattering of the other means of production. As it
excludes the concentration of these means of production, so also it excludes co-operation, division of
labor within each separate process of production, the control over, and the productive application of the
forces of Nature by society, and the free development of the social productive powers. It is compatible
only with a system of production, and a society, moving within narrow and more or less primitive
bounds. To perpetuate it would be, as Pecqueur rightly says, "to decree universal mediocrity". At a
certain stage of development, it brings forth the material agencies for its own dissolution. From that
moment new forces and new passions spring up in the bosom of society; but the old social organization
fetters them and keeps them down. It must be annihilated; it is annihilated. Its annihilation, the
transformation of the individualized and scattered means of production into socially concentrated ones,
of the pigmy property of the many into the huge property of the few, the expropriation of the great mass
of the people from the soil, from the means of subsistence, and from the means of labor, this fearful and
painful expropriation of the mass of the people forms the prelude to the history of capital. It comprises a
series of forcible methods, of which we have passed in review only those that have been epoch-making
as methods of the primitive accumulation of capital. The expropriation of the immediate producers was

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch32.htm (1 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:20:09]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty Two

accomplished with merciless Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most infamous, the most
sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odious. Self-earned private property, that is based, so to say, on the
fusing together of the isolated, independent laboring-individual with the conditions of his labor, is
supplanted by capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally free labor of
others, i.e., on wage-labor. JJJ

As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently decomposed the old society from top to
bottom, as soon as the laborers are turned into proletarians, their means of labor into capital, as soon as
the capitalist mode of production stands on its own feet, then the further socialization of labor and further
transformation of the land and other means of production into socially exploited and, therefore, common
means of production, as well as the further expropriation of private proprietors, takes a new form. That
which is now to be expropriated is no longer the laborer working for himself, but the capitalist exploiting
many laborers. This expropriation is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalistic
production itself, by the centralization of capital. One capitalist always kills many. Hand in hand with
this centralization, or this expropriation of many capitalists by few, develop, on an ever-extending scale,
the co-operative form of the labor-process, the conscious technical application of science, the methodical
cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the instruments of labor into instruments of labor only usable
in common, the economizing of all means of production by their use as means of production of
combined, socialized labor, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world-market, and with this,
the international character of the capitalistic regime. Along with the constantly diminishing number of
the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolize all advantages of this process of transformation,
grows the mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with this too grows the
revolt of the working-class, a class always increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organized by
the very mechanism of the process of capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital becomes a
fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and under it.
Centralization of the means of production and socialization of labor at last reach a point where they
become incompatible with their capitalist integument. Thus integument is burst asunder. The knell of
capitalist private property sounds. The expropriators are expropriated.

The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capitalist mode of production, produces capitalist
private property. This is the first negation of individual private property, as founded on the labor of the
proprietor. But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. It
is the negation of negation. This does not re-establish private property for the producer, but gives him
individual property based on the acquisition of the capitalist era: i.e., on co-operation and the possession
in common of the land and of the means of production.

The transformation of scattered private property, arising from individual labor, into capitalist private
property is, naturally, a process, incomparably more protracted, violent, and difficult, than the
transformation of capitalistic private property, already practically resting on socialized production, into
socialized property. In the former case, we had the expropriation of the mass of the people by a few
usurpers; in the latter, we have the expropriation of a few usurpers by the mass of the people. \2]



Footnotes



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch32.htm (2 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:20:09]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty Two

T 1 1 "Nous sommes dans une condition tout-a-fait nouvelle de la societe... nous tendons a separer toute
espece de propriete d'avec toute espece de travail." (Sismondi: "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Polit." t.II,
p.434.)

\2] The advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the
laborers, due to competition, by their revolutionary combination, due to association. The development of
Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie
produces and appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above all, are its own
grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.... Of all the classes that
stand face-to-face with the bourgeoisie today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The
other classes perish and disappear in the face of Modern Industry, the proletariat is its special and
essential product.... The lower middle-classes, the small manufacturers, the shopkeepers, the artisan, the
peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as fractions of the
middle-class... they are reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei", London, 1848, pp. 9, 11.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Thirty-Three: The Modern Theory of Colonisation
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch32.htm (3 of 3) [23/08/2000 16:20:09]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VIM:

Primative Accumulation



CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE:

THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION



III



Political economy confuses on principle two very different kinds of private property, of which one rests
on the producers' own labor, the other on the employment of the labor of others. It forgets that the latter
not only is the direct antithesis of the former, but absolutely grows on its tomb only. In Western Europe,
the home of Political Economy, the process of primitive accumulation is more of less accomplished.
Here the capitalist regime has either directly conquered the whole domain of national production, or,
where economic conditions are less developed, it, at least, indirectly controls those strata of society
which, though belonging to the antiquated mode of production, continue to exist side by side with it in
gradual decay. To this ready-made world of capital, the political economist applies the notions of law and
of property inherited from a pre-capitalistic world with all the more anxious zeal and all the greater
unction, the more loudly the facts cry out in the face of his ideology. It is otherwise in the colonies. There
the capitalist regime everywhere comes into collision with the resistance of the producer, who, as owner
of his own conditions of labor, employs that labor to enrich himself, instead of the capitalist. The
contradiction of these two diametrically opposed economic systems, manifest itself here practically in a
struggle between them. Where the capitalist has at his back the power of the mother-country, he tries to
clear out of his way by force the modes of production and appropriation based on the independent labor
of the producer. The same interest, which compels the sycophant of capital, the political economist, in
the mother-country, to proclaim the theoretical identity of the capitalist mode of production with its
contrary, that same interest compels him in the colonies to make a clean breast of it, and to proclaim
aloud the antagonism of the two modes of production. To this end, he proves how the development of the
social productive power of labor, co-operation, division of labor, use of machinery on a large scale, &c,
are impossible without the expropriation of the laborers, and the corresponding transformation of their
means of production into capital. In the interest of the so-called national wealth, he seeks for artificial
means to ensure the poverty of the people. Here his apologetic armor crumbles off, bit by bit, like rotten
touchwood. It is the great merit of E.G. Wakefield to have discovered, not anything new about the
Colonies [2]_, but to have discovered in the Colonies the truth as to the conditions of capitalist production
in the mother country. As the system of protection at its origin £3} attempted to manufacture capitalists
artificially in the mother-country, so Wakefield's colonization theory, which England tried for a time to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

enforce by Acts of Parliament, attempted to effect the manufacture of wage-workers in the Colonies.
This he calls "systematic colonization".

First of all, Wakefield discovered that in the Colonies, proper means of subsistence, machines, and other
means of production, does not as yet stamp a man as a capitalist if there be wanting the correlative — the
wage-worker, the other man who is compelled to sell himself of his own free-will. He discovered that
capital is not a thing, but a social relation between persons, established by the instrumentality of things.
\4] Mr. Peel, he moans, took him from England to Swan River, West Australia, means of subsistence and
of production to the amount of £50,000. Mr. Peel had the foresight to bring with him, besides, 3,000
persons of the working-class, men, women, and children. Once arrived at his destination, "Mr. Peel was
left without a servant to make his bed or fetch him water from the river." [51 Unhappy Mr. Peel who
provided for everything except the export of English modes of production to Swan River!

For the understanding of the following discoveries of Wakefield, two preliminary remarks: We know that
the means of production and subsistence, while they remain the property of the immediate producer, are
not capital. They become capital only under circumstances in which they serve at the same time as means
of exploitation and subjection of the laborer. But this capitalist soul of theirs is so intimately wedded, in
the head of the political economist, to their material substance, that he christens them capital under all
circumstances, even when they are its exact opposite. Thus is it with Wakefield. Further: the splitting up
of the means of production into the individual property of many independent laborers, working on their
own account, he calls equal division of capital. It is with the political economist as with the feudal jurist.
The latter stuck on to pure monetary relations the labels supplied by feudal law.

"If," says Wakefield, "all members of the society are supposed to possess equal portions of capital... no
man would have a motive for accumulating more capital than he could use with his own hands. This is to
some extent the case in new American settlements, where a passion for owning land prevents the
existence of a class of laborers for hire." [61 So long, therefore, as the laborer can accumulate for himself
— and this he can do so long as he remains possessor of his means of production — capitalist
accumulation and the capitalistic mode of production are impossible. The class of wage-laborers,
essential to these, is wanting. How, then, in old Europe, was the expropriation of the laborer from his
conditions of labor, i.e., the co-existence of capital and wage-labor, brought about? By a social contract
of a quite original kind. "Mankind have adopted a... simple contrivance for promoting the accumulation
of capital," which, of course, since the time of Adam, floated in their imagination, floated in their
imagination as the sole and final end of their existence: "they have divided themselves into owners of
capital and owners of labor.... The division was the result of concert and combination." [71 In one word:
the mass of mankind expropriated itself in honor of the "accumulation of capital". Now, one would think
that this instinct of self-denying fanaticism would give itself full fling especially in the Colonies, where
alone exist the men and conditions that could turn a social contract from a dream to a reality. But why,
then, should "systematic colonization" be called in to replace its opposite, spontaneous, unregulated
colonization? But - but- "In the Northern States of the American Union; it may be doubted whether so
many as a tenth of the people would fall under the description of hired laborers.... In England... the
laboring class compose the bulk of the people." [81 Nay, the impulse to self-expropriation on the part of
laboring humanity for the glory of capital, exists so little that slavery, according to Wakefield himself, is
the sole natural basis of Colonial wealth. His systematic colonization is a mere pis aller, since he
unfortunately has to do with free men, not with slaves. "The first Spanish settlers in Saint Domingo did
not obtain laborers from Spain. But, without laborers, their capital must have perished, or at least, must



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

soon have been diminished to that small amount which each individual could employ with his own
hands. This has actually occurred in the last Colony founded by England — the Swan River Settlement
— where a great mass of capital, of seeds, implements, and cattle, has perished for want of laborers to
use it, and where no settler has preserved much more capital than he can employ with his own hands." [9]

We have seen that the expropriation of the mass of the people from the soil forms the basis of the
capitalist mode of production. The essence of a free colony, on the contrary, consists in this — that the
bulk of the soil is still public property, and every settler on it therefore can turn part of it into his private
property and individual means of production, without hindering the later settlers in the same
operation, f 101 This is the secret both of the prosperity of the colonies and of their inveterate vice —
opposition to the establishment of capital. "Where land is very cheap and all men are free, where every
one who so pleases can easily obtain a piece of land for himself, not only is labor very dear, as respects
the laborer's share of the produce, but the difficulty is to obtain combined labor at any price." fill

As in the colonies the separation of the laborer from the conditions of labor and their root, the soil, does
not exist, or only sporadically, or on too limited a scale, so neither does the separation of agriculture from
industry exist, not the destruction of the household industry of the peasantry. Whence then is to come the
internal market for capital? "No part of the population of America is exclusively agricultural, excepting
slaves and their employers who combine capital and labor in particular works. Free Americans, who
cultivate the soil, follow many other occupations. Some portion of the furniture and tools which they use
is commonly made by themselves. They frequently build their own houses, and carry to market, at
whatever distance, the produce of their own industry. They are spinners and weavers; they make soap
and candles, as well as, in many cases, shoes and clothes for their own use. In America the cultivation of
land is often the secondary pursuit of a blacksmith, a miller or a shopkeeper." f!21 With such queer
people as these, where is the "field of abstinence" for the capitalists?

The great beauty of capitalist production consists in this — that it not only constantly reproduces the
wage-worker as wage-worker, but produces always, in production to the accumulation of capital, a
relative surplus-population of wage-workers. Thus the law of supply and demand of labor is kept in the
right rut, the oscillation of wages is penned within limits satisfactory to capitalist exploitation, and lastly,
the social dependence of the laborer on the capitalist, that indispensable requisite, is secured; an
unmistakable relation of dependence, which the smug political economist, at home, in the
mother-country, can transmogrify into one of free contract between buyer and seller, between equally
independent owners of commodities, the owner of the commodity capital and the owner of the
commodity labor. But in the colonies, this pretty fancy is torn asunder. The absolute population here
increases much more quickly than in the mother-country, because many laborers enter this world as
ready-made adults, and yet the labor-market is always understocked. The law of supply and demand of
labor falls to pieces. On the one hand, the old world constantly throws in capital, thirsting after
exploitation and "abstinence"; on the other, the regular reproduction of the wage-laborer as wage-laborer
comes into collision with impediments the most impertinent and in part invincible. What becomes of the
production of wage-laborers into independent producers, who work for themselves instead of for capital,
and enrich themselves instead of the capitalist gentry, reacts in its turn very perversely on the conditions
of the labor-market. Not only does the degree of exploitation of the wage-laborer remain indecently low.
The wage-laborer loses into the bargain, along with the relation of dependence, also the sentiment of
dependence on the abstemious capitalist. Hence all the inconveniences that our E. G. Wakefield pictures
so doughtily, so eloquently, so pathetically. The supply of wage-labor, he complains, is neither constant,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

nor regular, nor sufficient. "The supply of labor is always not only small but uncertain." f 131 "Though the
produce divided between the capitalist and the laborer be large, the laborer takes so great a share that he
soon becomes a capitalist.... Few, even those whose lives are unusually long, can accumulate great
masses of wealth." f!41 The laborers most distinctly decline to allow the capitalist to abstain from the
payment of the greater part of their labor. It avails him nothing, is he is so cunning as to import from
Europe, with his own capital, his own wage-workers. They soon "cease... to be laborers for hire; they...
become independent landowners, if not competitors with their former masters in the labor-market." |T51
Think of the horror! The excellent capitalist has imported bodily from Europe, with his own good money,
his own competitors ! The end of the world has come ! No wonder Wakefield laments the absence of all
dependence and of all sentiment of dependence on the part of the wage-workers in the colonies. On
account of the high wages, says his disciple, Merivale, there is in the colonies "the urgent desire for
cheaper and more subservient laborers — for a class to whom the capitalist might dictate terms, instead
of being dictated to by them.... In ancient civilized countries the laborer, though free, is by a law of
Nature dependent on capitalists; in colonies this dependence must be created by artificial means." f!61

What is now, according to Wakefield, the consequence of this unfortunate state of things in the colonies?
A "barbarising tendency of dispersion" of producers and national wealth. \ 171 The parcelling-out of the
means of production among innumerable owners, working on their own account, annihilates, along with
the centralization of capital, all the foundation of combined labor. Every long-winded undertaking,
extending over several years and demanding outlay of fixed capital, is prevented from being carried out.
In Europe, capital invests without hesitating a moment, for the working-class constitutes its living
appurtennce, always in excess, always at disposal. But in the colonies! Wakefield tells and extremely
doleful anecdote. He was talking with some capitalists of Canada and the state of New York, where the
immigrant wave often becomes stagnant and deposits a sediment of "supernumerary" laborers. "Our
capital," says one of the characters in the melodrama, "was ready for many operations which require a
considerable period of time for their completion; but we could not begin such operations with labor
which, we knew, would soon leave us. If we had been sure of retraining the labor of such emigrants, we
should have been glad to have engaged it at once, and for a high price: and we should have engaged it,
even though we had been sure it would leave us, provided we had been sure of a fresh supply whenever
we might need it." |T81

After Wakefield has constructed the English capitalist agriculture and its "combined" labor with the
scattered cultivation of American peasants, he unwittingly gives us a glimpse at the reverse of the medal.
He depicts the mass of the American people as well-to-do, independent, enterprising, and comparatively
cultured, whilst "the English agricultural laborer is miserable wretch, a pauper.... In what country, except
North America and some new colonies, do the wages of free labor employed in agriculture much exceed
a bare subsistence for the laborer? ... Undoubtedly , farm-horses in England, being a valuable property,
are better fed than English peasants." |191 But, never mind, national wealth is, once again, by its very
nature, identical with misery of the people.

How, then, to heal the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colonies? If men were willing, at a blow, to turn all
the soil from public into private property, they would destroy certainly the root of the evil, but also — the
colonies. The trick is how to kill two birds with one stone. Let the Government put upon the virgin soil
an artificial price, independent of the law of supply and demand, a price that compels the immigrant to
work a long time for wages before he can earn enough money to buy land, and turn himself into an
independent peasant. T201 The fund resulting from the sale of land at a price relatively prohibitory for the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

wage-workers, this fund of money extorted from the wages of labor by violation of the sacred law of
supply and demand, the Government is to employ, on the other hand, in proportion as it grows; to import
have-nothings from Europe into the colonies, and thus keep the wage-labor market full for the capitalists.
Under these circumstances, tout sera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles. This is the
great secret of "systematic colonization". By this plan, Wakefield cries in triumph, "the supply of labor
must be constant and regular, because, first, as no laborer would be able to procure land until he had
worked for money, all immigrant laborers, working for a time for wages and in combination, would
produce capital for the employment of more laborers; secondly, because every laborer who left off
working for wages and became a landowner would, by purchasing land, provide a fund for bringing fresh
labor to the colony." f211 The price of the soil imposed by the State must, of course, be a "sufficient
price" — i.e., so high "as to prevent the laborers from becoming independent landowners until others had
followed to take their place." f221 This "sufficient price for the land" is nothing but a euphemistic
circumlocution for the ransom which the laborer pays to the capitalist for leave to retire from the
wage-labor market to the land. First, he must create for the capitalist "capital", with which the latter may
be able to exploit more laborers; then he must place, at his own expense, a locum tenens on the
labor-market, whom the Government forwards across the sea for the benefit of his old master, the
capitalist.

It is very characteristic that the English Government for years practised this method of "primitive
accumulation" prescribed by Mr. Wakefield expressly for the use of the colonies. The fiasco was, of
course, as complete as that of Sir Robert Peel's Bank Act. The stream of emigration was only diverted
from the English colonies to the Untied States. Meanwhile, the advance of capitalistic production in
Europe, accompanied by increasing Government pressure, has rendered Wakefield's recipe superfluous.
On the one hand, the enormous and ceaseless stream of men, year after year driven upon America, leaves
behind a stationary sediment in the east of the United States, the wave of immigration from Europe
throwing men on the labor-market there more rapidly than the wave of emigration westwards can wash
them away. On the other hand, the American Civil War brought in its train a colossal national debt, and,
with it, pressure of taxes, the rise of the vilest financial aristocracy, the squandering of a huge part of the
public land on speculative companies for the exploitation of railways, mines, &c, in brief, the most rapid
centralization of capital. The great republic has, therefore, ceased to be the promised land for emigrant
laborers. Capitalistic production advances there with giant strides, even though the lowering of wages
and the dependence of the wage-worker are yet far from being brought down to the normal European
level. The shameless lavishing of uncultivated colonial land on aristocrats and capitalists by the
Government, so loudly denounced even by Wakefield, has produced, especially in Australia [23] , in
conjunction with the stream of men that the gold-diggings attract, and with the competition that the
importation of English-commodities causes even to the smallest artisan, an ample "relative surplus
laboring population", so that almost every mail brings the Job's news of a "glut of the Australia
labor-market", and the prostitution in some places flourishes as wantonly as in the London Hey market.

However, we are not concerned here with the conditions of the colonies. The only thing that interests us
is the secret discovered in the new world by the Political Economy of the old world, and proclaimed on
the housetops: that the capitalist mode of production and accumulation, and therefore capitalist private
property, have for their fundamental condition the annihilation of self-earned private property; in other
words, the expropriation of the laborer.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

Footnotes

T 1 1 We treat here of real Colonies, virgins soils, colonized by free immigrants. The United States are,
speaking economically, still only a Colony of Europe. Besides, to this category belong such old
plantations as those in which the abolition of slavery has completely altered the earlier conditions.

[21 Wakefield's few glimpses on the subject of Modern Colonization are fully anticipated by Mirabeau
Pere, the physiocrat, and even much earlier by English economists.

\3] Later, it became a temporary necessity in the international competititve struggle. But, whatever its
motive, the consequences remain the same.

\4] "A negro is a negro. In certain circumstances he becomes a slave. A mule is a machine for spinning
cotton. Only under certain circumstances does it become capital. Outside these circumstances, it is no
more capital than gold is intrinsically money, or sugar is the price of sugar.... Capital is a social relation
of production. It is a historical relation of production." (Karl Marx, "Lohnarbeit und Kapital", N. Rh. Z.,
No.266, April 7, 1849.)

[51 E. G. Wakefield: "England and America", vol.ii. p. 33.

[61 I.e., p. 17.

[71 I.e., vol.i, p.18.

[81 I.e., pp.42, 43, 44.

[9J I.e., vol.ii, p.5.

f 101 "Land, to be an element of colonization, must not only be waste, but it must be public property,
liable to be converted into private property." (I.e., Vol.ii, p. 125.)

[Ill l.c, Vol.1, p.247.

[12J I.e., pp.21, 22.

[131 I.e., Vol.ii, p. 11 6.

T141 I.e., Vol.1, p.131.

[151 I.e., Vol.ii, p.5.

fl61 Merivale, I.e., Vol.ii, pp.235-314 passim. Even the mild, Free-trade, vulgar economist, Molinari,
says: "Dans les colonies ou l'esclavage a ete aboli sans que le travail force se trouvait remplace par une
quantite equivalente de travail libre, on a vu s'operer la contre-partie du fait qui se realise tous les jours
sous nos yeux. On a vu les simples travailleurs exploiter a leur tour les entrepreneurs d'industrie, exiger
d'eux des salaires hors de toute proportion avec la part legitime qui leur revenait dans le produit. Les
planteurs, ne pouvant obtenir de leurs sucres un prix suffisant pour couvrir la hausse de salaire, ont ete
obliges de fournir l'excedant, d'abord sur leurs profits, ensuite sur leurs capitaux memes. Une foule de



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Thirty-Three

planteurs ont ete mines de la sorte, d'autres ont ferme leurs ateliers our echapper a une ruine
imminente.... Sans doute, il vaut mieux voir perir des accumulations de capitaux que das generations
d'hommes [how generous Mr. Molinari!]: mais ne vaudrait-il pas mieux que ni les uns ni les autres
perissent? (Molinari, I.e., pp.5 1,52.) Mr. Molinari, Mr. Molinari! What then becomes of the ten
commandments, of Moses and the prophets, of the law of supply and demand, if in Europe the
"entrepreneur" can cut down the laborer's legitimate part, and in the West Indies, the laborer can cut
down the entrepreneur's? And what, if you please, is this "legitimate part", which on your own showing
the capitalist in Europe daily neglects to pay? Over yonder, in the colonies where the laborers are so
"simple" as to "exploit" the capitalist, Mr. Molinari feels a strong itching to set the law of supply and
demand, that works elsewhere automatically, on the right road by means of the police.

ri71 Wakefield, I.e., Vol.11, p.52.

£181 I.e., pp.191, 192.

£191 l.c, Vol.1, p.47, 246.

r201 "C'est, ajoutez-vous, grace a l'appropriation du sol et des capitaux que l'homme, qui n'a que ses bras,
trouve de l'occupation et se fait un revenu... c'est au contraire, grace a l'appropriation individuelle du sol
qu'il se trouve des hommes n'ayant que leurs bras.... Quand vous mettez un homme dans le vide, vous
vous emparez de l'atmosphere. Ainsi faites-vous, quand vous vous emparez du sol.... C'est le mettre dans
le vide de richesses, pour ne la laisser vivre qu'a votre volonte."

(Collins, l.c. t.III, pp.268-71, passim.)

£211 Wakefield, 1-C Vol.11, p. 192.

£22] I.e., p.45.

f231 As soon as Australia became her own law-giver, she passed, of course, laws favorable to the settlers,
but the squandering of the land, already accomplished by the English Government, stands in the way.
"The first and main object at which new Land Act of 1862 aims is to give increased facilities for the
settlement of the people." ("The Land Law of Victoria", by the Hon. C. G. Duffy, Minister of Public
Lands, Lond., 1862.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

The End

Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch33.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:20:14]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Full Contents Listing
CAPITAL

COMPLETE TABLE OF CONTENTS



PREFACES AND AFTERWORDS

1867: Dedication to Wilhelm Wolff
1867: Preface to the First German Edition
1872: Preface to the French Edition
1873: Afterword to the Second German Edition
1875: Afterword to the French Edition
1883: Preface to the Third German Edition
1 886: Preface to the English Edition
1890: Preface to the Fourth German Edition
7867: Marx's letter to Engels

Parti

COMMODITIES AND MONEY

Ch. 1: Commodities

Section 1 — The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use- Value and Value (the Substance of Value and the

Magnitude of Value)

Section 2 — The Two-fold Character of the Labour Embodied in Commodities

Section 3 — The Form of Value or Exchange-Value

A. Elementary or Accidental Form of Value

1. The Two Poles of the Expression of Value: Relative Form and Equivalent Form

2. The Relative Form of Value

a. The Nature and Import of this Form

b. Quantitative Determination of Relative Value

3. The Equivalent Form of Value

4. The Elementary Form of Value Considered as a Whole

B. Total or Expanded Form of Value



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (1 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

1. The Expanded Relative Form of Value

2. The Particular Equivalent Form

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded Form of Value

C. The General Form of Value

1. The Altered Character of the Form of Value

2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and of the Equivalent Form

3. Transition from the General Form of Value to the Money-Form

D. The Money-Form

Section 4 — The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof

Ch. 2: Exchange

Ch. 3: Money, or the Circulation of Commodities

Section 1 — The Measure of Values
Section 2 — The Medium of Circulation

A. The Metamorphosis of Commodities

B. The Currency of Money

C. Coin and Symbols of Value

Section 3 — Money

A. Hoarding

B. Means of Payment

C. Universal Money

Part II

THE TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO CAPITAL

Ch. 4: The General Formula for Capital

Ch. 5: Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital

Ch. 6: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power

Part III

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS-VALUE

Ch. 7: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus-Value

Section 1 — The Labour-Process or the Production of Use-Values
Section 2 — The Production of Surplus- Value

Ch. 8: Constant Capital and Variable Capital

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (2 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

Ch. 9: The Rate of Surplus-Value

Section 1 — The Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power

Section 2 — The Representation of the Components of the Value of the Product by Corresponding

Proportional Parts of the Product itself

Section 3 — Senior's "Last Hour"

Section 4 — Surplus-Produce

Ch. 10: The Working-Day

Section 1 — The Limits of the Working-Day

Section 2 — The Greed for Surplus-Labour. Manufacturer and Boyard

Section 3 — Branches of English Industry without Legal Limits to Exploitation

Section 4 — Day and Night Work. The Relay System

Section 5 — The Struggle for a Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Laws for the Extension of the

Working-Day from the Middle of the 14th to the End of the 17th Century

Section 6 — The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Limitation by Law of the

Working-Time. The English Factory Acts, 1833 to 1864

Section 7 — The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Reaction of the English Factory Acts on Other

Countries

Ch. 11: Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value

Part IV

PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE

Ch. 12: The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value

Ch. 13: Co-operation

Ch. 14: Division of Labour and Manufacture

Section 1 — Two-fold Origin of Manufacture

Section 2 — The Detail Labourer and his Implements

Section 3 — The Two Fundamental Forms of Manufacture: Heterogeneous Manufacture, Serial

Manufacture

Section 4 — Division of Labour in Manufacture, and Division of Labour in Society

Section 5 — The Capitalistic Character of Manufacture

Ch. 15: Machinery and Modern Industry

Section 1 — The Development of Machinery

Section 2 — The Value Transferred by Machinery to the Product

Section 3 — The Proximate Effects of Machinery on the Workman

A. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-Power by Capital. The Employment of Women and Children

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (3 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

B. Prolongation of the Working-Day

C. Intensification of Labour

Section 4 — The Factory

Section 5 — The Strife Between Workman and Machine

Section 6 — The Theory of Compensation as Regards the Workpeople Displaced by Machinery

Section 7 — Repulsion and Attraction of Workpeople by the Factory System. Crises in the Cotton Trade

Section 8 — Revolution Effected in Manufacture, Handicrafts, and Domestic Industry by Modern

Industry

A. Overthrow of Co-operation Based on Handicraft and on the Division of Labour

B. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries

C. Modern Manufacture

D. Modern Domestic Industry

E. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. The
Hastening of this Revolution by the Application of the Factory Acts to those Industries

Section 9 — The Factory Acts. Sanitary and Educational Clauses of the same. Their General Extension in

England

Section 10 — Modern Industry and Agriculture

PartV

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE AND OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE

Ch. 16: Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value

Ch. 1 7: Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value

Section 1. Length of the Working-Day and Intensity of Labour Constant. Productiveness of Labour

Variable

Section 2. Working-Day Constant. Productiveness of Labour Constant. Intensity of Labour Variable

Section 3. Productiveness and Intensity of Labour Constant. Length of the Working-Day Variable

Section 4. Simultaneous Variations in the Duration, Productiveness, and Intensity of Labour

A. Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with a Simultaneous Lengthening of the Working-Day

B. Increasing Intensity and Productiveness of Labour with Simultaneous Shortening of the Working-Day

Ch. 18: Various Formula for the Rate of Surplus-Value

Part VI
WAGES

Ch. 19: The Transformation of the Value (and Respective Price) of Labour-Power into Wages
Ch. 20: Time-Wages
Ch. 21: Piece-Wages

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (4 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

Ch. 22: National Differences of Wages

Part VII

THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL

Ch. 23: Simple Reproduction

Ch. 24: Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital

Section I — Capitalist Production on a Progressively Increasing Scale. Transition of the Laws of

Property that Characterise Production of Commodities into Laws of Capitalist Appropriation

Section 2 — Erroneous Conception, by Political Economy, of Reproduction on a Progressively

Increasing Scale

Section 3 — Separation of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue. The Abstinence Theory

Section 4 — Circumstances that, Independently of the Proportional Division of Surplus- Value into

Capital and Revenue, Determine the Amount of Accumulation. Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power.

Productivity of Labour. Growing Difference in Amount Between Capital Employed and Capital

Consumed. Magnitude of Capital Advanced

Section 5 — The So-Called Labour-Fund

Ch. 25: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation

Section I — The Increased Demand for Labour-Power that Accompanies Accumulation, the

Composition of Capital Remaining the same

Section 2 — Relative Diminution of the Variable Part of Capital Simultaneously with the Progress of

Accumulation and of the Concentration that Accompanies it

Section 3 — Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus-Population or Industrial Reserve Army

Section 4 — Different Forms of the Relative Surplus-Population. The General Law of Capitalistic

Accumulation

Section 5 — Illustrations of the General Law of Capitalist Accumulation

A. England from 1846-1866

B. The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class
C The Nomad Population

D. Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working-Class

E. The British Agricultural Proletariat

F. Ireland

Part VIII

PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION

Ch. 26: The Secret of Primitive Accumulation

Ch. 27: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land

Ch. 28: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing down of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (5 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Capital Vol. I — Full Contents Listing

Wages by Acts of Parliament

Ch. 29: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer

Ch. 30: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial
Capital

Ch. 31: Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist

Ch. 32: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation

Ch. 33: The Modern Theory of Colonisation

Transcribed by Zodiac (1993)

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Capital Volume One- Index

Marx/Engels Works Index I Marxists Internet Archive



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index-l.htm (6 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:20:17]



Marx/Engels Library

Marx/Engels Library




Marx/KnyeJ* Library



(Mi and (E) denote author;
Marx and Engeis respectively



E,in.ks in bold indicate
more than one page




Selected Works

Early I 1840 I 1850 I I860 I 1870 I 1880 I 1890



Search



Selected Works



1846: \A Critique of] German Ideology (M/E)

1847: Principles of Communism (E)

1848: The Communist Manifesto (M/E)

1849: Wage-Labor and Capital (M)

1859: Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (M)



1867: Capital, Volume 1 (M)

1871: The Civil War in France (M)

1875: Critique of the Gotha Program (M)

1880: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (E)

See Also: A Subject Index On Historical Materialism



1840s



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/index.htm (1 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:20:25]



Marx/Engels Library

Pre- 1840: The writings of a young Karl Marx (M)

1841: Hegel on Schelling [Abstract] (E)

1842: Comments on the Latest Prussian Censorship Instruction (M)

1842: On Freedom of the Press (M)

1842-3: News articles from the Rheinische Zeitung (M)

1843: Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right (M)

1844: News articles from the Deutsche-Franzosische Jahrbilcher (M/E)

1844: On The Jewish Question (M)

1844: Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy (E)

1844: Review of Thomas Carlyle's book Past and Present (E)

1844: Critical Notes on "The King of Prussia" (M)

1844: Comments on James Mill's "Elements of Political Economy" (M)

1844: Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts (M)

1844-5: Condition of the Working Class in England (E)

1845: The Holy Family — or a Critique of Critical Critique (M)

1845: Theses on Feuerbach (M)

1845-6: The German Ideology (M/E)

1847: Communist League (M/E)

1847: Principles of Communism (E)

1847: The Poverty of Philosophy (M)

1848: Speech: On The Question of Free Trade (M)

1848: The Communist Manifesto (M/E)

1848: Speech: Communism, Revolution, and a Free Poland (M)

1848: Demands of the Communist Party in Germany (M/E)

1848-9: Articles in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (M/E)

1849: Wage-Labor and Capital (M)



1850s



1850: England's 17th c. Revolution (M/E)

1850: Reviews from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue (M/E)

1850: The Class Struggle in France, 1848 to 1850 (M)

1850: The Peasants' War in Germany (E)

1852: Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (M)

1852: The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (M)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/index.htm (2 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:20:25]



Marx/Engels Library

1852: The Heroes of the Exile! (M/E)

1852: Revelations on the Cologne Communist Trial (M)

1852-61: Articles in the New York Daily Tribune (M)

1853: The Duchess of Sutherland and Slavery (M)

1855: Anti-Church Movement: Demonstration in Hyde Park (M)

1856: Speech at the Anniversary of the People's Paper (M)

1857-60: Articles on the China War for the New York Daily Tribune (M/E)

1857: Introduction to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (M)

1857: Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations (M)

1857: The Grundrisse (M)

1859: A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (M)

1859: Engels review of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (E)



1860s



1861: Articles on the U.S. Civil War (M)

1861-3: Theories of Surplus Value , Vol. 1 (M)

1861-3: Theories of Surplus Value, Vol. 2 (M)

1861-3: Theories of Surplus Value, Vol. 3 (M)

1863: Proclamation on Poland (M)

1864: International Workingmen's Association (M/E)

1865: The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party (E)

1865: Address: Value, Price, and Profit (M)

1866: What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland? (E)

1867: Capital, Volume 1 (M)

1868: Synopsis of Marx's Capital (E)

1868-72: The conflict with Bakunin (M/E)

1869: The Abolition of Landed Property (M)



1870s



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/index.htm (3 of 5) [23/08/2000 16:20:25]



Marx/Engels Library



1870: The General Council to the Federal Council of French Switzerland (M)

1871: Jenny Marx's Articles on Ireland (Jenny Marx)

1871: New York World Interview with Marx

1871: Resolution of the London Conference on Working-Class Political Action (M/E)

1871: The Civil War in France (M)

1871: Escape from Post-Commune France ! (Jenny Marx)

1872: The Alleged Splits in the International (M/E)

1872: The Hague Congress of the International Workingmen's Association

1872: Report to the Hague Congress (M)

1872: On Authority (E)

1873: The Housing Question (E)

1874: Political Indifferentism (M)

1875: Conspectus of Bakunin's Book Statism and Anarchy (M)

1875: For Poland (M/E)

1875: Critique of the Gotha Program (M)

1876: Wilhelm Wolff biography (E)

1876: The Part Played by Labour in the Transition From Ape to Man (E)

1877: Anti-Duhring (E)

1879: Chicago Tribune Interview with Marx

1879: A letter to British Princess Victoria about Karl Marx

1879: Reformists in Germany's Social-Democratic party (M/E)



1880s



1880: Marginal Notes on Adolph Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen okonomie (M)

1880: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (E)

1880: A Workers' Inquiry (M)

1880: Introduction to the Programme of the French Workers' Party (M)

1881: Articles for The Labour Standard (E)

1882: Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity (E)

1883: The Dialectics of Nature (E)

1883: Articles on Karl Marx's Death (E)

1884: The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (E)

1885: Capital, volume 2 (M)

1885: History of the Communist League (E)
INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY
AND ITS FUTURE




J



The Unabomber's Manifesto



Aiui-Authorttartans Anonymous Po Box 11331 Eugene.Oregon 97440 U$.



Anti-Authoritarians AiioiiMiwus

TO Box 11331
Eugene, Oregon 9"-l4l)



Introduction

1. The Industrial Revolution and its consequences have been a disaster Tor the human race. They

have greatly increased the life-expectancy of those of us who live in "advanced" countries,
but they hitvc destabilized society, have made life unfulfilling, have subjected human beings
to indignities, have led to widespread psychological suffering (in the Third World to physical
suffering as well) and have inflicted severe damage on the natural world. The continued
development of technology will worsen the situation. Il will certainly subject human beings
lo greater indignities and inflict greater damage on the natural world, it will probably lead to
greater social disruption and psychological suffering, and it may lead to increased physical
suffering even in "advanced" countries.

2. The industrial-technological system may survive or it may break down. If it survives, it may

eventually achieve a low level of physical and psychological suffering, but only after passing
through a long and very painful period of adjustment and only at the cost of permanently
reducing human beings and many other living organisms lo engineered products and mere
cogs in the social machine. Furthermore, if the system survives, the consequences will be
inevitable; There is no way of reforming or modifying the system so as lo prevent it from
depriving people of dignity and autonomy.

3. If (lie system breaks down the consequences will still be very painful. But the bigger the
system grows the more disastrous the results of its breakdown will be, so if it is to break down
il had best break down sooner rather than later.

4. We therefore advocate a revolution against ihe industrial system. This revolution may or may

not make use of violence: il may he sudden or il may be a relatively gradual process spanning
a few decades. We can'l predict any of that. Bui we do outline in n very general way the
measures that those who hale the industrial system should take in order to prepare the way for
a revolution against that form or society. This is not lo be a political revolution. Its object will
be lo overt h ro w not governments but the economic and technological basis of Ihe present
society.

5. In this mliclc we give atlcnlion to only some of ihe negative developments Hurt have grown
out of llie industrial-technological system. Other such developments we mention only briefly
or ignore altogether. This docs not mean that we regard these other developments as unimpor-
tant, For practical reasons we have lo confine our discussion lo areas thai have received
insufficient public attention or in which we have something new lo say. For example, since
there arc well-developed environmental and wilderness movements, we have written very
little about environmental degradation or the destruction of wild nature, even though we con-
sider these lo be highly important. , - •



The Psychology
Of Modern Leftism

6. Almost everyone will agree that we live in a deeply troubled society. One of the most wide-

spread manifestations of thecraziness of our world is leftism, so a discussion of the psychol-
ogy of leftism can serve as an introduction to the discussion of ihe problems of modern soci-
ety in general.

7. But what is leftism? During the first half of ihe 20th ceolury leftism could have been practi-
cally identified with socialism. Today the movement is fragmented and il is not clear who can
properly be called a leftist. When we speak of leftists in this article we have in mind mainly
socialists, collectivism, "politically correct" types, feminists, gay and disability activists, ani-
mal rights activists and the like. But not everyone who is associated with one of these move- ,
mcnls is a leftist. What we are trying to gel at in discussing leftism is not so much a movement
or an ideology as a psychological type, Of rather a collection of related types. Thus, what we
mean by "leftism" will emerge more clearly in the course of our discussion of leftist psychol-
ogy (Also, see paragraphs 227-230).

8. Even so, our conception of leftism will remain a good deal less clear than we would wish, but
there doesn't seem lo be any remedy for this. All we arc trying to do is indicate in a rough and
approximate way the two psychological tendencies that wc believe arc the maiu driving force



of modern leflism. We by no incnns claim to be Idling the whole truth about leftist psychol-
ogy. Also.our discussion is meant to apply to modern leftism only. We leave open the ques-
tion of the extent lo which our discussion could be applied (o the leftists of (he 1 9lh and early
20th century.

9. The two psychological tendencies that underlie modern leftism wc call "feelings of inferior-
' it y" and "ovcrsocinlizaiion." Peelings of inferiority arc characteristic of modern leftism as a

whole, while ovcrsocialization is characteristic only of a certain segment of modern leftism;
but this segment is highly influential.

Feelings Of Inferiority

10. By "feelings of inferiority" we mean not only inferiority feelings in the strictest sense but a
whole spectrum of related traits: low self-esteem, feelings of powerlessness, depressive ten-
dencies, defeatism, guilt, self-hatred, etc. We argue that modem leftists tend to have such
feelings (possibly more or less repressed) and that these feelings are decisive in determining
the direction of modern leftism.

1 1. When someone interprets as derogatory almost anything that is said about him (or about
groups witli whom be identifies) wc conclude that he has Inferiority feelings or low self-
esteem. This tendency is pronounced among minority rights advocates, whether or not they
belong to the minority groups whose rights they defend. They arc hypersensitive about the
words used to designate minorities. The terms "negro," "oriental," "handicapped" or "cluck"
for an African, an Asian, a disabled person or a woman originally had no derogatory connota-
tion. "Broad" and "chick" were merely the feminine equivalents of "guy," "dude" or "fel-
low." The negative connotations have been attached in these terms by the activists them-
selves. Some animal rights advocates have gone so far us to reject the word "pel" and insist on
its replacement by "animal companion." Leftist anthropologists go to great lengths to avoid
saying anything about primitive peoples that could conceivably be interpreted as negative.
They want to replace the word "primitive" by "nonl iterate." They seem almost pmaunid about
anything that might suggest that any primitive culture is inferior to our own. (Wc do not mean
to imply that primitive cultures are inferior to ours. Wc merely point out the hypersensitivity
of leftist anthropologists.)

12. Those who arc most sensitive about "politically incorrect" terminology arc not the average
black ghcllo-dwcllcr, Asian immigrant, abused woman or disabled person, but a minority of
activists, many of whom do not even belong to any "oppressed" group but come from privi-
leged strata of society. Political correctness has its stronghold among university professors,
who have secure employment with comfortable salaries, and the majority of whom arc het-
erosexual, white males from middle-class families.

13. Many leftists have an intense identification with the problems of groups that have an image
of being weak (women), defeated (American Indians), repellent (homosexuals), or otherwise
inferior. The leftists themselves feel that these groups arc inferior. They would never admit it
to themselves that they have such feelings, but it is precisely because they do see these groups
as inferior that they identify with their problems, (Wc do not suggest that women, Indians,
etc., are inferior; we are only making a point about leftist psychology).

14. Feminists are desperately anxious to prove that women are M strong as capable as men.
Clearly they are nagged by a fear that women may not be as strong and as capable as men.

15. Leftists tend to hate anything that has an image of being strong, good and successful. They
hate America, they hate Western civilization, they hale white mates, they hate rationality. The
reasons that leftists give for haling the West, etc. clearly do not correspond with their real
motives. They say they hate the West because it is warlike, imperialistic, sexist, ethnocentric
and so forth, but where these same faults appear in socialist countries or in primitive cultures,
the leftist Finds excuses for them, or at best he grudgingly admits that they exist; whereas lie
enthusiastically points out (and often greatly exaggerates) these faults where they appear in
Western civilization. Thus it is clear that these faults are not the leftist's real motive for hating
America and the West, lie hales America ami the West because I hey are strong and successful

16. Words like "self-confidence," "self-reliance," "initiative", "enterprise," "optimism," clc. play
litlle role in the liberal and leftist vocabulary. The leftist is anti-individualistic, pro-collcctiv-






229. The leftist is oriented toward large scale collectivism. He emphasizes the duly of the indi-
vidual to serve society and the duly of society to take care of the individual. He has a negative
attitude toward individualism. He often takes a moralistic tone. Me lends to be for gun con-
trol, ftu sex education and other psychologically "enlightened** educational methods, lor plan-
ning, for affirmative action, for multictiltiiraiism. He tends to identify with victims. He tends
to be against competition and against violence, but he often finds excuses for those leftists
who do commit violence. He is fond of using the common catch-phrases of the left like
"racism, ""sexism, " "homophobia, " "capitalism," "imperialism," "neocolonialism " "geno-
cide," "social change," "social justice," "social responsibility." Maybe the best diagnostic ,
Irait of the leftist is his tendency lo sympathize with the following movements: feminism, gay
rights, ethnic rights, disability rights, animal rights, and political correctness. Anyone who
strongly sympathizes with all of these movements is almost certainly a leftist.'*

230. The more dangerous leftists, that is. those who are most power hungry, are often character-
ized by arrogance or by a dogmatic approach to ideology. However, the most dangerous
leftists of all may be certain oversocialized types who avoid irritating displays of aggressive-
ness and refrain from advertising their leftism, but work quietly and unobtrusively to promote
collcclivisl values, "enlightened" psychological techniques for socializing children, depen-
dence of the individual on the system, and so forth, These crypto- Icliisls (as wc may call
them) approximate certain bourgeois types as far as practical action is concerned, but differ
from them in psychology, ideology and motivation. The ordinary bourgeois tries lo bring
people under control of the system in order to protect his way of life, or he docs so simply
because his attitudes arc conventional. The crypto- leftist tries to bring people under control of
the system because he is a True Believer in a collcctivistic ideology. The crypto- leftist is
differentiated from the average leftist of the oversocialized type by the fact that his rebellious
impulse is weaker and he is more securely socialized. He is differentiated brim the ordinary
well-socialized bourgeois by the fact that ihcrc is some deep lack within him thai makes it
necessary for him to devote himself to a cause and Immerse Mntsetf in a collectivity. And
may he his (well-sublimated) drive fur power is stronger than that of the average bourgeois.



FINAL NOTE '



231 . Throughout this article we've made imprecise statements and statements that ought to have
had all sorts of qualifications and reservations attached to them; and some of our statements
may he flatly false. Lack of sufficient in formation and the need for brevity made it impossible
for us to fomulale our assertions more precisely or add all the necessary qualifications. And of
course in a discussion of this kind one must rely heavily on intuitive judgment, and that can
sometimes be wrong. So we don't claim that this article expresses more than a crude approxi-
mation to the truth.

232. AH the same wc arc reasonably confident that the general outlines of the picture we have
painted here arc roughly correct. Wc have portrayed leftism in its modern form as a phenom-
enon peculiar to our time and as a symptom of the disruption of the power process. But we
might possibly be wrong about this. Oversocialized types who try to satisfy their drive for
power by imposing their morality on everyone have certainly been around for a long time.
But wc think that the decisive role played by feelings of inferiority, low self-esteem, power-
lessness. identification with victims by people who are not themselves victims, is a peculiar-
ity of modern leftism. Identification with victims by people not themselves victims can be
seen lo some extent in 19th century leftism and early Christianity but as far as we can make
out, symptoms of low self-esteem, etc., were not nearly so evident in these movements, or in
any other movements, as they are in modem leftism. But we are not in a position to assert
confidently that no such movements have existed prior lo modern leftism. This is a significant
question to which historians ought to give their attention.



36. (Paragraph 229) tt is important In understand that we mean lameone who sympathize* with these movements
01 they exist today in our society One wlm believes that women, homosexuals, etc., shonUI have equal lights is
not necessarily a leftist. The feminist, gay rights, etc., movements thai exist in our society have the particular
ideological tone that characiemes leftism, and if one believes, for example, that women should have equal
tights it tines not necessarily fallow that one must sympathize with the feminist movement as it exists today.



is in die struggle lo impose their morality on everyone,

222. Leftists, especially lliuse of I lie ovcrsocinli/nl type, ate 'line Believers in llie sense of line
Holler's book. "The True Believer." Hut nol till 'line Believers are of lite same psychological
lypc as leftists. Presumably a liuc-belicving uazi, lor instance is very different psychologi-
cally from a iruc-believing Icftisl. Because of their capacity for single-minded devotion lo I
cause, True Believers arc a useful, perhaps a necessary, ingredient ninny revolutionary move-
ment. This presents a problem with which wc musl admit we don'l know how to deal. We
aren't sure how to harness lite energies of llie True Believer lo h revolution against technol-
ogy. Al present all we can say is thai no True Believer will make a safe recruit lo llie revolu-
tion unless his commitment is exclusively lo the destruction of technology. If he is committed
also lo another ideal, he may want to use technology as a lool for pursuing thai olhcr ideal (sec
paragraphs 220. 22 1 ).

223. Some readers may say, "This sluffuboui leftism is a lot of crap. I know John and June who
are lefiish types and (hey don'l have all these lotalitarian Icndcncics." Il's quite true lhat many
leftists, possibly even a numerical majority, are decenl people who sincerely believe in toler-
aiing others' values (up to a point) and wouldn't want lo use high-handed methods lo reach
iheir social goals. Our remarks about leftism are nol meant to apply to every individual lefiisi
but to describe ihe general character of leftism as a movement. And the general character or a
movement is not necessarily determined by the numerical proportions of the various kinds or
|ieople involved in Ihe movement.

224. The people who rise lo positions of power in leftist ntovcincnls lend to be leftists of ihe
most power-hungry lypc because power-hungry people arc those who si rive battiest lo gel
into positions of power. Once ihe power-hungry types have captured conlrol of ihe move-
ment, ihere arc many leftists of a genllcr breed who inwardly disapprove of many of the
actions of ihe lenders, but cannot bring themselves lo oppose them. They need their faith in
Ihe movement, and because they cannol give up litis failh ihcy go along with Ihe lenders,
True, SOttH leftists do have the guls lo oppose Ihe totalitarian tendencies thai emerge, hut Ihey
generally lose, because lite power-hungry types ate bciler oitiinizcd, aic more ruthless and
Machiavellian and have laken care to build themselves a strong power base.

225. These phenomena appeared clearly in Russia and olhcr countries lli.il were taken over by
leftists. Similarly, before Ihe breakdown of communism in the USSR, lefiish types in the
West would seldom criticize llial country. If prodded Ihcy would admil (hut llie UJj.SK did
many wrong tilings, but then ihey would try lo find excuses for l he communists and begin
talking about die faults of the West. They alwnys opposed Western military resistance to
communist aggression, Leftish lypes all over the world vigorously protested ihe U.S.! military
action in Vielnam, but when the USSR invaded Afghanistan Ihcy did nothing. Not thai ihey
approved of ihe Soviet actions; bul because of their leftist faith, they just couldn't bear lo put
themselves in opposition lo communism. Today, in those or our universities where "political
correctness" has become dominant, there are probably many leftist types who privately dis-
approve of the suppression of academic freedom, but ihcy go along with il anyway.^

226. Thus (he fact that many individual leftists are personally mild and fairly tolerant people by
no means prevents leftism as a whole form having a totalitarian tendency.

227. Our discussion of leftism has a serious weakness. It is still far from clear whal we mean by
the word "leftist." There doesn't seem to be much we can do about this. Today leftism is
fragmented into a whole spectrum of aclivisl movements. Yet not all activist movements arc
leftist, and some activist movements (e.g.., radical cnvironmenlalism) seem to include boih
personalities of Ihe leftist type and personalities of thoroughly un-lcftisl types who ought lo
know better than lo collaborate wilh leftists. Varieties of leftists fade out gradually inlo vari-
eties of non-leftists and we ourselves would often be hnrd-presscd to decide whether a given
individual is or is not a leftist. To the extent thai il is defined at all, our conception of leftism
is defined by the discussion of it lhat we have given in this article, and we can pnly advise Ihe
reader to use his own judgment in deciding who is a leftist.

228. But il will be helpful lo list some criteria for diagnosing leftism. These criteria cannot be
applied in a cut and dried manner. Some individuals may meet some of the criteria without
being leftists, some leftists may not mcel any of the crilcrin. Again, you just have lo use your
judgment.



ist. I Ic wants society lo solve everyone's needs for litem, take enre of them. He is not the soil
of pci son who has an inner sense ol confidence in his own ability to solve his own problems
and satisfy his own needs, flic leftist is anlagonislic to ihe concept of competition because,
deep inside, he feels like a loser.

17. Art forms lhat appeal to modern leftist intellectuals tend to focus on sordiilness. defeat and
despair, or else they lake an orgiastic tone, throwing off rational control as if there were no
hope of accomplishing anything through rational calculation and all that was lcfl\vas tp tin-'
mcrsc oneself in llie sensations of llie moment.

18. Modem leftist philosophers (end lo dismiss reason, science, objective reality and to insist
lhat everything is culturally relative. It is (rue that one can ask serious questions about Ihe
foundations of scientific knowledge and about how, if at all, ihe concept of objective reality
can be defined. Bul it is obvious that modern leftist philosophers arc not simply cool-headed
logicians systematically analyzing the foundations of knowledge. Ihcy arc deeply involved
emotionally in their attack on n nth and reality. They attack these concepts because of their
own psychological needs. For one thing, iheir attack is an outlet for hostility, and, to ihe
extent that it is successful, it satisfies the drive for power. More importantly, the leftist hates
science and rationality because they classify certain beliefs as true (i.e., successful, superior)
and other beliefs as false (i.e. failed, inferior). The leftist's feelings of inferiority run so deep
that he cannot tolerate any classification of some things as successful or superior and other
ihings as failed or inferior. This also underlies the rejection by many leftists of the concept of
menial illness and of ihe utility of IQ tests. Leftists arc antagonistic lo genetic explanations of
human abilities or behavior because such explanations tend to make some persons appear
superior or inferior lo others. Leftists prefer lo give society ihe credit or blame for an individual's
ability or lack of it. Thus if a person is "inferior" it is nol his fault, but society's, because he
has not been brought up properly.

19. The leftist is nol typically the kind of person whose feelings of inferiority make him a brng-
garl, an egotist, a bully, a self- pro molcr, a ruthless competitor. This kind of person has not
wholly lost failh in himself, lie has a deficit in his sense of power and self-worth, bul he can
Mill conceive of himself as having the capacity lo be strong, and his efforts to make himself
strong produce his unpleasant behavior. 1 But the lefiisi is too far gone for that. His feelings of
Inferiority arc so ingrained that he cannot conceive of himself ns individually strong and
v ul liable, llcncc the collectivism of the leftist. He can feci strong only ns a member of a large
organization or a mass movement wilh which he identifies himself.

20. Notice the masochistic tendency of leftist tactics, Leftists protest by lying down in front of
vehicles, they intentionally provoke police or racists to abuse them, etc. These tactics may
often be effective, but many leftists use (hem nol as a means lo an end but because they prefer
masochistic tactics. Self-halted is a leftist trait.

21. Lcftisls may claim lhat their activism is motivated by compassion or by moral principle, and
moral principle does play a role for the Icftisl of the ovcrsocialized type. But compassion and
moral principle cannot be the main motives for leftist activism. Hostility is loo promincul a
component of leftist behavior; so is the drive for power. Moreover, much leftist bchnvior is
not rationally calculated lo be of benefit lo the people whom the leftists claim to be trying lo
help. For example, tT one believes lhat affirmative action is good Tor black people, does it
make sense lo demand affirmative action in hostile or dogmatic terms? Obviously il would be
more productive to lake n diplomatic and conciliatory approach llml would make al Icasl
verbal and symbolic concessions to while people who think thai affirmative action discrimi-
nates against llicm, But lefiisi activists do nol lake such an approach because il would not
satisfy their emotional needs. Helping black people is not their real goal. Instead, race prob-
lems serve as an excuse for ihem to express Iheir own hostility and frustrated need for power.
In doing so they actually harm black people, because the activists' hostile attitude toward the
while majority tends lo intensify race hatred.

22. If our society had no social problems at all, the leftists would have to invent problems in
order lo provide themselves with an excuse for making a fuss.

/. {Paragraph 19) We are asserting that all, or even most, bullies and ruthless competitors suffer from feelings
ofinferiurity, <






23. We emphasize that tlie foregoing does not pretend to be an accurate description of everyone
who might be considered a leftist. It is only a rough indication of a general tendency of
leftism.



OVERSOCIALIZATION

24. Psychologists use the term "socialization" to designate the process by which children arc
trained to think and act as society demands. A person is said to be well socialized if he be-
lieves in and obeys the moral code of his society and fits in well as a functioning part of that
society. It may seem senseless to say that many leftists are over-socialized, since the leftist is
perceived as a rebel. Nevertheless, the position can be defended. Many leftists are not such
rebels as they seem.
25. The moral code of our society is so demanding that no one can think, feci and act in a
completely moral way. For example, wc are not supposed to hate anyone, yet almost every-
one hates somebody nt some lime or other, whether he admits H to himself or not. Some
people are so highly socialized thai the attempt to think, feel and act morally imposes a severe
burden on them. In order to avoid feelings of guilt, they continually have to deceive them-
selves about their own motives and find moral explanations for feelings and actions that in
reality have a non-moral origin. We use the term "oversocialized" to describe such people. 1

26. Ovcrsocializalion can lend to low self-esteem, a sense of powerlcssness, defeatism, guilt, etc.
One of the most important means by which our society socializes children is by making them
feci ashamed of behavior or speech that is contrary to society's expectations. If this is over-
done, or if a particular child is especially susceptible to such feelings, he ends by feeling
ashamed of himself. Moreover the thought and the behavior of the ovcrsocializcd person arc
more restricted by society's expectations than are those of the lightly socialized person. The
majority of people engage in a significant amount of naughty behavior. They lie, they commit
petty thefts, they break traffic laws, they goof off at work, they hale someone, they say spite-
ful tilings or they use some underhanded trick to get ahead olthc other guy. The ovei socialized
person cannot do these things, or if he docs do them he generates in himscirn sense of shame
and self-hatred. The ovcrsocializcd person cannot even experience, without guilt, thoughts or
feelings that are contrary to the accepted morality; he cannot think "unclean" ihoughls.And
socialization is not just a matter of morality; wc are socialized to confirm to many norms of
behavior that do not fall under the heading of morality. Thus the ovcrsocializcd person is kept
on a psychological leash and spends his life running on rails that society has laid down for
him. In many oversocializcd people this results in a sense of constraint and powerlcssness
that can be a severe hardship. We suggest that ovcrsocializalion is among the more serious
cruelties that human beings inflict on one another,

27. Wc argue that a very important and influential segment of the modern left is oversocializcd
and that their ovcrsocializalion is of great importance in determining the direction of modem
leftism. Leftists of the oversocialized type tend to be intellectuals or members of the upper-
middle class. Notice that university intellectuals 1 constitute the most highly socialized seg-
ment or our society and also the most left-wing segment.

28. The leftist of the oversocializcd type tries to gel off bis psychological leash and assert his
autonomy by rebelling. But usually lie is nol strong enough to rebel against the most basic
values of society. Generally speaking, the goals of today's leftists arc not in conflict 1 with the
accepted morality. On the contrary, the left lakes an accepted moral principle, adopts it as its
own, and then accuses mainstream society of violating that principle. Examples: racial equal-
ity, equality of the sexes, helping poor people, jicacc as opposed to war, nonviolence gener-
ally, freedom of expression, kindness to animals. More fundamentally, the duly oflhe indi-
vidual to serve society and the duty of society to take care of the individual. All these have
been deeply rooted values of our society (oral least of its middle and uppei classes* Tor a long
lime. These values are explicitly or implicitly expressed or presupposed in most of the inate-



2. (Paragraph 25) During the Victorian period many oversocialized people suffered from Striata psychologi-
cal problems at a result of repressing or trying to repress llteir sexual feelings, Freud apparently based his
theories on people of this type. Today the focus of socialization has shifted f torn sex to aggression.

3. (Paragraph 27J Not necessarily including specialists in engineering "hard" sciences.



dom, but today, in those universities where leftists have become dominant, they have shown
themselves ready to lake away from everyone else's academic freedom. (This is "political
correctness .") The same will happen with leftists and technology: They will use it to oppress
everyone else if they ever gel it under their own control.

217. In earlier revolutions, leftists oflhe most power-hungry type, repeatedly, have first cooper-
ated with non-leftist revolutionaries, as well as with leftists of a more libertarian inclination,
and later have double-crossed them to seize power for themselves. Robespierre did this in the
French Revolution, the Bolsheviks did it in the Russian Revolution, the communists did it in
Spain in 1938 and Castro and his followers did it in Cuba. Given the past history of leftism, it
would be utterly foolish for non-leftist revolutionaries today to collaborate with leftists.

218. Various thinkers have pointed out that leftism is a kind of religion. Leftism is nol a religion
in the strict sense because leftist doctrine docs not postulate the existence of any supernatural
hcing. But for the leftist, leftism plays a psychological role much like that which religion
plays for some people. The leftist needs to believe in leftism; it plays a vital role in his psy-
chological economy. His beliefs are not ensily modified by logic or facts. Me has a deep
conviction that leftism is morally Right with a capital R. and thai he has not only a right but a
duty 10 impose leftist morality on everyone. (1 lowcvcr, many oflhe people wc arc referring lo
as "leftists" do not think of themselves as leftists and would nol describe their system of
beliefs as leftism. We use the term "leftism" because we don't know of any belter words to
designate the spectrum of related creeds that includes the feminist, gay rights, pohticaf cor-
rectness, clc, movements, and because these movements have a strong affinity with the old
left. Sec paragraphs 227-230.)

219. Leftism is totalitarian force. Wherever leftism is in a position of power it tends to invade
every private corner and force every thought into a leftist mold. In pari this is because oflhe
quasi-religious character of leftism; everything contrary lo leftists beliefs represents Sin. More
i in porl ant ly. leftism is a totalitarian force because oflhe leftists' drive for power, The lcfti.il
seeks to satisfy his need for power through identification with n social movement and he tries
lo go through the power process by helping lo pursue and attain the goals of the movement
(see paragraph 83). But no mailer how far the movement has gone in attaining its goals the
leftist is never satisfied, because his activism is a surrogate activity (see paragraph 41). That
is, the leftist's real motive is not to allntn the ostensible goals of leftism; in reality he is
motivated by the sense of power he gets from struggling for and then reaching a social goal."
Consequently I he leftist is never satisfied with the goals he has already attained; his need for
the power process leads him always lo pursue some new goal. The leftist wants equal oppor-
tunities for minorities. When that is attained he instsls on statistical equality of achievement
by minorities. And as long as anyone harbors in some comer of his mind a negative attitude
toward some minority, the leftist has to reeducate him. And ethnic minorities are not enough;
no one can be allowed to have a negative altitude toward homosexuals, disabled people, fat
people, old people, ugly people, and on and on and on. It's not enough that the public should
be informed about the hazards of smoking; a warning has to be stamped on every package of
cigarcltcs. Then cigarette advertising has lo be restricted if not banned. The activists will
never be satisfied until lobacco is outlawed, and after that it will be alcohol, then junk food,
etc. Activists have fought gross child abuse, which is reasonable. But now Ihey want to stop
all spanking, When they have done that they will want to ban something else they consider
unwholesome, then another thing and then another. They will never be satisfied until they
have complete control over all child rearing practices. And then they will move on lo another cause.

220. Suppose you asked leftists to make a list or ALL the things thai were wrong with society,
and then suppose you instituted every social change that they demanded. It is safe lo say thai
within a couple of years the majority of leftists would find something new lo complain about,
some new social "evil" lo correct because, once again, the leftist is motivated less by distress
at society's ills than by Ihc need lo satisfy his drive for power by imposing his solutions on society.

221. Because of the restrictions placed on ihcir thoughts and behavior by their high level of
socialization, many leftists of the oversocialized lype cannot pursue power in the ways that
olhcr people do. For them the drive for power has only one morally acceptable outlet, and (tint

,\5. (Paragraph 219) Matty leftists ate motivated also by hostility, but the hostility probably results in part
from a frustrated need for power.



would be few and scattered. An industrial society, if built from scratch without outside help,
cim only be built in a series of stages: You need tools to make tools to make tools to make
tools ... . A long process of economic development and progress in social organization is
required. And, even in the absence of an ideology opposed to technology, there is no reason to
believe that anyone would be interested in rebuilding industrial society. The enthusiasm for
"progress" is a phenomenon particular to the modern form of society, and it seems not to have
existed prior to the 17th century or thereabouts.

211. In the laic Middle Ages there were four main civilizations that were about equally "ad-
vanced": Europe, the Islamic world, India, and the Far Fast (China, Japan, Korea). Three of
those civilizations remained more or less stable, and only Europe became dynamic. No one
knows why Europe became dynamic at (hat lime; historians have their thcoiics hut these arc
only speculation. At any rale, it is clear that rapid development toward a technological form
of society occurs only under special conditions. So there is no mason to assume thai long-
lasting technological regression cannot he brought about.

212. Would society eventually develop again toward an indusliiul-lcchtiological form? Maybe.
hut there is no use in worrying about it, since wc can't predict or control events 500 or 1,000
years in the future. Those problems must be dealt with by the people who will live al that lime.

THE DANGER OF LEFTISM

213. Because of their need for rebellion and for membership in a movement, leftists or persons
or similar psychological type are often unattracled to a rebellious or activist movement whose
goals and membership arc not initially leftist. The resulting influx of leftish types can easily
turn a non-leftist movement into a leftist one, so (hat leftist goals replace or distort the original
goals of the movement.

214. To avoid this, a movement that exalts nature and opposes technology must take a resolutely
anti-leftist stance and must avoid all collaboration with leftists. Leftism is in the long tun
inconsistent with wild nature, with human freedom and with Ihc elimination of modern tech-
nology. Left ism is collectivism it seeks to bind together the ciltirc world (both nature and the
human race) into a unified whole. But this implies management of nature and of human life
by organized society, and il requires advanced technology. You can't have a united world
without rapid transportation and communication, you can't make all people love one another
without sophisticated psychological techniques, you can't have a "planned society" without
the necessary technological base. Above all, leftism is driven by the need for power, and the
leftist seeks power on a collective basis, through identification with a mass movement or an
organization. Leftism is unlikely ever to give up technology, because technology is too valu-
able a source of collective power.

215. The anarchist" too seeks power, but he seeks it on an individual or small-group basis; he
wants individuals and small groups to be able to control the circumstances of their own lives.
He opposes technology because it makes small groups dependent on large organizations.

216. Some leftists may seem to oppose technology, but they will oppose il only so long as they
are outsiders and the technological system is controlled by non-leftists, [f leftism ever be-
comes dominant in society, so that the technological system becomes a tool in the hands of
leftists, they will enthusiastically use it and promote its growth. In doing this they 1 will be
repealing a pattern that leftism has shown again and again in the past. When the Bolsheviks in
Russia were outsiders, they vigorously opposed censorship and the secret police, they advo-
cated scir- determination for ethnic minorities, and so forth; hut as soon as they crime into
power themselves, they imposed a lighter censorship and crealed a more ruthless secret po-
lice than any that had existed under the Isars, and they oppressed ethnic minorities at least as
much as the tsars had done. In the United Stales, a couple of decades ago when leftists were a
minority in our universities, leftist professors were vigorous proponents of academic frcc-



34. (Paragraph 215) Tltis statement refers to our particular brand of anarchism. A wide vmiety of social
altitudes have been called "anarchist, " and it may be that many who consider themselves anatchists would
not accept our statement of paragraph 215. It should be noted, by the way, dial there is a nonviolent
anarvhist movement whose members probably would nut accept FCas anarchist and certainly would not
appiave ofFC's violent methods.



rial presented to us by the mainstream communications media and the educational system.
Leftists, es|jccially those of the ovcrsocialized type, usually do not rebel against these prin-
ciples but justify their hostility to society by claiming (with some degree of truth) that society
is not living up to these principles.

29. Here is an illustration of the way in which theoversocialized leftist shows his real attachment
to the conventional altitudes of our society while pretending to be in rebellion against it.
Many leftists push fur affirmative action, for moving black people into high-prestige jobs, for
improved education in black schools and more money for such schools; the wny of life of the
black "underclass" they regard as a social disgrace. They want to integrate the black man into
the system, make him a business executive, a lawyer, a scientist just like upper-middlc-class
while people. The leftists will reply flint ihc hist thing Ihcy want is to make the block man into
a copy of Ihc while man; instead, they want to preserve African Amcricnn culture. Bui in what
does this preservation of African American culture consist"/ It can hardly consist in anything
mote than caling black-style food, listening to black-style music, wearing black-style cloth-
ing and going to a black-style church or mosque. In other words, il can express itself only in
superficial mailers. In all essential respects more leftists of the ovcrsocialized type want to
make ihc black man conform to while, middle-class ideals. They want to make him s'tudy
technical subjects, become an executive or a scientist, spend his life climbing the status lad-
der to prove that black people nre as good as while. They want to make black fathers "respon-
sible." They want black gangs to become nonviolent, etc. But these are exactly the values of
the industrial-technological system. The system couldn't care less what kind of music a man
listens lo, what kind of clothes he wears or what religion he believes in as long as he studies
in school, holds a respectable job, climbs the status ladder, is a "responsible" parent, is non-
violent and so forth. In effect, however much he may deny it, the ovcrsocialized leftist wants
lo integrate the black man into the system and make him adopt its values.

30. We certainly do not claim that leftists, even of theoversocialized type, never rebel against the
Imulanicntal values of our society. Clearly they sometimes do, Some ovci socialized leftists
have gone so far as lo rebel against one of modern society's most iinpot Hint principles by
engaging in physical violence. By their own account, violence is for them a form of "libera-
tion." In other words, by committing violence they break through the psychological restraints
that have been trained into them. Because ihey are oversocialized these restraints have been
more confining for them than for others; hence their need lo break free of them. Bui (hey
usually justify their rebellion in terms of mainstream values. If they engage in violence they
claim to be fighting against racism or the like.

3 1 . We realize (hat many objections could be raised lo Ihc foregoing thumb-nail sketch of leftist
psychology. The teal situation is complex, and anything like a complete description of it
would lake several volumes even if the necessary data were available. We claim only to have
indicated very roughly the two most important tendencies in the psychology of modern leftism.

32. The problems of the leftist are indicative of the problems of our society as a whole. Low self-
esteem, depressive tendencies and defeatism arc not restricted to the left. Though they are
especially noticeable in the left, they arc widespread in our society. And today's society ivies
lo socialize us to a greater extent than any previous society. We are even told by experts how
lo eal, how lo exercise, how lo make love, how lo raise our kids and so forth.



4. (Paragraph 28) There are many individuals of the middle and upper classes who resist some of these values,
but usually their resistance is more or less covert. Such resistance appears in the mass media only to a
very limited extent. The main thiust of propaganda in our society is in favor of the stated values. The main
reasons why these values have become, so to speak, the official values of our society is that they are useful
to the industrial system. Violence is discouraged because it disrupts the functioning of the system. Racism
is discouraged because ethnic conflicts also disrupt the system, and discrimination wastes the talent of
minority- group members who could be useful to die system. Poverty must be "cured" because the underclass
rouses pirdilems far die system and contact with the underclass lowers the moral of the other classes.
Women are encouraged to have careers because their talents ate useful to the system anil, more impor-
tantly because by having regular jobs women became better integrated into the system and lied directly lo
it rather than to their families. This helps toweaken fatuity solidarity. (The leaders of the system say they
want to strengthen the family, but they really mean It that they want the family to serve as an effective tool
for socialiiing children in accord with the needs of the system. We atgue in paragraphs 51,52 that the
system cannot ajfoid to let the family or other small-scale social groups be strong or autonomous )



The Power Process

33. Human beings luivc a need (probably based in biology) Tor something that we wilt csdl llie
"power process." This is closely related lo the need for power (which is widely recognized)
bul is not quite the same tiling. The power process has four elements. The three most elenr-cul
of these we cnll goal, effort and attainment of goal. (Everyone needs to have goals whose
attainment requires effort, and needs to succeed in attaining at least some of his goals.) The
fourth clement is more difficult to define and may not lie necessary for everyone. Wc cidl it
autonomy and will discuss it later (paragraphs 42-44).

34. Consider the hypothetical case of a man who can have anything he wants just by wishing for
it. Such a man has power, but he will develop serious psychological problems. At first he will
have a lot of fun, bul by nnd by he will become acutely bored and demoralized. Eventually he
may become clinically depressed. History shows that leisured aristocracies tend lo become
decadent. This is not true of fighting aristocracies that have lo struggle lo maintain their
power. But leisured,, secure aristocracies that have no need to exert ihemselves usually be-
come bored, hedonistic and demoralized, even though they have power. This shows that power
is noi enough. One must have goals toward which to exercise one's power.

35. Everyone has goals; if nothing else, to obtain the physical necessities oflife: food, water and
whatever clothing and shelter are made necessary by lite climate. Bul the leisured aristocrat
obtains these things without effort. Hence his boredom and demoralization.

36. Non-altainineni of important goals results in death if the goals are physical necessities, and in
frustration if non-attainment of the goals is compatible with survival. Consistent failure lo
attain goals throughout life results in defeatism, low self-esteem or depression.

37. Thus, in order to avoid serious psychological problems, a human being needs goals whose
attainment requires effort, and he must have a reasonable rate of success in attaining his
goals.

SURROGATE ACTIVITIES

38. But not every leisured aristocrat becomes bored and demoralized. Tor example, the emperor
Hirohilo, instead of sinking into decadent hedonism, devoted himself lo marine biology, n
field in which lie became distinguished. When people do not have to exerl Ihemselves In
satisfy Uieir physical needs they often scl up artificial goals for ihemselves. In many cases
(hey then pursue these goals with the same energy and emotional involvement (hat they oth-
erwise would have put into the search for physical necessities. Thus Ihc aristocrats of the
Roman Empire bad their literary pretentions; ninny European aristocrats n few centuries ago
invested tremendous lime and energy in hunting, though they certainly didn't need ihc meal;
other aristocracies have competed for status through elaborate displays of wealth; and a few
aristocrats, like Hirohilo. have turned to science.

39. We use Ihe term "surrogate activity" to designate an activity that is directed toward an artifi-
cial goal that people set up for ihemselves merely in order lo have some goal to work toward,
or let us say, merely for the sake of the "fulfilhiienl" that (hey get from pursuing the goal.
Here is a rule of Ihumb for the identification of surrogate activities. Given a person who
devotes much time and energy to the pursuit of goal X, ask yourself this: If he had to devote
most of his lime and energy lo satisfying his biological needs, and if that effort required him
to use his physical and mental facilities in a varied and interesting way, would he feci seri-
ously deprived because he did not attain goal X? If ihc answer is no, then the person's pursuit
of a goal X is a surrogate activity. Hirohilo's studies in marine biology clearly conslitulcd a
surrogate activity, since it is prclty certain that if Hirohilo had had lo spend his time working
at interesting non-scientific tasks in order to obtain Ihc necessities of life, he would not have
felt deprived because he didn't know all about the anatomy and life-cycles of marine animals
On the other band the pursuit of sex nnd love (for example) is nol a surrogate activity, because
most people, even if llicir existence were otherwise satisfactory, would feel deprived if they
passed their lives without ever having a relationship with a member of the opposite sex. (Bul
pursuit of an excessive amount or sex, more than one really needs, can be a surrogate activity.)

40. Ill modern industrial society only minimal effort is necessary to satisfy one's physical needs.



altitude is a direct outcome of a person's genetic constitution, but it nppcnrs (hat personality
Iraits tend, within the context of our society, to make & person more likely to hold this or thai
social attitude. Objections to these findings have been raised, bul objections are feeble and
seem lo be ideologically motivated. In any evcnl, no one denies thai children tend on the
average lo bold social altitudes similar to those of (heir parents. From our point of view it
doesn't mailer all that much whether the altitudes are passed on genetically or through child-
hood training. In either case they aw passed on,

205. The trouble is thai many of ihc people who arc inclined to rebel against the industrial system
arc also concerned about the population problems, hence Ihey are apt to have few or no
children. In this way ihey may be handing the world over lo the sort of people who support or
al leasl accept the industrial system. To insure ihc strength of the next generation of revolu-
tionaries Ihc present generation must reproduce ilsclf abundantly. In doing so they will be
worsening Ihc population problem only slightly. And ihc most important problem is to get rid
of the industrial system, because once the industrial system is gone the world's population
necessarily will decrease (see paragraph 167); whereas, if ihe industrial system survives, it
will continue developing new techniques of food production that may enable the world's
population to keep increasing almost indefinitely.

206. With regard to revolutionary strategy, the only points on which we absolutely insist are that
the single overriding goal must be ihe elimination of modern technology, and lhat no other
goal can be allowed lo compete with this one. For the rest, revolutionaries should take an
empirical approach. If experience indicates that some of the recommendations made in the
foregoing paragraphs arc not going to give good results, then those recommendations should
be discarded.

TWO KINDS OF TECHNOLOGY

207. An argument likely to be raised against our proposed revolution is lhat it is bound lo fiiil.
because (il is claimed) throughout history technology has always progressed, never regressed,
hence technological regression is impossible. But this claim is false.

208. Wc distinguish between ifvo kinds of technology, which wc will call small-scale technology
and organization-dependent technology. Small-scale technology is technology that can be
used by siniill-sciile communities without outside assistance. Organization-dependent tech-
nology is technology that depends on huge-scale social organization. Wc arc aware of no
significant cases of regression in small-scale technology. Bul organization-dependent tech-
nology does regress when the social organization on which it depends breaks down. Ex- .
ample: When Ihe Roman Umpire fell apart the Romans* small-scale technology surVivefd be-
cause any clever village craftsman could build, for instance, a waler wheel, any skilled smith
could make steel by Roman methods, and so forth. But the Romans' organization-dependent
technology did regress. Their aqueducts fell into disrepair and were never rebuilt. Their tech-
niques of road construction were lost. The Roman system of urban sanitation was forgotten,
so lhat until rather reccnl times did the sanitation of European cities match that of Ancient Rome.

209. The reason why technology has seemed always to progress is that, until perhaps a century
or two before the Industrial Revolution, mosl technology was small-scale technology. But
most of the technology developed since the Industrial Revolution is organization-dependent
technology. Take (he refrigerator for example. Without factory-made parts or the facilities of
a posl-iudusirial machine shop it would be virtually impossible for a handful of local crafts-
men lo build a re frige ralor. If by some miracle they did succeed in building one it would be
useless lo llicni without a reliable source of electric power. So they would have to dam a
stream and build a generator. Generators require large amounts of copper wire. Imagine try-
ing lo make that wire without modern machinery. And where would ihey get a gas suitable for
refrigeration? It would be much ensier lo build an icehouse or preserve food by drying or
picking, as was done before the invention of the refrigerator.

210. So il is clear lhat if ihc industrial system were once thoroughly broken down, refrigeration
technology would quickly be lost. The same is Irue of olher organ! z.at ion -dependent technol-
ogy. And once this technology had been lost for a generation or so it would take centuries lo
rebuild it, just as it look centuries to build il the first lime around. Surviving technical books

A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  THESEUS, Duke of Athens
  EGEUS, father to Hermia
  LYSANDER, in love with Hermia
  DEMETRIUS, in love with Hermia
  PHILOSTRATE, Master of the Revels to Theseus
  QUINCE, a carpenter
  SNUG, a joiner
  BOTTOM, a weaver
  FLUTE, a bellows-mender
  SNOUT, a tinker
  STARVELING, a tailor

  HIPPOLYTA, Queen of the Amazons, bethrothed to Theseus
  HERMIA, daughter to Egeus, in love with Lysander
  HELENA, in love with Demetrius

  OBERON, King of the Fairies
  TITANIA, Queen of the Fairies
  PUCK, or ROBIN GOODFELLOW
  PEASEBLOSSOM, fairy
  COBWEB, fairy
  MOTH, fairy
  MUSTARDSEED, fairy

  PROLOGUE, PYRAMUS, THISBY, WALL, MOONSHINE, LION are presented
by:
    QUINCE, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, STARVELING, AND SNUG

  Other Fairies attending their King and Queen
  Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Athens and a wood near it


ACT I. SCENE I.
Athens. The palace of THESEUS

Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and ATTENDANTS

  THESEUS. Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
    Draws on apace; four happy days bring in
    Another moon; but, O, methinks, how slow
    This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires,
    Like to a step-dame or a dowager,
    Long withering out a young man's revenue.
  HIPPOLYTA. Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
    Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
    And then the moon, like to a silver bow
    New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
    Of our solemnities.
  THESEUS. Go, Philostrate,
    Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;
    Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;
    Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
    The pale companion is not for our pomp.     Exit PHILOSTRATE
    Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword,
    And won thy love doing thee injuries;
    But I will wed thee in another key,
    With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling.

          Enter EGEUS, and his daughter HERMIA, LYSANDER,
                           and DEMETRIUS

  EGEUS. Happy be Theseus, our renowned Duke!
  THESEUS. Thanks, good Egeus; what's the news with thee?
  EGEUS. Full of vexation come I, with complaint
    Against my child, my daughter Hermia.
    Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,
    This man hath my consent to marry her.
    Stand forth, Lysander. And, my gracious Duke,
    This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child.
    Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,
    And interchang'd love-tokens with my child;
    Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,
    With feigning voice, verses of feigning love,
    And stol'n the impression of her fantasy
    With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits,
    Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats- messengers
    Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth;
    With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart;
    Turn'd her obedience, which is due to me,
    To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke,
    Be it so she will not here before your Grace
    Consent to marry with Demetrius,
    I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
    As she is mine I may dispose of her;
    Which shall be either to this gentleman
    Or to her death, according to our law
    Immediately provided in that case.
  THESEUS. What say you, Hermia? Be advis'd, fair maid.
    To you your father should be as a god;
    One that compos'd your beauties; yea, and one
    To whom you are but as a form in wax,
    By him imprinted, and within his power
    To leave the figure, or disfigure it.
    Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
  HERMIA. So is Lysander.
  THESEUS. In himself he is;
    But, in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
    The other must be held the worthier.
  HERMIA. I would my father look'd but with my eyes.
  THESEUS. Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
  HERMIA. I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
    I know not by what power I am made bold,
    Nor how it may concern my modesty
    In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
    But I beseech your Grace that I may know
    The worst that may befall me in this case,
    If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
  THESEUS. Either to die the death, or to abjure
    For ever the society of men.
    Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
    Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
    Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
    You can endure the livery of a nun,
    For aye to be shady cloister mew'd,
    To live a barren sister all your life,
    Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
    Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood
    To undergo such maiden pilgrimage;
    But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd
    Than that which withering on the virgin thorn
    Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.
  HERMIA. So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
    Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
    Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke
    My soul consents not to give sovereignty.
  THESEUS. Take time to pause; and by the next new moon-
    The sealing-day betwixt my love and me
    For everlasting bond of fellowship-
    Upon that day either prepare to die
    For disobedience to your father's will,
    Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
    Or on Diana's altar to protest
    For aye austerity and single life.
  DEMETRIUS. Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield
    Thy crazed title to my certain right.
  LYSANDER. You have her father's love, Demetrius;
    Let me have Hermia's; do you marry him.
  EGEUS. Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
    And what is mine my love shall render him;
    And she is mine; and all my right of her
    I do estate unto Demetrius.
  LYSANDER. I am, my lord, as well deriv'd as he,
    As well possess'd; my love is more than his;
    My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd,
    If not with vantage, as Demetrius';
    And, which is more than all these boasts can be,
    I am belov'd of beauteous Hermia.
    Why should not I then prosecute my right?
    Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
    Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
    And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
    Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
    Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
  THESEUS. I must confess that I have heard so much,
    And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
    But, being over-full of self-affairs,
    My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come;
    And come, Egeus; you shall go with me;
    I have some private schooling for you both.
    For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
    To fit your fancies to your father's will,
    Or else the law of Athens yields you up-
    Which by no means we may extenuate-
    To death, or to a vow of single life.
    Come, my Hippolyta; what cheer, my love?
    Demetrius, and Egeus, go along;
    I must employ you in some business
    Against our nuptial, and confer with you
    Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
  EGEUS. With duty and desire we follow you.
                              Exeunt all but LYSANDER and HERMIA
  LYSANDER. How now, my love! Why is your cheek so pale?
    How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
  HERMIA. Belike for want of rain, which I could well
    Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
  LYSANDER. Ay me! for aught that I could ever read,
    Could ever hear by tale or history,
    The course of true love never did run smooth;
    But either it was different in blood-
  HERMIA. O cross! too high to be enthrall'd to low.
  LYSANDER. Or else misgraffed in respect of years-
  HERMIA. O spite! too old to be engag'd to young.
  LYSANDER. Or else it stood upon the choice of friends-
  HERMIA. O hell! to choose love by another's eyes.
  LYSANDER. Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
    War, death, or sickness, did lay siege to it,
    Making it momentary as a sound,
    Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
    Brief as the lightning in the collied night
    That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
    And ere a man hath power to say 'Behold!'
    The jaws of darkness do devour it up;
    So quick bright things come to confusion.
  HERMIA. If then true lovers have ever cross'd,
    It stands as an edict in destiny.
    Then let us teach our trial patience,
    Because it is a customary cross,
    As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
    Wishes and tears, poor Fancy's followers.
  LYSANDER. A good persuasion; therefore, hear me, Hermia.
    I have a widow aunt, a dowager
    Of great revenue, and she hath no child-
    From Athens is her house remote seven leagues-
    And she respects me as her only son.
    There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
    And to that place the sharp Athenian law
    Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,
    Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night;
    And in the wood, a league without the town,
    Where I did meet thee once with Helena
    To do observance to a morn of May,
    There will I stay for thee.
  HERMIA. My good Lysander!
    I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow,
    By his best arrow, with the golden head,
    By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
    By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
    And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage Queen,
    When the false Troyan under sail was seen,
    By all the vows that ever men have broke,
    In number more than ever women spoke,
    In that same place thou hast appointed me,
    To-morrow truly will I meet with thee.
  LYSANDER. Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.

                         Enter HELENA

  HERMIA. God speed fair Helena! Whither away?
  HELENA. Call you me fair? That fair again unsay.
    Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
    Your eyes are lode-stars and your tongue's sweet air
    More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear,
    When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
    Sickness is catching; O, were favour so,
    Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go!
    My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
    My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody.
    Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
    The rest I'd give to be to you translated.
    O, teach me how you look, and with what art
    You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart!
  HERMIA. I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
  HELENA. O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
  HERMIA. I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
  HELENA. O that my prayers could such affection move!
  HERMIA. The more I hate, the more he follows me.
  HELENA. The more I love, the more he hateth me.
  HERMIA. His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
  HELENA. None, but your beauty; would that fault were mine!
  HERMIA. Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;
    Lysander and myself will fly this place.
    Before the time I did Lysander see,
    Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me.
    O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,
    That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell!
  LYSANDER. Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:
    To-morrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
    Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass,
    Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass,
    A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal,
    Through Athens' gates have we devis'd to steal.
  HERMIA. And in the wood where often you and I
    Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
    Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
    There my Lysander and myself shall meet;
    And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,
    To seek new friends and stranger companies.
    Farewell, sweet playfellow; pray thou for us,
    And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
    Keep word, Lysander; we must starve our sight
    From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.
  LYSANDER. I will, my Hermia. [Exit HERMIA] Helena, adieu;
    As you on him, Demetrius dote on you.                   Exit
  HELENA. How happy some o'er other some can be!
    Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
    But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
    He will not know what all but he do know.
    And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
    So I, admiring of his qualities.
    Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
    Love can transpose to form and dignity.
    Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;
    And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind.
    Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste;
    Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste;
    And therefore is Love said to be a child,
    Because in choice he is so oft beguil'd.
    As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
    So the boy Love is perjur'd everywhere;
    For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne,
    He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine;
    And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
    So he dissolv'd, and show'rs of oaths did melt.
    I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight;
    Then to the wood will he to-morrow night
    Pursue her; and for this intelligence
    If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
    But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
    To have his sight thither and back again.               Exit




SCENE II.
Athens. QUINCE'S house

Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING

  QUINCE. Is all our company here?
  BOTTOM. You were best to call them generally, man by man,
according
    to the scrip.
  QUINCE. Here is the scroll of every man's name which is thought
    fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the
Duke
    and the Duchess on his wedding-day at night.
  BOTTOM. First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on;
then
    read the names of the actors; and so grow to a point.
  QUINCE. Marry, our play is 'The most Lamentable Comedy and most
    Cruel Death of Pyramus and Thisby.'
  BOTTOM. A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry.
Now,
    good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll.
Masters,
    spread yourselves.
  QUINCE. Answer, as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.
  BOTTOM. Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.
  QUINCE. You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
  BOTTOM. What is Pyramus? A lover, or a tyrant?
  QUINCE. A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love.
  BOTTOM. That will ask some tears in the true performing of it.
If I
    do it, let the audience look to their eyes; I will move
storms; I
    will condole in some measure. To the rest- yet my chief
humour is
    for a tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a
cat
    in, to make all split.

                 'The raging rocks
                 And shivering shocks
                 Shall break the locks
                   Of prison gates;

                 And Phibbus' car
                 Shall shine from far,
                 And make and mar
                   The foolish Fates.'

    This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players. This is
    Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein: a lover is more condoling.
  QUINCE. Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.
  FLUTE. Here, Peter Quince.
  QUINCE. Flute, you must take Thisby on you.
  FLUTE. What is Thisby? A wand'ring knight?
  QUINCE. It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
  FLUTE. Nay, faith, let not me play a woman; I have a beard
coming.
  QUINCE. That's all one; you shall play it in a mask, and you
may
    speak as small as you will.
  BOTTOM. An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too.
    I'll speak in a monstrous little voice: 'Thisne, Thisne!'
    [Then speaking small] 'Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy
    Thisby dear, and lady dear!'
  QUINCE. No, no, you must play Pyramus; and, Flute, you Thisby.
  BOTTOM. Well, proceed.
  QUINCE. Robin Starveling, the tailor.
  STARVELING. Here, Peter Quince.
  QUINCE. Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother.
    Tom Snout, the tinker.
  SNOUT. Here, Peter Quince.
  QUINCE. You, Pyramus' father; myself, Thisby's father; Snug,
the
    joiner, you, the lion's part. And, I hope, here is a play
fitted.
  SNUG. Have you the lion's part written? Pray you, if it be,
give it
    me, for I am slow of study.
  QUINCE. You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
  BOTTOM. Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will do
any
    man's heart good to hear me; I will roar that I will make the
    Duke say 'Let him roar again, let him roar again.'
  QUINCE. An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the
    Duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek; and that were
    enough to hang us all.
  ALL. That would hang us, every mother's son.
  BOTTOM. I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies
out
    of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang
us;
    but I will aggravate my voice so, that I will roar you as
gently
    as any sucking dove; I will roar you an 'twere any
nightingale.
  QUINCE. You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a
    sweet-fac'd man; a proper man, as one shall see in a summer's
    day; a most lovely gentleman-like man; therefore you must
needs
    play Pyramus.
  BOTTOM. Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to
play
    it in?
  QUINCE. Why, what you will.
  BOTTOM. I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard,
your
    orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your
    French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.
  QUINCE. Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and
then
    you will play bare-fac'd. But, masters, here are your parts;
and
    I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to con them
by
    to-morrow night; and meet me in the palace wood, a mile
without
    the town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse; for if we
meet in
    the city, we shall be dogg'd with company, and our devices
known.
    In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties, such as our
    play wants. I pray you, fail me not.
  BOTTOM. We will meet; and there we may rehearse most obscenely
and
    courageously. Take pains; be perfect; adieu.
  QUINCE. At the Duke's oak we meet.
  BOTTOM. Enough; hold, or cut bow-strings.               Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.
A wood near Athens

Enter a FAIRY at One door, and PUCK at another

  PUCK. How now, spirit! whither wander you?
  FAIRY.      Over hill, over dale,
                Thorough bush, thorough brier,
              Over park, over pale,
                Thorough flood, thorough fire,
              I do wander every where,
              Swifter than the moon's sphere;
              And I serve the Fairy Queen,
              To dew her orbs upon the green.
              The cowslips tall her pensioners be;
              In their gold coats spots you see;
              Those be rubies, fairy favours,
              In those freckles live their savours.

    I must go seek some dewdrops here,
    And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.
    Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I'll be gone.
    Our Queen and all her elves come here anon.
  PUCK. The King doth keep his revels here to-night;
    Take heed the Queen come not within his sight;
    For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
    Because that she as her attendant hath
    A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king.
    She never had so sweet a changeling;
    And jealous Oberon would have the child
    Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild;
    But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
    Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
    And now they never meet in grove or green,
    By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,
    But they do square, that all their elves for fear
    Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
  FAIRY. Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
    Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
    Call'd Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
    That frights the maidens of the villagery,
    Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern,
    And bootless make the breathless housewife churn,
    And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
    Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
    Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,
    You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
    Are not you he?
  PUCK. Thou speakest aright:
    I am that merry wanderer of the night.
    I jest to Oberon, and make him smile
    When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
    Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;
    And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl
    In very likeness of a roasted crab,
    And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob,
    And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
    The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
    Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
    Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
    And 'tailor' cries, and falls into a cough;
    And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh,
    And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear
    A merrier hour was never wasted there.
    But room, fairy, here comes Oberon.
  FAIRY. And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!

       Enter OBERON at one door, with his TRAIN, and TITANIA,
                        at another, with hers

  OBERON. Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.
  TITANIA. What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence;
    I have forsworn his bed and company.
  OBERON. Tarry, rash wanton; am not I thy lord?
  TITANIA. Then I must be thy lady; but I know
    When thou hast stolen away from fairy land,
    And in the shape of Corin sat all day,
    Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love
    To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
    Come from the farthest steep of India,
    But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
    Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love,
    To Theseus must be wedded, and you come
    To give their bed joy and prosperity?
  OBERON. How canst thou thus, for shame, Titania,
    Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
    Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
    Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night
    From Perigouna, whom he ravished?
    And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
    With Ariadne and Antiopa?
  TITANIA. These are the forgeries of jealousy;
    And never, since the middle summer's spring,
    Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
    By paved fountain, or by rushy brook,
    Or in the beached margent of the sea,
    To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
    But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport.
    Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
    As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea
    Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,
    Hath every pelting river made so proud
    That they have overborne their continents.
    The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain,
    The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
    Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard;
    The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
    And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;
    The nine men's morris is fill'd up with mud,
    And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
    For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
    The human mortals want their winter here;
    No night is now with hymn or carol blest;
    Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
    Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
    That rheumatic diseases do abound.
    And thorough this distemperature we see
    The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
    Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose;
    And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown
    An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
    Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
    The childing autumn, angry winter, change
    Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,
    By their increase, now knows not which is which.
    And this same progeny of evils comes
    From our debate, from our dissension;
    We are their parents and original.
  OBERON. Do you amend it, then; it lies in you.
    Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
    I do but beg a little changeling boy
    To be my henchman.
  TITANIA. Set your heart at rest;
    The fairy land buys not the child of me.
    His mother was a vot'ress of my order;
    And, in the spiced Indian air, by night,
    Full often hath she gossip'd by my side;
    And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,
    Marking th' embarked traders on the flood;
    When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive,
    And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
    Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait
    Following- her womb then rich with my young squire-
    Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
    To fetch me trifles, and return again,
    As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
    But she, being mortal, of that boy did die;
    And for her sake do I rear up her boy;
    And for her sake I will not part with him.
  OBERON. How long within this wood intend you stay?
  TITANIA. Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day.
    If you will patiently dance in our round,
    And see our moonlight revels, go with us;
    If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.
  OBERON. Give me that boy and I will go with thee.
  TITANIA. Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
    We shall chide downright if I longer stay.
                                     Exit TITANIA with her train
  OBERON. Well, go thy way; thou shalt not from this grove
    Till I torment thee for this injury.
    My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb'rest
    Since once I sat upon a promontory,
    And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back
    Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
    That the rude sea grew civil at her song,
    And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
    To hear the sea-maid's music.
  PUCK. I remember.
  OBERON. That very time I saw, but thou couldst not,
    Flying between the cold moon and the earth
    Cupid, all arm'd; a certain aim he took
    At a fair vestal, throned by the west,
    And loos'd his love-shaft smartly from his bow,
    As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts;
    But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
    Quench'd in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon;
    And the imperial vot'ress passed on,
    In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
    Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell.
    It fell upon a little western flower,
    Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound,
    And maidens call it Love-in-idleness.
    Fetch me that flow'r, the herb I showed thee once.
    The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
    Will make or man or woman madly dote
    Upon the next live creature that it sees.
    Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
    Ere the leviathan can swim a league.
  PUCK. I'll put a girdle round about the earth
    In forty minutes.                                  Exit PUCK
  OBERON. Having once this juice,
    I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,
    And drop the liquor of it in her eyes;
    The next thing then she waking looks upon,
    Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
    On meddling monkey, or on busy ape,
    She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
    And ere I take this charm from off her sight,
    As I can take it with another herb,
    I'll make her render up her page to me.
    But who comes here? I am invisible;
    And I will overhear their conference.

               Enter DEMETRIUS, HELENA following him

  DEMETRIUS. I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
    Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
    The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.
    Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood,
    And here am I, and wood within this wood,
    Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
    Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
  HELENA. You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant;
    But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
    Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
    And I shall have no power to follow you.
  DEMETRIUS. Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
    Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth
    Tell you I do not nor I cannot love you?
  HELENA. And even for that do I love you the more.
    I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,
    The more you beat me, I will fawn on you.
    Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,
    Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,
    Unworthy as I am, to follow you.
    What worser place can I beg in your love,
    And yet a place of high respect with me,
    Than to be used as you use your dog?
  DEMETRIUS. Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
    For I am sick when I do look on thee.
  HELENA. And I am sick when I look not on you.
  DEMETRIUS. You do impeach your modesty too much
    To leave the city and commit yourself
    Into the hands of one that loves you not;
    To trust the opportunity of night,
    And the ill counsel of a desert place,
    With the rich worth of your virginity.
  HELENA. Your virtue is my privilege for that:
    It is not night when I do see your face,
    Therefore I think I am not in the night;
    Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
    For you, in my respect, are all the world.
    Then how can it be said I am alone
    When all the world is here to look on me?
  DEMETRIUS. I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
    And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
  HELENA. The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
    Run when you will; the story shall be chang'd:
    Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;
    The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind
    Makes speed to catch the tiger- bootless speed,
    When cowardice pursues and valour flies.
  DEMETRIUS. I will not stay thy questions; let me go;
    Or, if thou follow me, do not believe
    But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
  HELENA. Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
    You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
    Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
    We cannot fight for love as men may do;
    We should be woo'd, and were not made to woo.
                                                  Exit DEMETRIUS
    I'll follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,
    To die upon the hand I love so well.             Exit HELENA
  OBERON. Fare thee well, nymph; ere he do leave this grove,
    Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.

                            Re-enter PUCK

    Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
  PUCK. Ay, there it is.
  OBERON. I pray thee give it me.
    I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
    Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
    Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
    With sweet musk-roses, and with eglantine;
    There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
    Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight;
    And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin,
    Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in;
    And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes,
    And make her full of hateful fantasies.
    Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:
    A sweet Athenian lady is in love
    With a disdainful youth; anoint his eyes;
    But do it when the next thing he espies
    May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
    By the Athenian garments he hath on.
    Effect it with some care, that he may prove
    More fond on her than she upon her love.
    And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
  PUCK. Fear not, my lord; your servant shall do so.      Exeunt




SCENE II.
Another part of the wood

Enter TITANIA, with her train

  TITANIA. Come now, a roundel and a fairy song;
    Then, for the third part of a minute, hence:
    Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds;
    Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,
    To make my small elves coats; and some keep back
    The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
    At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;
    Then to your offices, and let me rest.

                          The FAIRIES Sing

  FIRST FAIRY. You spotted snakes with double tongue,
               Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
               Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong,
               Come not near our fairy Queen.
  CHORUS.      Philomel with melody
               Sing in our sweet lullaby.
               Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby.
               Never harm
               Nor spell nor charm
               Come our lovely lady nigh.
               So good night, with lullaby.
  SECOND FAIRY.  Weaving spiders, come not here;
                 Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence.
                 Beetles black, approach not near;
                 Worm nor snail do no offence.
  CHORUS.      Philomel with melody, etc.       [TITANIA Sleeps]
  FIRST FAIRY. Hence away; now all is well.
               One aloof stand sentinel.          Exeunt FAIRIES

      Enter OBERON and squeezes the flower on TITANIA'S eyelids

  OBERON. What thou seest when thou dost wake,
    Do it for thy true-love take;
    Love and languish for his sake.
    Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
    Pard, or boar with bristled hair,
    In thy eye that shall appear
    When thou wak'st, it is thy dear.
    Wake when some vile thing is near.                      Exit

                     Enter LYSANDER and HERMIA

  LYSANDER. Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood;
    And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way;
    We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
    And tarry for the comfort of the day.
  HERMIA. Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed,
    For I upon this bank will rest my head.
  LYSANDER. One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
    One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
  HERMIA. Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear,
    Lie further off yet; do not lie so near.
  LYSANDER. O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
    Love takes the meaning in love's conference.
    I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
    So that but one heart we can make of it;
    Two bosoms interchained with an oath,
    So then two bosoms and a single troth.
    Then by your side no bed-room me deny,
    For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.
  HERMIA. Lysander riddles very prettily.
    Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
    If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied!
    But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy
    Lie further off, in human modesty;
    Such separation as may well be said
    Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
    So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend.
    Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!
  LYSANDER. Amen, amen, to that fair prayer say I;
    And then end life when I end loyalty!
    Here is my bed; sleep give thee all his rest!
  HERMIA. With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd!
                                                    [They sleep]

                          Enter PUCK

  PUCK.      Through the forest have I gone,
             But Athenian found I none
             On whose eyes I might approve
             This flower's force in stirring love.
             Night and silence- Who is here?
             Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
             This is he, my master said,
             Despised the Athenian maid;
             And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
             On the dank and dirty ground.
             Pretty soul! she durst not lie
             Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
             Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
             All the power this charm doth owe:
             When thou wak'st let love forbid
             Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
             So awake when I am gone;
             For I must now to Oberon.                      Exit

               Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running

  HELENA. Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
  DEMETRIUS. I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
  HELENA. O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.
  DEMETRIUS. Stay on thy peril; I alone will go.            Exit
  HELENA. O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!
    The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
    Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies,
    For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
    How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears;
    If so, my eyes are oft'ner wash'd than hers.
    No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
    For beasts that meet me run away for fear;
    Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
    Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus.
    What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
    Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne?
    But who is here? Lysander! on the ground!
    Dead, or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.
    Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.
  LYSANDER. [Waking] And run through fire I will for thy sweet
sake.
    Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
    That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
    Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
    Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
  HELENA. Do not say so, Lysander; say not so.
    What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?
    Yet Hermia still loves you; then be content.
  LYSANDER. Content with Hermia! No: I do repent
    The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
    Not Hermia but Helena I love:
    Who will not change a raven for a dove?
    The will of man is by his reason sway'd,
    And reason says you are the worthier maid.
    Things growing are not ripe until their season;
    So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason;
    And touching now the point of human skill,
    Reason becomes the marshal to my will,
    And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook
    Love's stories, written in Love's richest book.
  HELENA. Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
    When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
    Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man,
    That I did never, no, nor never can,
    Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,
    But you must flout my insufficiency?
    Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
    In such disdainful manner me to woo.
    But fare you well; perforce I must confess
    I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
    O, that a lady of one man refus'd
    Should of another therefore be abus'd!                  Exit
  LYSANDER. She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there;
    And never mayst thou come Lysander near!
    For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
    The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
    Or as the heresies that men do leave
    Are hated most of those they did deceive,
    So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
    Of all be hated, but the most of me!
    And, all my powers, address your love and might
    To honour Helen, and to be her knight!                  Exit
  HERMIA. [Starting] Help me, Lysander, help me; do thy best
    To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.
    Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
    Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
    Methought a serpent eat my heart away,
    And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
    Lysander! What, remov'd? Lysander! lord!
    What, out of hearing gone? No sound, no word?
    Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear;
    Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
    No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
    Either death or you I'll find immediately.              Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
The wood. TITANIA lying asleep

Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING

  BOTTOM. Are we all met?
  QUINCE. Pat, pat; and here's a marvellous convenient place for
our
    rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn
    brake our tiring-house; and we will do it in action, as we
will
    do it before the Duke.
  BOTTOM. Peter Quince!
  QUINCE. What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
  BOTTOM. There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisby
that
    will never please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill
    himself; which the ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?
  SNOUT. By'r lakin, a parlous fear.
  STARVELING. I believe we must leave the killing out, when all
is
    done.
  BOTTOM. Not a whit; I have a device to make all well. Write me
a
    prologue; and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm
    with our swords, and that Pyramus is not kill'd indeed; and
for
    the more better assurance, tell them that I Pyramus am not
    Pyramus but Bottom the weaver. This will put them out of
fear.
  QUINCE. Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be
written
    in eight and six.
  BOTTOM. No, make it two more; let it be written in eight and
eight.
  SNOUT. Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
  STARVELING. I fear it, I promise you.
  BOTTOM. Masters, you ought to consider with yourself to bring
in-
    God shield us!- a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing;
for
    there is not a more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living;
and
    we ought to look to't.
  SNOUT. Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.
  BOTTOM. Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be
seen
    through the lion's neck; and he himself must speak through,
    saying thus, or to the same defect: 'Ladies,' or 'Fair
ladies, I
    would wish you' or 'I would request you' or 'I would entreat
you
    not to fear, not to tremble. My life for yours! If you think
I
    come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. No, I am no
such
    thing; I am a man as other men are.' And there, indeed, let
him
    name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.
  QUINCE. Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things-
that
    is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber; for, you know,
Pyramus
    and Thisby meet by moonlight.
  SNOUT. Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
  BOTTOM. A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanack; find out
    moonshine, find out moonshine.
  QUINCE. Yes, it doth shine that night.
  BOTTOM. Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber
    window, where we play, open; and the moon may shine in at the
    casement.
  QUINCE. Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and
a
    lantern, and say he comes to disfigure or to present the
person
    of Moonshine. Then there is another thing: we must have a
wall in
    the great chamber; for Pyramus and Thisby, says the story,
did
    talk through the chink of a wall.
  SNOUT. You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?
  BOTTOM. Some man or other must present Wall; and let him have
some
    plaster, or some loam, or some rough-cast about him, to
signify
    wall; and let him hold his fingers thus, and through that
cranny
    shall Pyramus and Thisby whisper.
  QUINCE. If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every
    mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin;
when
    you have spoken your speech, enter into that brake; and so
every
    one according to his cue.

                          Enter PUCK behind

  PUCK. What hempen homespuns have we swagg'ring here,
    So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
    What, a play toward! I'll be an auditor;
    An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.
  QUINCE. Speak, Pyramus. Thisby, stand forth.
  BOTTOM. Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet-
  QUINCE. 'Odious'- odorous!
  BOTTOM. -odours savours sweet;
    So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear.
    But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
    And by and by I will to thee appear.                    Exit
  PUCK. A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here!           Exit
  FLUTE. Must I speak now?
  QUINCE. Ay, marry, must you; for you must understand he goes
but to
    see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.
  FLUTE. Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
    Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
    Most brisky juvenal, and eke most lovely Jew,
    As true as truest horse, that would never tire,
    I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.
  QUINCE. 'Ninus' tomb,' man! Why, you must not speak that yet;
that
    you answer to Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues,
and
    all. Pyramus enter: your cue is past; it is 'never tire.'
  FLUTE. O- As true as truest horse, that y et would never tire.

            Re-enter PUCK, and BOTTOM with an ass's head

  BOTTOM. If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine.
  QUINCE. O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters!
fly,
    masters! Help!
                                  Exeunt all but BOTTOM and PUCK
  PUCK. I'll follow you; I'll lead you about a round,
    Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier;
    Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
    A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
    And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
    Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
Exit
  BOTTOM. Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make
me
    afeard.

                          Re-enter SNOUT

  SNOUT. O Bottom, thou art chang'd! What do I see on thee?
  BOTTOM. What do you see? You see an ass-head of your own, do
you?
                                                      Exit SNOUT

                          Re-enter QUINCE

  QUINCE. Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art translated.
 Exit
  BOTTOM. I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me; to
    fright me, if they could. But I will not stir from this
place, do
    what they can; I will walk up and down here, and will sing,
that
    they shall hear I am not afraid.                     [Sings]

          The ousel cock, so black of hue,
            With orange-tawny bill,
          The throstle with his note so true,
            The wren with little quill.

  TITANIA. What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed?
  BOTTOM. [Sings]
          The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
            The plain-song cuckoo grey,
          Whose note full many a man doth mark,
            And dares not answer nay-
    for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird?
    Who would give a bird the he, though he cry 'cuckoo' never
so?
  TITANIA. I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
    Mine ear is much enamoured of thy note;
    So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape;
    And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me,
    On the first view, to say, to swear, I love thee.
  BOTTOM. Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for
that.
    And yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep little
company
    together now-a-days. The more the pity that some honest
    neighbours will not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon
    occasion.
  TITANIA. Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
  BOTTOM. Not so, neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of
this
    wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.
  TITANIA. Out of this wood do not desire to go;
    Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
    I am a spirit of no common rate;
    The summer still doth tend upon my state;
    And I do love thee; therefore, go with me.
    I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee;
    And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
    And sing, while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep;
    And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
    That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.
    Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed!

       Enter PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH, and MUSTARDSEED

  PEASEBLOSSOM. Ready.
  COBWEB. And I.
  MOTH. And I.
  MUSTARDSEED. And I.
  ALL. Where shall we go?
  TITANIA. Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;
    Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
    Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
    With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
    The honey bags steal from the humble-bees,
    And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs,
    And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,
    To have my love to bed and to arise;
    And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,
    To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
    Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Hail, mortal!
  COBWEB. Hail!
  MOTH. Hail!
  MUSTARDSEED. Hail!
  BOTTOM. I cry your worships mercy, heartily; I beseech your
    worship's name.
  COBWEB. Cobweb.
  BOTTOM. I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master
    Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you. Your
    name, honest gentleman?
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Peaseblossom.
  BOTTOM. I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother,
and
    to Master Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I
shall
    desire you of more acquaintance too. Your name, I beseech
you,
    sir?
  MUSTARDSEED. Mustardseed.
  BOTTOM. Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well.
That
    same cowardly giant-like ox-beef hath devour'd many a
gentleman
    of your house. I promise you your kindred hath made my eyes
water
    ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance, good Master
    Mustardseed.
  TITANIA. Come, wait upon him; lead him to my bower.
    The moon, methinks, looks with a wat'ry eye;
    And when she weeps, weeps every little flower;
    Lamenting some enforced chastity.
    Tie up my love's tongue, bring him silently.          Exeunt




SCENE II.
Another part of the wood

Enter OBERON

  OBERON. I wonder if Titania be awak'd;
    Then, what it was that next came in her eye,
    Which she must dote on in extremity.

                          Enter PUCK

    Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit!
    What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
  PUCK. My mistress with a monster is in love.
    Near to her close and consecrated bower,
    While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
    A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
    That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
    Were met together to rehearse a play
    Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.
    The shallowest thickskin of that barren sort,
    Who Pyramus presented, in their sport
    Forsook his scene and ent'red in a brake;
    When I did him at this advantage take,
    An ass's nole I fixed on his head.
    Anon his Thisby must be answered,
    And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
    As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
    Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
    Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
    Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
    So at his sight away his fellows fly;
    And at our stamp here, o'er and o'er one falls;
    He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
    Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,
    Made senseless things begin to do them wrong,
    For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
    Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.
    I led them on in this distracted fear,
    And left sweet Pyramus translated there;
    When in that moment, so it came to pass,
    Titania wak'd, and straightway lov'd an ass.
  OBERON. This falls out better than I could devise.
    But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes
    With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?
  PUCK. I took him sleeping- that is finish'd too-
    And the Athenian woman by his side;
    That, when he wak'd, of force she must be ey'd.

                 Enter DEMETRIUS and HERMIA

  OBERON. Stand close; this is the same Athenian.
  PUCK. This is the woman, but not this the man.
  DEMETRIUS. O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
    Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
  HERMIA. Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
    For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
    If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
    Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
    And kill me too.
    The sun was not so true unto the day
    As he to me. Would he have stolen away
    From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon
    This whole earth may be bor'd, and that the moon
    May through the centre creep and so displease
    Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes.
    It cannot be but thou hast murd'red him;
    So should a murderer look- so dead, so grim.
  DEMETRIUS. So should the murdered look; and so should I,
    Pierc'd through the heart with your stern cruelty;
    Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
    As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
  HERMIA. What's this to my Lysander? Where is he?
    Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
  DEMETRIUS. I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
  HERMIA. Out, dog! out, cur! Thou driv'st me past the bounds
    Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
    Henceforth be never numb'red among men!
    O, once tell true; tell true, even for my sake!
    Durst thou have look'd upon him being awake,
    And hast thou kill'd him sleeping? O brave touch!
    Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
    An adder did it; for with doubler tongue
    Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
  DEMETRIUS. You spend your passion on a mispris'd mood:
    I am not guilty of Lysander's blood;
    Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
  HERMIA. I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
  DEMETRIUS. An if I could, what should I get therefore?
  HERMIA. A privilege never to see me more.
    And from thy hated presence part I so;
    See me no more whether he be dead or no.                Exit
  DEMETRIUS. There is no following her in this fierce vein;
    Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
    So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow
    For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe;
    Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
    If for his tender here I make some stay.         [Lies down]
  OBERON. What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite,
    And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight.
    Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
    Some true love turn'd, and not a false turn'd true.
  PUCK. Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth,
    A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
  OBERON. About the wood go swifter than the wind,
    And Helena of Athens look thou find;
    All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer,
    With sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.
    By some illusion see thou bring her here;
    I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.
  PUCK. I go, I go; look how I go,
    Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.               Exit
  OBERON.       Flower of this purple dye,
                Hit with Cupid's archery,
                Sink in apple of his eye.
                When his love he doth espy,
                Let her shine as gloriously
                As the Venus of the sky.
                When thou wak'st, if she be by,
                Beg of her for remedy.

                       Re-enter PUCK

  PUCK.         Captain of our fairy band,
                Helena is here at hand,
                And the youth mistook by me
                Pleading for a lover's fee;
                Shall we their fond pageant see?
                Lord, what fools these mortals be!
  OBERON.       Stand aside. The noise they make
                Will cause Demetrius to awake.
  PUCK.         Then will two at once woo one.
                That must needs be sport alone;
                And those things do best please me
                That befall prepost'rously.

                   Enter LYSANDER and HELENA

  LYSANDER. Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
    Scorn and derision never come in tears.
    Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
    In their nativity all truth appears.
    How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
    Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?
  HELENA. You do advance your cunning more and more.
    When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
    These vows are Hermia's. Will you give her o'er?
    Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:
    Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
    Will even weigh; and both as light as tales.
  LYSANDER. I hod no judgment when to her I swore.
  HELENA. Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.
  LYSANDER. Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
  DEMETRIUS. [Awaking] O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
    To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
    Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
    Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
    That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,
    Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
    When thou hold'st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
    This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
  HELENA. O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
    To set against me for your merriment.
    If you were civil and knew courtesy,
    You would not do me thus much injury.
    Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
    But you must join in souls to mock me too?
    If you were men, as men you are in show,
    You would not use a gentle lady so:
    To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
    When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.
    You both are rivals, and love Hermia;
    And now both rivals, to mock Helena.
    A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
    To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes
    With your derision! None of noble sort
    Would so offend a virgin, and extort
    A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.
  LYSANDER. You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so;
    For you love Hermia. This you know I know;
    And here, with all good will, with all my heart,
    In Hermia's love I yield you up my part;
    And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
    Whom I do love and will do till my death.
  HELENA. Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
  DEMETRIUS. Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none.
    If e'er I lov'd her, all that love is gone.
    My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd,
    And now to Helen is it home return'd,
    There to remain.
  LYSANDER. Helen, it is not so.
  DEMETRIUS. Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
    Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear.
    Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.

                       Enter HERMIA

  HERMIA. Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
    The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
    Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
    It pays the hearing double recompense.
    Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
    Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
    But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
  LYSANDER. Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?
  HERMIA. What love could press Lysander from my side?
  LYSANDER. Lysander's love, that would not let him bide-
    Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
    Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
    Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee know
    The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so?
  HERMIA. You speak not as you think; it cannot be.
  HELENA. Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
    Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three
    To fashion this false sport in spite of me.
    Injurious Hermia! most ungrateful maid!
    Have you conspir'd, have you with these contriv'd,
    To bait me with this foul derision?
    Is all the counsel that we two have shar'd,
    The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent,
    When we have chid the hasty-footed time
    For parting us- O, is all forgot?
    All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence?
    We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
    Have with our needles created both one flower,
    Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
    Both warbling of one song, both in one key;
    As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds,
    Had been incorporate. So we grew together,
    Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
    But yet an union in partition,
    Two lovely berries moulded on one stern;
    So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;
    Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
    Due but to one, and crowned with one crest.
    And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
    To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
    It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly;
    Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
    Though I alone do feel the injury.
  HERMIA. I am amazed at your passionate words;
    I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me.
  HELENA. Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
    To follow me and praise my eyes and face?
    And made your other love, Demetrius,
    Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
    To call me goddess, nymph, divine, and rare,
    Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
    To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
    Deny your love, so rich within his soul,
    And tender me, forsooth, affection,
    But by your setting on, by your consent?
    What though I be not so in grace as you,
    So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
    But miserable most, to love unlov'd?
    This you should pity rather than despise.
  HERMIA. I understand not what you mean by this.
  HELENA. Ay, do- persever, counterfeit sad looks,
    Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
    Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up;
    This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
    If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
    You would not make me such an argument.
    But fare ye well; 'tis partly my own fault,
    Which death, or absence, soon shall remedy.
  LYSANDER. Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse;
    My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!
  HELENA. O excellent!
  HERMIA. Sweet, do not scorn her so.
  DEMETRIUS. If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
  LYSANDER. Thou canst compel no more than she entreat;
    Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers
    Helen, I love thee, by my life I do;
    I swear by that which I will lose for thee
    To prove him false that says I love thee not.
  DEMETRIUS. I say I love thee more than he can do.
  LYSANDER. If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.
  DEMETRIUS. Quick, come.
  HERMIA. Lysander, whereto tends all this?
  LYSANDER. Away, you Ethiope!
  DEMETRIUS. No, no, he will
    Seem to break loose- take on as you would follow,
    But yet come not. You are a tame man; go!
  LYSANDER. Hang off, thou cat, thou burr; vile thing, let loose,
    Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
  HERMIA. Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
    Sweet love?
  LYSANDER. Thy love! Out, tawny Tartar, out!
    Out, loathed med'cine! O hated potion, hence!
  HERMIA. Do you not jest?
  HELENA. Yes, sooth; and so do you.
  LYSANDER. Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
  DEMETRIUS. I would I had your bond; for I perceive
    A weak bond holds you; I'll not trust your word.
  LYSANDER. What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
    Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.
  HERMIA. What! Can you do me greater harm than hate?
    Hate me! wherefore? O me! what news, my love?
    Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
    I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
    Since night you lov'd me; yet since night you left me.
    Why then, you left me- O, the gods forbid!-
    In earnest, shall I say?
  LYSANDER. Ay, by my life!
    And never did desire to see thee more.
    Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt;
    Be certain, nothing truer; 'tis no jest
    That I do hate thee and love Helena.
  HERMIA. O me! you juggler! you cankerblossom!
    You thief of love! What! Have you come by night,
    And stol'n my love's heart from him?
  HELENA. Fine, i' faith!
    Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
    No touch of bashfulness? What! Will you tear
    Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
    Fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet you!
  HERMIA. 'Puppet!' why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
    Now I perceive that she hath made compare
    Between our statures; she hath urg'd her height;
    And with her personage, her tall personage,
    Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him.
    And are you grown so high in his esteem
    Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
    How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak.
    How low am I? I am not yet so low
    But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
  HELENA. I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
    Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
    I have no gift at all in shrewishness;
    I am a right maid for my cowardice;
    Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
    Because she is something lower than myself,
    That I can match her.
  HERMIA. 'Lower' hark, again.
  HELENA. Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
    I evermore did love you, Hermia,
    Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong'd you;
    Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
    I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
    He followed you; for love I followed him;
    But he hath chid me hence, and threat'ned me
    To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too;
    And now, so you will let me quiet go,
    To Athens will I bear my folly back,
    And follow you no further. Let me go.
    You see how simple and how fond I am.
  HERMIA. Why, get you gone! Who is't that hinders you?
  HELENA. A foolish heart that I leave here behind.
  HERMIA. What! with Lysander?
  HELENA. With Demetrius.
  LYSANDER. Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.
  DEMETRIUS. No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
  HELENA. O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd;
    She was a vixen when she went to school;
    And, though she be but little, she is fierce.
  HERMIA. 'Little' again! Nothing but 'low' and 'little'!
    Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
    Let me come to her.
  LYSANDER. Get you gone, you dwarf;
    You minimus, of hind'ring knot-grass made;
    You bead, you acorn.
  DEMETRIUS. You are too officious
    In her behalf that scorns your services.
    Let her alone; speak not of Helena;
    Take not her part; for if thou dost intend
    Never so little show of love to her,
    Thou shalt aby it.
  LYSANDER. Now she holds me not.
    Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right,
    Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
  DEMETRIUS. Follow! Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
                                   Exeunt LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS
  HERMIA. You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
    Nay, go not back.
  HELENA. I will not trust you, I;
    Nor longer stay in your curst company.
    Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray;
    My legs are longer though, to run away.                 Exit
  HERMIA. I am amaz'd, and know not what to say.            Exit
  OBERON. This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak'st,
    Or else committ'st thy knaveries wilfully.
  PUCK. Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
    Did not you tell me I should know the man
    By the Athenian garments he had on?
    And so far blameless proves my enterprise
    That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
    And so far am I glad it so did sort,
    As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
  OBERON. Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
    Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
    The starry welkin cover thou anon
    With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
    And lead these testy rivals so astray
    As one come not within another's way.
    Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
    Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;
    And sometime rail thou like Demetrius;
    And from each other look thou lead them thus,
    Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
    With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
    Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye;
    Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
    To take from thence all error with his might
    And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
    When they next wake, all this derision
    Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision;
    And back to Athens shall the lovers wend
    With league whose date till death shall never end.
    Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
    I'll to my queen, and beg her Indian boy;
    And then I will her charmed eye release
    From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.
  PUCK. My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
    For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;
    And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,
    At whose approach ghosts, wand'ring here and there,
    Troop home to churchyards. Damned spirits all
    That in cross-ways and floods have burial,
    Already to their wormy beds are gone,
    For fear lest day should look their shames upon;
    They wilfully themselves exil'd from light,
    And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night.
  OBERON. But we are spirits of another sort:
    I with the Morning's love have oft made sport;
    And, like a forester, the groves may tread
    Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,
    Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
    Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.
    But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay;
    We may effect this business yet ere day.         Exit OBERON
  PUCK.      Up and down, up and down,
             I will lead them up and down.
             I am fear'd in field and town.
             Goblin, lead them up and down.
    Here comes one.

                      Enter LYSANDER

  LYSANDER. Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.
  PUCK. Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?
  LYSANDER. I will be with thee straight.
  PUCK. Follow me, then,
    To plainer ground.      Exit LYSANDER as following the voice

                      Enter DEMETRIUS

  DEMETRIUS. Lysander, speak again.
    Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
    Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?
  PUCK. Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
    Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
    And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child;
    I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defil'd
    That draws a sword on thee.
  DEMETRIUS. Yea, art thou there?
  PUCK. Follow my voice; we'll try no manhood here.       Exeunt

                      Re-enter LYSANDER

  LYSANDER. He goes before me, and still dares me on;
    When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
    The villain is much lighter heel'd than I.
    I followed fast, but faster he did fly,
    That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
    And here will rest me. [Lies down] Come, thou gentle day.
    For if but once thou show me thy grey light,
    I'll find Demetrius, and revenge this spite.        [Sleeps]

                 Re-enter PUCK and DEMETRIUS

  PUCK. Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not?
  DEMETRIUS. Abide me, if thou dar'st; for well I wot
    Thou run'st before me, shifting every place,
    And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face.
    Where art thou now?
  PUCK. Come hither; I am here.
  DEMETRIUS. Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this
dear,
    If ever I thy face by daylight see;
    Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
    To measure out my length on this cold bed.
    By day's approach look to be visited.
                                          [Lies down and sleeps]

                       Enter HELENA

  HELENA. O weary night, O long and tedious night,
    Abate thy hours! Shine comforts from the east,
    That I may back to Athens by daylight,
    From these that my poor company detest.
    And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
    Steal me awhile from mine own company.              [Sleeps]
  PUCK.       Yet but three? Come one more;
              Two of both kinds makes up four.
              Here she comes, curst and sad.
              Cupid is a knavish lad,
              Thus to make poor females mad.

                     Enter HERMIA

  HERMIA. Never so weary, never so in woe,
    Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briers,
    I can no further crawl, no further go;
    My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
    Here will I rest me till the break of day.
    Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!
                                          [Lies down and sleeps]
  PUCK.          On the ground
                 Sleep sound;
                 I'll apply
                 To your eye,
          Gentle lover, remedy.
                        [Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER'S eyes]
                 When thou wak'st,
                 Thou tak'st
                 True delight
                 In the sight
          Of thy former lady's eye;
          And the country proverb known,
          That every man should take his own,
          In your waking shall be shown:
                 Jack shall have Jill;
                 Nought shall go ill;
    The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
 Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
The wood. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA, lying asleep

Enter TITANIA and Bottom; PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH,
MUSTARDSEED,
and other FAIRIES attending;
                      OBERON behind, unseen

  TITANIA. Come, sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed,
    While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
    And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,
    And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
  BOTTOM. Where's Peaseblossom?
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Ready.
  BOTTOM. Scratch my head, Peaseblossom.
    Where's Mounsieur Cobweb?
  COBWEB. Ready.
  BOTTOM. Mounsieur Cobweb; good mounsieur, get you your weapons
in
    your hand and kill me a red-hipp'd humble-bee on the top of a
    thistle; and, good mounsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not
fret
    yourself too much in the action, mounsieur; and, good
mounsieur,
    have a care the honey-bag break not; I would be loath to have
you
    overflown with a honey-bag, signior. Where's Mounsieur
    Mustardseed?
  MUSTARDSEED. Ready.
  BOTTOM. Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed. Pray you,
leave
    your curtsy, good mounsieur.
  MUSTARDSEED. What's your will?
  BOTTOM. Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to
    scratch. I must to the barber's, mounsieur; for methinks I am
    marvellous hairy about the face; and I am such a tender ass,
if
    my hair do but tickle me I must scratch.
  TITANIA. What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?
  BOTTOM. I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's have the
tongs
    and the bones.
  TITANIA. Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
  BOTTOM. Truly, a peck of provender; I could munch your good dry
    oats. Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay. Good
    hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.
  TITANIA. I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
    The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.
  BOTTOM. I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But,
I
    pray you, let none of your people stir me; I have an
exposition
    of sleep come upon me.
  TITANIA. Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
    Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.       Exeunt FAIRIES
    So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
    Gently entwist; the female ivy so
    Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
    O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!         [They sleep]

                         Enter PUCK

  OBERON. [Advancing] Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet
      sight?
    Her dotage now I do begin to pity;
    For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
    Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool,
    I did upbraid her and fall out with her.
    For she his hairy temples then had rounded
    With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
    And that same dew which sometime on the buds
    Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls
    Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes,
    Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
    When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
    And she in mild terms begg'd my patience,
    I then did ask of her her changeling child;
    Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
    To bear him to my bower in fairy land.
    And now I have the boy, I will undo
    This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
    And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
    From off the head of this Athenian swain,
    That he awaking when the other do
    May all to Athens back again repair,
    And think no more of this night's accidents
    But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
    But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
                                             [Touching her eyes]
           Be as thou wast wont to be;
           See as thou was wont to see.
           Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower
           Hath such force and blessed power.
    Now, my Titania; wake you, my sweet queen.
  TITANIA. My Oberon! What visions have I seen!
    Methought I was enamour'd of an ass.
  OBERON. There lies your love.
  TITANIA. How came these things to pass?
    O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
  OBERON. Silence awhile. Robin, take off this head.
    Titania, music call; and strike more dead
    Than common sleep of all these five the sense.
  TITANIA. Music, ho, music, such as charmeth sleep!
  PUCK. Now when thou wak'st with thine own fool's eyes peep.
  OBERON. Sound, music. Come, my Queen, take hands with me,
                                                         [Music]
    And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
    Now thou and I are new in amity,
    And will to-morrow midnight solemnly
    Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,
    And bless it to all fair prosperity.
    There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
    Wedded, with Theseus, an in jollity.
  PUCK.       Fairy King, attend and mark;
              I do hear the morning lark.
  OBERON.     Then, my Queen, in silence sad,
              Trip we after night's shade.
              We the globe can compass soon,
              Swifter than the wand'ring moon.
  TITANIA.    Come, my lord; and in our flight,
              Tell me how it came this night
              That I sleeping here was found
              With these mortals on the ground.           Exeunt

        To the winding of horns, enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA,
                      EGEUS, and train

  THESEUS. Go, one of you, find out the forester;
    For now our observation is perform'd,
    And since we have the vaward of the day,
    My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
    Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
    Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.    Exit an ATTENDANT
    We will, fair Queen, up to the mountain's top,
    And mark the musical confusion
    Of hounds and echo in conjunction.
  HIPPOLYTA. I was with Hercules and Cadmus once
    When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear
    With hounds of Sparta; never did I hear
    Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,
    The skies, the fountains, every region near
    Seem'd all one mutual cry. I never heard
    So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
  THESEUS. My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
    So flew'd, so sanded; and their heads are hung
    With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
    Crook-knee'd and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls;
    Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells,
    Each under each. A cry more tuneable
    Was never holla'd to, nor cheer'd with horn,
    In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
    Judge when you hear. But, soft, what nymphs are these?
  EGEUS. My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
    And this Lysander, this Demetrius is,
    This Helena, old Nedar's Helena.
    I wonder of their being here together.
  THESEUS. No doubt they rose up early to observe
    The rite of May; and, hearing our intent,
    Came here in grace of our solemnity.
    But speak, Egeus; is not this the day
    That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
  EGEUS. It is, my lord.
  THESEUS. Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
                           [Horns and shout within. The sleepers
                                     awake and kneel to THESEUS]
    Good-morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past;
    Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?
  LYSANDER. Pardon, my lord.
  THESEUS. I pray you all, stand up.
    I know you two are rival enemies;
    How comes this gentle concord in the world
    That hatred is so far from jealousy
    To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?
  LYSANDER. My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
    Half sleep, half waking; but as yet, I swear,
    I cannot truly say how I came here,
    But, as I think- for truly would I speak,
    And now I do bethink me, so it is-
    I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
    Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
    Without the peril of the Athenian law-
  EGEUS. Enough, enough, my Lord; you have enough;
    I beg the law, the law upon his head.
    They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius,
    Thereby to have defeated you and me:
    You of your wife, and me of my consent,
    Of my consent that she should be your wife.
  DEMETRIUS. My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
    Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
    And I in fury hither followed them,
    Fair Helena in fancy following me.
    But, my good lord, I wot not by what power-
    But by some power it is- my love to Hermia,
    Melted as the snow, seems to me now
    As the remembrance of an idle gaud
    Which in my childhood I did dote upon;
    And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
    The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
    Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
    Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia.
    But, like a sickness, did I loathe this food;
    But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
    Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
    And will for evermore be true to it.
  THESEUS. Fair lovers, you are fortunately met;
    Of this discourse we more will hear anon.
    Egeus, I will overbear your will;
    For in the temple, by and by, with us
    These couples shall eternally be knit.
    And, for the morning now is something worn,
    Our purpos'd hunting shall be set aside.
    Away with us to Athens, three and three;
    We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.
    Come, Hippolyta.
                     Exeunt THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, EGEUS, and train
  DEMETRIUS. These things seem small and undistinguishable,
    Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.
  HERMIA. Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
    When every thing seems double.
  HELENA. So methinks;
    And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
    Mine own, and not mine own.
  DEMETRIUS. Are you sure
    That we are awake? It seems to me
    That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
    The Duke was here, and bid us follow him?
  HERMIA. Yea, and my father.
  HELENA. And Hippolyta.
  LYSANDER. And he did bid us follow to the temple.
  DEMETRIUS. Why, then, we are awake; let's follow him;
    And by the way let us recount our dreams.             Exeunt
  BOTTOM. [Awaking] When my cue comes, call me, and I will
answer. My
    next is 'Most fair Pyramus.' Heigh-ho! Peter Quince! Flute,
the
    bellows-mender! Snout, the tinker! Starveling! God's my life,
    stol'n hence, and left me asleep! I have had a most rare
vision.
    I have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it
was.
    Man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream.
Methought
    I was- there is no man can tell what. Methought I was, and
    methought I had, but man is but a patch'd fool, if he will
offer
    to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not heard,
the
    ear of man hath not seen, man's hand is not able to taste,
his
    tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream
was. I
    will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream. It
shall
    be call'd 'Bottom's Dream,' because it hath no bottom; and I
will
    sing it in the latter end of a play, before the Duke.
    Peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it
at
    her death.                                              Exit




SCENE II.
Athens. QUINCE'S house

Enter QUINCE, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING

  QUINCE. Have you sent to Bottom's house? Is he come home yet?
  STARVELING. He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is
transported.
  FLUTE. If he come not, then the play is marr'd; it goes not
    forward, doth it?
  QUINCE. It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens
able
    to discharge Pyramus but he.
  FLUTE. No; he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in
    Athens.
  QUINCE. Yea, and the best person too; and he is a very paramour
for
    a sweet voice.
  FLUTE. You must say 'paragon.' A paramour is- God bless us!- A
    thing of naught.

                           Enter SNUG

  SNUG. Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple; and there is
two
    or three lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone

    forward, we had all been made men.
  FLUTE. O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day
    during his life; he could not have scaped sixpence a day. An
the
    Duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus,
I'll
    be hanged. He would have deserved it: sixpence a day in
Pyramus,
    or nothing.

                           Enter BOTTOM

  BOTTOM. Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?
  QUINCE. Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!
  BOTTOM. Masters, I am to discourse wonders; but ask me not
what;
    for if I tell you, I am not true Athenian. I will tell you
    everything, right as it fell out.
  QUINCE. Let us hear, sweet Bottom.
  BOTTOM. Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that the
    Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together; good strings to
your
    beards, new ribbons to your pumps; meet presently at the
palace;
    every man look o'er his part; for the short and the long is,
our
    play is preferr'd. In any case, let Thisby have clean linen;
and
    let not him that plays the lion pare his nails, for they
shall
    hang out for the lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no
    onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath; and I do
not
    doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No more
words.
    Away, go, away!                                       Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
Athens. The palace of THESEUS

Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, LORDS, and ATTENDANTS

  HIPPOLYTA. 'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak
of.
  THESEUS. More strange than true. I never may believe
    These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.
    Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
    Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
    More than cool reason ever comprehends.
    The lunatic, the lover, and the poet,
    Are of imagination all compact.
    One sees more devils than vast hell can hold;
    That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
    Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.
    The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
    Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
    And as imagination bodies forth
    The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
    Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
    A local habitation and a name.
    Such tricks hath strong imagination
    That, if it would but apprehend some joy,
    It comprehends some bringer of that joy;
    Or in the night, imagining some fear,
    How easy is a bush suppos'd a bear?
  HIPPOLYTA. But all the story of the night told over,
    And all their minds transfigur'd so together,
    More witnesseth than fancy's images,
    And grows to something of great constancy,
    But howsoever strange and admirable.

          Enter LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HERMIA, and HELENA

  THESEUS. Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.
    Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love
    Accompany your hearts!
  LYSANDER. More than to us
    Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
  THESEUS. Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have,
    To wear away this long age of three hours
    Between our after-supper and bed-time?
    Where is our usual manager of mirth?
    What revels are in hand? Is there no play
    To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
    Call Philostrate.
  PHILOSTRATE. Here, mighty Theseus.
  THESEUS. Say, what abridgment have you for this evening?
    What masque? what music? How shall we beguile
    The lazy time, if not with some delight?
  PHILOSTRATE. There is a brief how many sports are ripe;
    Make choice of which your Highness will see first.
                                                [Giving a paper]
  THESEUS. 'The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
    By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.'
    We'll none of that: that have I told my love,
    In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
    'The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
    Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.'
    That is an old device, and it was play'd
    When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
    'The thrice three Muses mourning for the death
    Of Learning, late deceas'd in beggary.'
    That is some satire, keen and critical,
    Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
    'A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
    And his love Thisby; very tragical mirth.'
    Merry and tragical! tedious and brief!
    That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
    How shall we find the concord of this discord?
  PHILOSTRATE. A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
    Which is as brief as I have known a play;
    But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
    Which makes it tedious; for in all the play
    There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
    And tragical, my noble lord, it is;
    For Pyramus therein doth kill himself.
    Which when I saw rehears'd, I must confess,
    Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
    The passion of loud laughter never shed.
  THESEUS. What are they that do play it?
  PHILOSTRATE. Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
    Which never labour'd in their minds till now;
    And now have toil'd their unbreathed memories
    With this same play against your nuptial.
  THESEUS. And we will hear it.
  PHILOSTRATE. No, my noble lord,
    It is not for you. I have heard it over,
    And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
    Unless you can find sport in their intents,
    Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain,
    To do you service.
  THESEUS. I will hear that play;
    For never anything can be amiss
    When simpleness and duty tender it.
    Go, bring them in; and take your places, ladies.
                                                Exit PHILOSTRATE
  HIPPOLYTA. I love not to see wretchedness o'er-charged,
    And duty in his service perishing.
  THESEUS. Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
  HIPPOLYTA. He says they can do nothing in this kind.
  THESEUS. The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
    Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;
    And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
    Takes it in might, not merit.
    Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
    To greet me with premeditated welcomes;
    Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
    Make periods in the midst of sentences,
    Throttle their practis'd accent in their fears,
    And, in conclusion, dumbly have broke off,
    Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
    Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome;
    And in the modesty of fearful duty
    I read as much as from the rattling tongue
    Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
    Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
    In least speak most to my capacity.

                       Re-enter PHILOSTRATE

  PHILOSTRATE. SO please your Grace, the Prologue is address'd.
  THESEUS. Let him approach.              [Flourish of trumpets]

                 Enter QUINCE as the PROLOGUE

  PROLOGUE. If we offend, it is with our good will.
    That you should think, we come not to offend,
    But with good will. To show our simple skill,
    That is the true beginning of our end.
    Consider then, we come but in despite.
    We do not come, as minding to content you,
    Our true intent is. All for your delight
    We are not here. That you should here repent you,
    The actors are at band; and, by their show,
    You shall know all, that you are like to know,
  THESEUS. This fellow doth not stand upon points.
  LYSANDER. He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt; he knows
not
    the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak,
but
    to speak true.
  HIPPOLYTA. Indeed he hath play'd on this prologue like a child
on a
    recorder- a sound, but not in government.
  THESEUS. His speech was like a tangled chain; nothing im
paired,
    but all disordered. Who is next?

          Enter, with a trumpet before them, as in dumb show,
            PYRAMUS and THISBY, WALL, MOONSHINE, and LION

  PROLOGUE. Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;
    But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
    This man is Pyramus, if you would know;
    This beauteous lady Thisby is certain.
    This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present
    Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder;
    And through Walls chink, poor souls, they are content
    To whisper. At the which let no man wonder.
    This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn,
    Presenteth Moonshine; for, if you will know,
    By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
    To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
    This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name,
    The trusty Thisby, coming first by night,
    Did scare away, or rather did affright;
    And as she fled, her mantle she did fall;
    Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
    Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
    And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain;
    Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
    He bravely broach'd his boiling bloody breast;
    And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,
    His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
    Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain,
    At large discourse while here they do remain.
                               Exeunt PROLOGUE, PYRAMUS, THISBY,
                                             LION, and MOONSHINE
  THESEUS. I wonder if the lion be to speak.
  DEMETRIUS. No wonder, my lord: one lion may, when many asses
do.
  WALL. In this same interlude it doth befall
    That I, one Snout by name, present a wall;
    And such a wall as I would have you think
    That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
    Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby,
    Did whisper often very secretly.
    This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone, doth show
    That I am that same wall; the truth is so;
    And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
    Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
  THESEUS. Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?
  DEMETRIUS. It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
    discourse, my lord.

                       Enter PYRAMUS

  THESEUS. Pyramus draws near the wall; silence.
  PYRAMUS. O grim-look'd night! O night with hue so black!
    O night, which ever art when day is not!
    O night, O night, alack, alack, alack,
    I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot!
    And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
    That stand'st between her father's ground and mine;
    Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
    Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.
                                     [WALL holds up his fingers]
    Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for this!
    But what see what see I? No Thisby do I see.
    O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
    Curs'd he thy stones for thus deceiving me!
  THESEUS. The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse
again.
  PYRAMUS. No, in truth, sir, he should not. Deceiving me is
Thisby's
    cue. She is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the
wall.
    You shall see it will fall pat as I told you; yonder she
comes.

                          Enter THISBY

  THISBY. O wall, full often hast thou beard my moans,
    For parting my fair Pyramus and me!
    My cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones,
    Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.
  PYRAMUS. I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
    To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face.
    Thisby!
  THISBY. My love! thou art my love, I think.
  PYRAMUS. Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace;
    And like Limander am I trusty still.
  THISBY. And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
  PYRAMUS. Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
  THISBY. As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
  PYRAMUS. O, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
  THISBY. I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.
  PYRAMUS. Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?
  THISBY. Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.
                                       Exeunt PYRAMUS and THISBY
  WALL. Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so;
    And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.           Exit WALL
  THESEUS. Now is the moon used between the two neighbours.
  DEMETRIUS. No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear
    without warning.
  HIPPOLYTA. This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
  THESEUS. The best in this kind are but shadows; and the worst
are
    no worse, if imagination amend them.
  HIPPOLYTA. It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.
  THESEUS. If we imagine no worse of them than they of
themselves,
    they may pass for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts
in, a
    man and a lion.

                   Enter LION and MOONSHINE

  LION. You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear
    The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,
    May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here,
    When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
    Then know that I as Snug the joiner am
    A lion fell, nor else no lion's dam;
    For, if I should as lion come in strife
    Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.
  THESEUS. A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.
  DEMETRIUS. The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.
  LYSANDER. This lion is a very fox for his valour.
  THESEUS. True; and a goose for his discretion.
  DEMETRIUS. Not so, my lord; for his valour cannot carry his
    discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
  THESEUS. His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour;
for
    the goose carries not the fox. It is well. Leave it to his
    discretion, and let us listen to the Moon.
  MOONSHINE. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present-
  DEMETRIUS. He should have worn the horns on his head.
  THESEUS. He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within
the
    circumference.
  MOONSHINE. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present;
    Myself the Man i' th' Moon do seem to be.
  THESEUS. This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man
should
    be put into the lantern. How is it else the man i' th' moon?
  DEMETRIUS. He dares not come there for the candle; for, you
see, it
    is already in snuff.
  HIPPOLYTA. I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change!
  THESEUS. It appears, by his small light of discretion, that he
is
    in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must
stay
    the time.
  LYSANDER. Proceed, Moon.
  MOON. All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn
is
    the moon; I, the Man i' th' Moon; this thorn-bush, my
thorn-bush;
    and this dog, my dog.
  DEMETRIUS. Why, all these should be in the lantern; for all
these
    are in the moon. But silence; here comes Thisby.

                        Re-enter THISBY

  THISBY. This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?
  LION. [Roaring] O-                           [THISBY runs off]
  DEMETRIUS. Well roar'd, Lion.
  THESEUS. Well run, Thisby.
  HIPPOLYTA. Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a good
    grace.            [The LION tears THISBY'S Mantle, and exit]
  THESEUS. Well mous'd, Lion.

                        Re-enter PYRAMUS

  DEMETRIUS. And then came Pyramus.
  LYSANDER. And so the lion vanish'd.
  PYRAMUS. Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;
    I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;
    For, by thy gracious golden, glittering gleams,
    I trust to take of truest Thisby sight.
             But stay, O spite!
             But mark, poor knight,
           What dreadful dole is here!
             Eyes, do you see?
             How can it he?
           O dainty duck! O dear!
             Thy mantle good,
             What! stain'd with blood?
           Approach, ye Furies fell.
             O Fates! come, come;
             Cut thread and thrum;
           Quail, crush, conclude, and quell.
  THESEUS. This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go
    near to make a man look sad.
  HIPPOLYTA. Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.
  PYRAMUS. O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame?
    Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear;
    Which is- no, no- which was the fairest dame
    That liv'd, that lov'd, that lik'd, that look'd with cheer.
             Come, tears, confound;
             Out, sword, and wound
           The pap of Pyramus;
             Ay, that left pap,
             Where heart doth hop.               [Stabs himself]
           Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
             Now am I dead,
             Now am I fled;
           My soul is in the sky.
             Tongue, lose thy light;
             Moon, take thy flight.             [Exit MOONSHINE]
           Now die, die, die, die, die.                   [Dies]
  DEMETRIUS. No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.
  LYSANDER. Less than an ace, man; for he is dead; he is nothing.
  THESEUS. With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and
yet
    prove an ass.
  HIPPOLYTA. How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisby comes
back
    and finds her lover?

                       Re-enter THISBY

  THESEUS. She will find him by starlight. Here she comes; and
her
    passion ends the play.
  HIPPOLYTA. Methinks she should not use a long one for such a
    Pyramus; I hope she will be brief.
  DEMETRIUS. A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which
    Thisby, is the better- he for a man, God warrant us: She for
a
    woman, God bless us!
  LYSANDER. She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.
  DEMETRIUS. And thus she moans, videlicet:-
  THISBY.      Asleep, my love?
               What, dead, my dove?
             O Pyramus, arise,
               Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
               Dead, dead? A tomb
             Must cover thy sweet eyes.
               These lily lips,
               This cherry nose,
             These yellow cowslip cheeks,
               Are gone, are gone;
               Lovers, make moan;
             His eyes were green as leeks.
               O Sisters Three,
               Come, come to me,
             With hands as pale as milk;
               Lay them in gore,
               Since you have shore
             With shears his thread of silk.
               Tongue, not a word.
               Come, trusty sword;
             Come, blade, my breast imbrue.      [Stabs herself]
               And farewell, friends;
               Thus Thisby ends;
             Adieu, adieu, adieu.                         [Dies]
  THESEUS. Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
  DEMETRIUS. Ay, and Wall too.
  BOTTOM. [Starting up] No, I assure you; the wall is down that
    parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the Epilogue,
or
    to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company?
  THESEUS. No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no
excuse.
    Never excuse; for when the players are all dead there need
none
    to be blamed. Marry, if he that writ it had played Pyramus,
and
    hang'd himself in Thisby's garter, it would have been a fine
    tragedy. And so it is, truly; and very notably discharg'd.
But
    come, your Bergomask; let your epilogue alone.     [A dance]
    The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
    Lovers, to bed; 'tis almost fairy time.
    I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn,
    As much as we this night have overwatch'd.
    This palpable-gross play hath well beguil'd
    The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
    A fortnight hold we this solemnity,
    In nightly revels and new jollity.                    Exeunt

                     Enter PUCK with a broom

  PUCK.      Now the hungry lion roars,
             And the wolf behowls the moon;
             Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
             All with weary task fordone.
             Now the wasted brands do glow,
             Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
             Puts the wretch that lies in woe
             In remembrance of a shroud.
             Now it is the time of night
             That the graves, all gaping wide,
             Every one lets forth his sprite,
             In the church-way paths to glide.
             And we fairies, that do run
             By the triple Hecate's team
             From the presence of the sun,
             Following darkness like a dream,
             Now are frolic. Not a mouse
             Shall disturb this hallowed house.
             I am sent with broom before,
             To sweep the dust behind the door.

         Enter OBERON and TITANIA, with all their train

  OBERON.    Through the house give glimmering light,
             By the dead and drowsy fire;
             Every elf and fairy sprite
             Hop as light as bird from brier;
             And this ditty, after me,
             Sing and dance it trippingly.
  TITANIA.      First, rehearse your song by rote,
                To each word a warbling note;
                Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
                Will we sing, and bless this place.

           [OBERON leading, the FAIRIES sing and dance]

  OBERON.    Now, until the break of day,
             Through this house each fairy stray.
             To the best bride-bed will we,
             Which by us shall blessed be;
             And the issue there create
             Ever shall be fortunate.
             So shall all the couples three
             Ever true in loving be;
             And the blots of Nature's hand
             Shall not in their issue stand;
             Never mole, hare-lip, nor scar,
             Nor mark prodigious, such as are
             Despised in nativity,
             Shall upon their children be.
             With this field-dew consecrate,
             Every fairy take his gait,
             And each several chamber bless,
             Through this palace, with sweet peace;
             And the owner of it blest
             Ever shall in safety rest.
             Trip away; make no stay;
             Meet me all by break of day.    Exeunt all but PUCK
  PUCK.      If we shadows have offended,
             Think but this, and all is mended,
             That you have but slumb'red here
             While these visions did appear.
             And this weak and idle theme,
             No more yielding but a dream,
             Gentles, do not reprehend.
             If you pardon, we will mend.
             And, as I am an honest Puck,
             If we have unearned luck
             Now to scape the serpent's tongue,
             We will make amends ere long;
             Else the Puck a liar call.
             So, good night unto you all.
             Give me your hands, if we be friends,
             And Robin shall restore amends.                Exit

THE END
  Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister
on the bank, and of having nothing to do:  once or twice she had
peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no
pictures or conversations in it, `and what is the use of a book,'
thought Alice `without pictures or conversation?'

  So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could,
for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether
the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble
of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White
Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.

  There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice
think it so VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to
itself, `Oh dear!  Oh dear!  I shall be late!'  (when she thought
it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have
wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural);
but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-
POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to
her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never
before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to
take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop
down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

  In another moment down went Alice after it, never once
considering how in the world she was to get out again.

  The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way,
and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a
moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself
falling down a very deep well.

  Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she
had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to
wonder what was going to happen next.  First, she tried to look
down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to
see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and
noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves;
here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.  She
took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was
labelled `ORANGE MARMALADE', but to her great disappointment it
was empty:  she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing
somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she
fell past it.

  `Well!' thought Alice to herself, `after such a fall as this, I
shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs!  How brave they'll
all think me at home!  Why, I wouldn't say anything about it,
even if I fell off the top of the house!' (Which was very likely
true.)

  Down, down, down.  Would the fall NEVER come to an end!  `I
wonder how many miles I've fallen by this time?' she said aloud.
`I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.  Let
me see:  that would be four thousand miles down, I think--' (for,
you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her
lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a VERY good
opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to
listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) `--yes,
that's about the right distance--but then I wonder what Latitude
or Longitude I've got to?'  (Alice had no idea what Latitude was,
or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to
say.)

  Presently she began again.  `I wonder if I shall fall right
THROUGH the earth!  How funny it'll seem to come out among the
people that walk with their heads downward!  The Antipathies, I
think--' (she was rather glad there WAS no one listening, this
time, as it didn't sound at all the right word) `--but I shall
have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and she tried
to curtsey as she spoke--fancy CURTSEYING as you're falling
through the air!  Do you think you could manage it?)  `And what
an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking!  No, it'll
never do to ask:  perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.'

  Down, down, down.  There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon
began talking again.  `Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I
should think!'  (Dinah was the cat.)  `I hope they'll remember
her saucer of milk at tea-time.  Dinah my dear!  I wish you were
down here with me!  There are no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but
you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know.
But do cats eat bats, I wonder?'  And here Alice began to get
rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
way, `Do cats eat bats?  Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, `Do
bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either
question, it didn't much matter which way she put it.  She felt
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she
was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very
earnestly, `Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:  did you ever eat a
bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of
sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

  Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a
moment:  she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her
was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in
sight, hurrying down it.  There was not a moment to be lost:
away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it
say, as it turned a corner, `Oh my ears and whiskers, how late
it's getting!'  She was close behind it when she turned the
corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen:  she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps
hanging from the roof.

  There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked;
and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the
other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

  Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of
solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key,
and Alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the
doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or
the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of
them.  However, on the second time round, she came upon a low
curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little
door about fifteen inches high:  she tried the little golden key
in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

  Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small
passage, not much larger than a rat-hole:  she knelt down and
looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about
among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but
she could not even get her head through the doorway; `and even if
my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, `it would be of
very little use without my shoulders.  Oh, how I wish
I could shut up like a telescope!  I think I could, if I only
know how to begin.'  For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things
had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few
things indeed were really impossible.

  There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she
went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on
it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like
telescopes:  this time she found a little bottle on it, (`which
certainly was not here before,' said Alice,) and round the neck
of the bottle was a paper label, with the words `DRINK ME'
beautifully printed on it in large letters.

  It was all very well to say `Drink me,' but the wise little
Alice was not going to do THAT in a hurry.  `No, I'll look
first,' she said, `and see whether it's marked "poison" or not';
for she had read several nice little histories about children who
had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant
things, all because they WOULD not remember the simple rules
their friends had taught them:  such as, that a red-hot poker
will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your
finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had
never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked
`poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or
later.

  However, this bottle was NOT marked `poison,' so Alice ventured
to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort
of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast
turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished
it off.

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

         *       *       *       *       *       *

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

  `What a curious feeling!' said Alice; `I must be shutting up
like a telescope.'

  And so it was indeed:  she was now only ten inches high, and
her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right
size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was
going to shrink any further:  she felt a little nervous about
this; `for it might end, you know,' said Alice to herself, `in my
going out altogether, like a candle.  I wonder what I should be
like then?'  And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is
like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember
ever having seen such a thing.

  After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided
on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice!
when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the
little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it,
she found she could not possibly reach it:  she could see it
quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb
up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying,
the poor little thing sat down and cried.

  `Come, there's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to
herself, rather sharply; `I advise you to leave off this minute!'
She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very
seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so
severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered
trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game
of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious
child was very fond of pretending to be two people.  `But it's no
use now,' thought poor Alice, `to pretend to be two people!  Why,
there's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable
person!'

  Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under
the table:  she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on
which the words `EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants.
`Well, I'll eat it,' said Alice, `and if it makes me grow larger,
I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep
under the door; so either way I'll get into the garden, and I
don't care which happens!'

  She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, `Which
way?  Which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to
feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to
find that she remained the same size:  to be sure, this generally
happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the
way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen,
that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the
common way.

  So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

         *       *       *       *       *       *

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *




                           CHAPTER II

                        The Pool of Tears


  `Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she was so much
surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good
English); `now I'm opening out like the largest telescope that
ever was!  Good-bye, feet!' (for when she looked down at her
feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so
far off).  `Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on
your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?  I'm sure _I_ shan't
be able!  I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself
about you:  you must manage the best way you can; --but I must be
kind to them,' thought Alice, `or perhaps they won't walk the
way I want to go!  Let me see:  I'll give them a new pair of
boots every Christmas.'

  And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it.
`They must go by the carrier,' she thought; `and how funny it'll
seem, sending presents to one's own feet!  And how odd the
directions will look!

            ALICE'S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
                HEARTHRUG,
                    NEAR THE FENDER,
                        (WITH ALICE'S LOVE).

Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!'

  Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall:  in
fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took
up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

  Poor Alice!  It was as much as she could do, lying down on one
side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get
through was more hopeless than ever:  she sat down and began to
cry again.

  `You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said Alice, `a great
girl like you,' (she might well say this), `to go on crying in
this way!  Stop this moment, I tell you!'  But she went on all
the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool
all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the
hall.

  After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a
pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
other:  he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to
himself as he came, `Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! won't she
be savage if I've kept her waiting!'  Alice felt so desperate
that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, `If you please,
sir--'  The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid
gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard
as he could go.

  Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very
hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking:
`Dear, dear!  How queer everything is to-day!  And yesterday
things went on just as usual.  I wonder if I've been changed in
the night?  Let me think:  was I the same when I got up this
morning?  I almost think I can remember feeling a little
different.  But if I'm not the same, the next question is, Who in
the world am I?  Ah, THAT'S the great puzzle!'  And she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age
as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of
them.

  `I'm sure I'm not Ada,' she said, `for her hair goes in such
long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm
sure I can't be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she,
oh! she knows such a very little!  Besides, SHE'S she, and I'm I,
and--oh dear, how puzzling it all is!  I'll try if I know all the
things I used to know.  Let me see:  four times five is twelve,
and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is--oh dear!
I shall never get to twenty at that rate!  However, the
Multiplication Table doesn't signify:  let's try Geography.
London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome,
and Rome--no, THAT'S all wrong, I'm certain!  I must have been
changed for Mabel!  I'll try and say "How doth the little--"'
and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons,
and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and
strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:--

            `How doth the little crocodile
              Improve his shining tail,
            And pour the waters of the Nile
              On every golden scale!

            `How cheerfully he seems to grin,
              How neatly spread his claws,
            And welcome little fishes in
              With gently smiling jaws!'

  `I'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor Alice, and
her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, `I must be Mabel
after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little
house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so
many lessons to learn!  No, I've made up my mind about it; if I'm
Mabel, I'll stay down here!  It'll be no use their putting their
heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!"  I shall only look
up and say "Who am I then?  Tell me that first, and then, if I
like being that person, I'll come up:  if not, I'll stay down
here till I'm somebody else"--but, oh dear!' cried Alice, with a
sudden burst of tears, `I do wish they WOULD put their heads
down!  I am so VERY tired of being all alone here!'

  As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was
surprised to see that she had put on one of the Rabbit's little
white kid gloves while she was talking.  `How CAN I have done
that?' she thought.  `I must be growing small again.'  She got up
and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that,
as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high,
and was going on shrinking rapidly:  she soon found out that the
cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it
hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

`That WAS a narrow escape!' said Alice, a good deal frightened at
the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in
existence; `and now for the garden!' and she ran with all speed
back to the little door:  but, alas! the little door was shut
again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as
before, `and things are worse than ever,' thought the poor child,
`for I never was so small as this before, never!  And I declare
it's too bad, that it is!'

  As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another
moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water.  Her first
idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, `and in that
case I can go back by railway,' she said to herself.  (Alice had
been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general
conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find
a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in
the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and
behind them a railway station.)  However, she soon made out that
she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine
feet high.

  `I wish I hadn't cried so much!' said Alice, as she swam about,
trying to find her way out.  `I shall be punished for it now, I
suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!  That WILL be a queer
thing, to be sure!  However, everything is queer to-day.'

  Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a
little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was:  at
first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then
she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that
it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

  `Would it be of any use, now,' thought Alice, `to speak to this
mouse?  Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should
think very likely it can talk:  at any rate, there's no harm in
trying.'  So she began:  `O Mouse, do you know the way out of
this pool?  I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!'
(Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse:
she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having
seen in her brother's Latin Grammar, `A mouse--of a mouse--to a
mouse--a mouse--O mouse!')  The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.

  `Perhaps it doesn't understand English,' thought Alice; `I
daresay it's a French mouse, come over with William the
Conqueror.'  (For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had
no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.)  So she
began again:  `Ou est ma chatte?' which was the first sentence in
her French lesson-book.  The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the
water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.  `Oh, I beg
your pardon!' cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
poor animal's feelings.  `I quite forgot you didn't like cats.'

  `Not like cats!' cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate
voice.  `Would YOU like cats if you were me?'

  `Well, perhaps not,' said Alice in a soothing tone:  `don't be
angry about it.  And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah:
I think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
She is such a dear quiet thing,' Alice went on, half to herself,
as she swam lazily about in the pool, `and she sits purring so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face--and
she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's such a capital
one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice again,
for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt
certain it must be really offended.  `We won't talk about her any
more if you'd rather not.'

  `We indeed!' cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end
of his tail.  `As if I would talk on such a subject!  Our family
always HATED cats:  nasty, low, vulgar things!  Don't let me hear
the name again!'

  `I won't indeed!' said Alice, in a great hurry to change the
subject of conversation.  `Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?'
The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly:  `There is
such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you!
A little bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly
brown hair!  And it'll fetch things when you throw them, and
it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things--I
can't remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds!
He says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!' cried Alice in a
sorrowful tone, `I'm afraid I've offended it again!'  For the
Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and
making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

  So she called softly after it, `Mouse dear!  Do come back
again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't
like them!'  When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam
slowly back to her:  its face was quite pale (with passion, Alice
thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, `Let us get to
the shore, and then I'll tell you my history, and you'll
understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.'

  It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded
with the birds and animals that had fallen into it:  there were a
Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious
creatures.  Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the
shore.



                           CHAPTER III

                  A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale


  They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the
bank--the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their
fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and
uncomfortable.

  The first question of course was, how to get dry again:  they
had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed
quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them all her life.  Indeed, she had
quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky,
and would only say, `I am older than you, and must know better';
and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was,
and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no
more to be said.

  At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among
them, called out, `Sit down, all of you, and listen to me!  I'LL
soon make you dry enough!'  They all sat down at once, in a large
ring, with the Mouse in the middle.  Alice kept her eyes
anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad
cold if she did not get dry very soon.

  `Ahem!' said the Mouse with an important air, `are you all ready?
This is the driest thing I know.  Silence all round, if you please!
"William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was
soon submitted to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been
of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest.  Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria--"'

  `Ugh!' said the Lory, with a shiver.

  `I beg your pardon!' said the Mouse, frowning, but very
politely:  `Did you speak?'

  `Not I!' said the Lory hastily.

  `I thought you did,' said the Mouse.  `--I proceed.  "Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him:
and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found
it advisable--"'

  `Found WHAT?' said the Duck.

  `Found IT,' the Mouse replied rather crossly:  `of course you
know what "it" means.'

  `I know what "it" means well enough, when I find a thing,' said
the Duck:  `it's generally a frog or a worm.  The question is,
what did the archbishop find?'

  The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on,
`"--found it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William
and offer him the crown.  William's conduct at first was
moderate.  But the insolence of his Normans--"  How are you
getting on now, my dear?' it continued, turning to Alice as it
spoke.

  `As wet as ever,' said Alice in a melancholy tone:  `it doesn't
seem to dry me at all.'

  `In that case,' said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, `I
move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more
energetic remedies--'

  `Speak English!' said the Eaglet.  `I don't know the meaning of
half those long words, and, what's more, I don't believe you do
either!'  And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile:
some of the other birds tittered audibly.

  `What I was going to say,' said the Dodo in an offended tone,
`was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.'

  `What IS a Caucus-race?' said Alice; not that she wanted much
to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY
ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

  `Why,' said the Dodo, `the best way to explain it is to do it.'
(And, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter
day, I will tell you how the Dodo managed it.)

  First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (`the
exact shape doesn't matter,' it said,) and then all the party
were placed along the course, here and there.  There was no `One,
two, three, and away,' but they began running when they liked,
and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know
when the race was over.  However, when they had been running half
an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called
out `The race is over!' and they all crowded round it, panting,
and asking, `But who has won?'

  This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon
its forehead (the position in which you usually see Shakespeare,
in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence.  At
last the Dodo said, `EVERYBODY has won, and all must have
prizes.'

  `But who is to give the prizes?' quite a chorus of voices
asked.

  `Why, SHE, of course,' said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with
one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her,
calling out in a confused way, `Prizes! Prizes!'

  Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand
in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt
water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes.
There was exactly one a-piece all round.

  `But she must have a prize herself, you know,' said the Mouse.

  `Of course,' the Dodo replied very gravely.  `What else have
you got in your pocket?' he went on, turning to Alice.

  `Only a thimble,' said Alice sadly.

  `Hand it over here,' said the Dodo.

  Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo
solemnly presented the thimble, saying `We beg your acceptance of
this elegant thimble'; and, when it had finished this short
speech, they all cheered.

  Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked
so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not
think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble,
looking as solemn as she could.

  The next thing was to eat the comfits:  this caused some noise
and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not
taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on
the back.  However, it was over at last, and they sat down again
in a ring, and begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

  `You promised to tell me your history, you know,' said Alice,
`and why it is you hate--C and D,' she added in a whisper, half
afraid that it would be offended again.

  `Mine is a long and a sad tale!' said the Mouse, turning to
Alice, and sighing.

  `It IS a long tail, certainly,' said Alice, looking down with
wonder at the Mouse's tail; `but why do you call it sad?'  And
she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so
that her idea of the tale was something like this:--

                    `Fury said to a
                   mouse, That he
                 met in the
               house,
            "Let us
              both go to
                law:  I will
                  prosecute
                    YOU.  --Come,
                       I'll take no
                        denial; We
                     must have a
                 trial:  For
              really this
           morning I've
          nothing
         to do."
           Said the
             mouse to the
               cur, "Such
                 a trial,
                   dear Sir,
                         With
                     no jury
                  or judge,
                would be
              wasting
             our
              breath."
               "I'll be
                 judge, I'll
                   be jury,"
                         Said
                    cunning
                      old Fury:
                     "I'll
                      try the
                         whole
                          cause,
                             and
                        condemn
                       you
                      to
                       death."'


  `You are not attending!' said the Mouse to Alice severely.
`What are you thinking of?'

  `I beg your pardon,' said Alice very humbly:  `you had got to
the fifth bend, I think?'

  `I had NOT!' cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

  `A knot!' said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and
looking anxiously about her.  `Oh, do let me help to undo it!'

  `I shall do nothing of the sort,' said the Mouse, getting up
and walking away.  `You insult me by talking such nonsense!'

  `I didn't mean it!' pleaded poor Alice.  `But you're so easily
offended, you know!'

  The Mouse only growled in reply.

  `Please come back and finish your story!' Alice called after
it; and the others all joined in chorus, `Yes, please do!' but
the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little
quicker.

  `What a pity it wouldn't stay!' sighed the Lory, as soon as it
was quite out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of
saying to her daughter `Ah, my dear!  Let this be a lesson to you
never to lose YOUR temper!'  `Hold your tongue, Ma!' said the
young Crab, a little snappishly.  `You're enough to try the
patience of an oyster!'

  `I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!' said Alice aloud,
addressing nobody in particular.  `She'd soon fetch it back!'

  `And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?'
said the Lory.

  Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about
her pet:  `Dinah's our cat.  And she's such a capital one for
catching mice you can't think!  And oh, I wish you could see her
after the birds!  Why, she'll eat a little bird as soon as look
at it!'

  This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
Some of the birds hurried off at once:  one old Magpie began
wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, `I really must be
getting home; the night-air doesn't suit my throat!' and a Canary
called out in a trembling voice to its children, `Come away, my
dears!  It's high time you were all in bed!'  On various pretexts
they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

  `I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!' she said to herself in a
melancholy tone.  `Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I'm
sure she's the best cat in the world!  Oh, my dear Dinah!  I
wonder if I shall ever see you any more!'  And here poor Alice
began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited.
In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of
footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping
that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to
finish his story.



                           CHAPTER IV

                The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill


  It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something;
and she heard it muttering to itself `The Duchess!  The Duchess!
Oh my dear paws!  Oh my fur and whiskers!  She'll get me
executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!  Where CAN I have
dropped them, I wonder?'  Alice guessed in a moment that it was
looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she
very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her
swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and
the little door, had vanished completely.

  Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about,
and called out to her in an angry tone, `Why, Mary Ann, what ARE
you doing out here?  Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of
gloves and a fan!  Quick, now!'  And Alice was so much frightened
that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without
trying to explain the mistake it had made.

  `He took me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran.
`How surprised he'll be when he finds out who I am!  But I'd
better take him his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them.'
As she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door
of which was a bright brass plate with the name `W. RABBIT'
engraved upon it.  She went in without knocking, and hurried
upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann,
and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and
gloves.

  `How queer it seems,' Alice said to herself, `to be going
messages for a rabbit!  I suppose Dinah'll be sending me on
messages next!'  And she began fancying the sort of thing that
would happen:  `"Miss Alice!  Come here directly, and get ready
for your walk!" "Coming in a minute, nurse!  But I've got to see
that the mouse doesn't get out."  Only I don't think,' Alice went
on, `that they'd let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering
people about like that!'

  By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with
a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two
or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves:  she took up the fan and
a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when
her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-
glass.  There was no label this time with the words `DRINK ME,'
but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.  `I know
SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen,' she said to herself,
`whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'll just see what this
bottle does.  I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for
really I'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!'

  It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected:
before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing
against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being
broken.  She hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself
`That's quite enough--I hope I shan't grow any more--As it is, I
can't get out at the door--I do wish I hadn't drunk quite so
much!'

  Alas! it was too late to wish that!  She went on growing, and
growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor:  in
another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried
the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the
other arm curled round her head.  Still she went on growing, and,
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
foot up the chimney, and said to herself `Now I can do no more,
whatever happens.  What WILL become of me?'

  Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full
effect, and she grew no larger:  still it was very uncomfortable,
and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

  `It was much pleasanter at home,' thought poor Alice, `when one
wasn't always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about
by mice and rabbits.  I almost wish I hadn't gone down that
rabbit-hole--and yet--and yet--it's rather curious, you know,
this sort of life!  I do wonder what CAN have happened to me!
When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that kind of thing
never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!  There
ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!  And when
I grow up, I'll write one--but I'm grown up now,' she added in a
sorrowful tone; `at least there's no room to grow up any more
HERE.'

  `But then,' thought Alice, `shall I NEVER get any older than I
am now?  That'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--
but then--always to have lessons to learn!  Oh, I shouldn't like THAT!'

  `Oh, you foolish Alice!' she answered herself.  `How can you
learn lessons in here?  Why, there's hardly room for YOU, and no
room at all for any lesson-books!'

  And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

  `Mary Ann!  Mary Ann!' said the voice.  `Fetch me my gloves
this moment!'  Then came a little pattering of feet on the
stairs.  Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and
she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she
was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it.

  Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it;
but, as the door opened inwards, and Alice's elbow was pressed
hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.  Alice heard it
say to itself `Then I'll go round and get in at the window.'

  `THAT you won't' thought Alice, and, after waiting till she
fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.  She did not
get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall,
and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was
just possible it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or something
of the sort.

  Next came an angry voice--the Rabbit's--`Pat! Pat!  Where are
you?'  And then a voice she had never heard before, `Sure then
I'm here!  Digging for apples, yer honour!'



  `Digging for apples, indeed!' said the Rabbit angrily.  `Here!
Come and help me out of THIS!'  (Sounds of more broken glass.)

  `Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the window?'

  `Sure, it's an arm, yer honour!'  (He pronounced it `arrum.')

  `An arm, you goose!   Who ever saw one that size?  Why, it
fills the whole window!'

  `Sure, it does, yer honour:  but it's an arm for all that.'

  `Well, it's got no business there, at any rate:  go and take it
away!'

  There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear
whispers now and then; such as, `Sure, I don't like it, yer
honour, at all, at all!'  `Do as I tell you, you coward!' and at
last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in
the air.  This time there were TWO little shrieks, and more
sounds of broken glass.  `What a number of cucumber-frames there
must be!' thought Alice.  `I wonder what they'll do next!  As for
pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD!  I'm sure I
don't want to stay in here any longer!'

  She waited for some time without hearing anything more:  at
last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a
good many voices all talking together:  she made out the words:
`Where's the other ladder?--Why, I hadn't to bring but one;
Bill's got the other--Bill! fetch it here, lad!--Here, put 'em up
at this corner--No, tie 'em together first--they don't reach half
high enough yet--Oh! they'll do well enough; don't be particular--
Here, Bill! catch hold of this rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind
that loose slate--Oh, it's coming down!  Heads below!' (a loud
crash)--`Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I fancy--Who's to go
down the chimney?--Nay, I shan't! YOU do it!--That I won't,
then!--Bill's to go down--Here, Bill! the master says you're to
go down the chimney!'

  `Oh! So Bill's got to come down the chimney, has he?' said
Alice to herself.  `Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill!
I wouldn't be in Bill's place for a good deal:  this fireplace is
narrow, to be sure; but I THINK I can kick a little!'

  She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and
waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what
sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close
above her:  then, saying to herself `This is Bill,' she gave one
sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.

  The first thing she heard was a general chorus of `There goes
Bill!' then the Rabbit's voice along--`Catch him, you by the
hedge!' then silence, and then another confusion of voices--`Hold
up his head--Brandy now--Don't choke him--How was it, old fellow?
What happened to you?  Tell us all about it!'

  Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (`That's Bill,'
thought Alice,) `Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I'm
better now--but I'm a deal too flustered to tell you--all I know
is, something comes at me like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes
like a sky-rocket!'

  `So you did, old fellow!' said the others.

  `We must burn the house down!' said the Rabbit's voice; and
Alice called out as loud as she could, `If you do.  I'll set
Dinah at you!'

  There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to
herself, `I wonder what they WILL do next!  If they had any
sense, they'd take the roof off.'  After a minute or two, they
began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, `A
barrowful will do, to begin with.'

  `A barrowful of WHAT?' thought Alice; but she had not long to
doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came
rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
`I'll put a stop to this,' she said to herself, and shouted out,
`You'd better not do that again!' which produced another dead
silence.

  Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all
turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright
idea came into her head.  `If I eat one of these cakes,' she
thought, `it's sure to make SOME change in my size; and as it
can't possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I
suppose.'

  So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find
that she began shrinking directly.  As soon as she was small
enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and
found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle, being held up by
two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared; but she
ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.

  `The first thing I've got to do,' said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, `is to grow to my right size again;
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
I think that will be the best plan.'

  It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the
smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over
her head made her look up in a great hurry.

  An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round
eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
`Poor little thing!' said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried
hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

  Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of
stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped
into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight,
and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then Alice
dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run
over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy
made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in
its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was very
like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle
again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the
stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long
way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its
mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

  This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape;
so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out
of breath, and till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the
distance.

  `And yet what a dear little puppy it was!' said Alice, as she
leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself
with one of the leaves:  `I should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, if--if I'd only been the right size to do it!  Oh
dear!  I'd nearly forgotten that I've got to grow up again!  Let
me see--how IS it to be managed?  I suppose I ought to eat or
drink something or other; but the great question is, what?'

  The great question certainly was, what?  Alice looked all round
her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see
anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under
the circumstances.  There was a large mushroom growing near her,
about the same height as herself; and when she had looked under
it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her
that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.

  She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of
the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded,
quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice
of her or of anything else.



                            CHAPTER V

                    Advice from a Caterpillar


  The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in
silence:  at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

  `Who are YOU?' said the Caterpillar.

  This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.  Alice
replied, rather shyly, `I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--
at least I know who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think
I must have been changed several times since then.'

  `What do you mean by that?' said the Caterpillar sternly.
`Explain yourself!'

  `I can't explain MYSELF, I'm afraid, sir' said Alice, `because
I'm not myself, you see.'

  `I don't see,' said the Caterpillar.

  `I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly,' Alice replied very
politely, `for I can't understand it myself to begin with; and
being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.'

  `It isn't,' said the Caterpillar.

  `Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet,' said Alice; `but
when you have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you
know--and then after that into a butterfly, I should think you'll
feel it a little queer, won't you?'

  `Not a bit,' said the Caterpillar.

  `Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,' said Alice;
`all I know is, it would feel very queer to ME.'

  `You!' said the Caterpillar contemptuously.  `Who are YOU?'

  Which brought them back again to the beginning of the
conversation.  Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar's
making such VERY short remarks, and she drew herself up and said,
very gravely, `I think, you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.'

  `Why?' said the Caterpillar.

  Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not
think of any good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in
a VERY unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.

  `Come back!' the Caterpillar called after her.  `I've something
important to say!'

  This sounded promising, certainly:  Alice turned and came back
again.

  `Keep your temper,' said the Caterpillar.

  `Is that all?' said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as
she could.

  `No,' said the Caterpillar.

  Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else
to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth
hearing.  For some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but
at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth
again, and said, `So you think you're changed, do you?'

  `I'm afraid I am, sir,' said Alice; `I can't remember things as
I used--and I don't keep the same size for ten minutes together!'

  `Can't remember WHAT things?' said the Caterpillar.

  `Well, I've tried to say "HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE," but it
all came different!' Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

  `Repeat, "YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,"' said the Caterpillar.

  Alice folded her hands, and began:--

    `You are old, Father William,' the young man said,
      `And your hair has become very white;
    And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
      Do you think, at your age, it is right?'

    `In my youth,' Father William replied to his son,
      `I feared it might injure the brain;
    But, now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
      Why, I do it again and again.'

    `You are old,' said the youth, `as I mentioned before,
      And have grown most uncommonly fat;
    Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door--
      Pray, what is the reason of that?'

    `In my youth,' said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
      `I kept all my limbs very supple
    By the use of this ointment--one shilling the box--
      Allow me to sell you a couple?'

    `You are old,' said the youth, `and your jaws are too weak
      For anything tougher than suet;
    Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak--
      Pray how did you manage to do it?'

    `In my youth,' said his father, `I took to the law,
      And argued each case with my wife;
    And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
      Has lasted the rest of my life.'

    `You are old,' said the youth, `one would hardly suppose
      That your eye was as steady as ever;
    Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--
      What made you so awfully clever?'

    `I have answered three questions, and that is enough,'
      Said his father; `don't give yourself airs!
    Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
      Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs!'


  `That is not said right,' said the Caterpillar.

  `Not QUITE right, I'm afraid,' said Alice, timidly; `some of the
words have got altered.'

  `It is wrong from beginning to end,' said the Caterpillar
decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.

  The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

  `What size do you want to be?' it asked.

  `Oh, I'm not particular as to size,' Alice hastily replied;
`only one doesn't like changing so often, you know.'

  `I DON'T know,' said the Caterpillar.

  Alice said nothing:  she had never been so much contradicted in
her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

  `Are you content now?' said the Caterpillar.

  `Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you
wouldn't mind,' said Alice:  `three inches is such a wretched
height to be.'

  `It is a very good height indeed!' said the Caterpillar
angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three
inches high).

  `But I'm not used to it!' pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone.
And she thought of herself, `I wish the creatures wouldn't be so
easily offended!'

  `You'll get used to it in time,' said the Caterpillar; and it
put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

  This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again.
In a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself.  Then it got
down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely
remarking as it went, `One side will make you grow taller, and
the other side will make you grow shorter.'

  `One side of WHAT?  The other side of WHAT?' thought Alice to
herself.

  `Of the mushroom,' said the Caterpillar, just as if she had
asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

  Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a
minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as
it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question.
However, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they
would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.

  `And now which is which?' she said to herself, and nibbled a
little of the right-hand bit to try the effect:  the next moment
she felt a violent blow underneath her chin:  it had struck her
foot!

  She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but
she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking
rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit.
Her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was
hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and
managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.


     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

         *       *       *       *       *       *

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

  `Come, my head's free at last!' said Alice in a tone of
delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she
found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found:  all she could
see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which
seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay
far below her.

  `What CAN all that green stuff be?' said Alice.  `And where
HAVE my shoulders got to?  And oh, my poor hands, how is it I
can't see you?'  She was moving them about as she spoke, but no
result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the
distant green leaves.

  As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her
head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted
to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction,
like a serpent.  She had just succeeded in curving it down into a
graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which
she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she
had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a
hurry:  a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating
her violently with its wings.

  `Serpent!' screamed the Pigeon.

  `I'm NOT a serpent!' said Alice indignantly.  `Let me alone!'

  `Serpent, I say again!' repeated the Pigeon, but in a more
subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, `I've tried every
way, and nothing seems to suit them!'

  `I haven't the least idea what you're talking about,' said
Alice.

  `I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've
tried hedges,' the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; `but
those serpents!  There's no pleasing them!'

  Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no
use in saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

  `As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs,' said the
Pigeon; `but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and
day!  Why, I haven't had a wink of sleep these three weeks!'

  `I'm very sorry you've been annoyed,' said Alice, who was
beginning to see its meaning.

  `And just as I'd taken the highest tree in the wood,' continued
the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, `and just as I was
thinking I should be free of them at last, they must needs come
wriggling down from the sky!  Ugh, Serpent!'

  `But I'm NOT a serpent, I tell you!' said Alice.  `I'm a--I'm
a--'

  `Well!  WHAT are you?' said the Pigeon.  `I can see you're
trying to invent something!'

  `I--I'm a little girl,' said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she
remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.

  `A likely story indeed!' said the Pigeon in a tone of the
deepest contempt.  `I've seen a good many little girls in my
time, but never ONE with such a neck as that!  No, no!  You're a
serpent; and there's no use denying it.  I suppose you'll be
telling me next that you never tasted an egg!'

  `I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly,' said Alice, who was a very
truthful child; `but little girls eat eggs quite as much as
serpents do, you know.'

  `I don't believe it,' said the Pigeon; `but if they do, why
then they're a kind of serpent, that's all I can say.'

  This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent
for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of
adding, `You're looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and
what does it matter to me whether you're a little girl or a
serpent?'

  `It matters a good deal to ME,' said Alice hastily; `but I'm
not looking for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn't
want YOURS:  I don't like them raw.'

  `Well, be off, then!' said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it
settled down again into its nest.  Alice crouched down among the
trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled
among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and
untwist it.  After a while she remembered that she still held the
pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very
carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and
growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

  It was so long since she had been anything near the right size,
that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a
few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual.  `Come,
there's half my plan done now!  How puzzling all these changes
are!  I'm never sure what I'm going to be, from one minute to
another!  However, I've got back to my right size:  the next
thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how IS that to be
done, I wonder?'  As she said this, she came suddenly upon an
open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
`Whoever lives there,' thought Alice, `it'll never do to come
upon them THIS size:  why, I should frighten them out of their
wits!'  So she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did
not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself
down to nine inches high.



                           CHAPTER VI

                         Pig and Pepper


  For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and
wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came
running out of the wood--(she considered him to be a footman
because he was in livery:  otherwise, judging by his face only,
she would have called him a fish)--and rapped loudly at the door
with his knuckles.  It was opened by another footman in livery,
with a round face, and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen,
Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their
heads.  She felt very curious to know what it was all about, and
crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

  The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great
letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to
the other, saying, in a solemn tone, `For the Duchess.  An
invitation from the Queen to play croquet.'  The Frog-Footman
repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the
words a little, `From the Queen.  An invitation for the Duchess
to play croquet.'

  Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled
together.

  Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into
the wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped
out the Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the
ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

  Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

  `There's no sort of use in knocking,' said the Footman, `and
that for two reasons.  First, because I'm on the same side of the
door as you are; secondly, because they're making such a noise
inside, no one could possibly hear you.'  And certainly there was
a most extraordinary noise going on within--a constant howling
and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish
or kettle had been broken to pieces.

  `Please, then,' said Alice, `how am I to get in?'

  `There might be some sense in your knocking,' the Footman went
on without attending to her, `if we had the door between us.  For
instance, if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let
you out, you know.'  He was looking up into the sky all the time
he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil.  `But
perhaps he can't help it,' she said to herself; `his eyes are so
VERY nearly at the top of his head.  But at any rate he might
answer questions.--How am I to get in?' she repeated, aloud.

  `I shall sit here,' the Footman remarked, `till tomorrow--'

  At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate
came skimming out, straight at the Footman's head:  it just
grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees
behind him.

  `--or next day, maybe,' the Footman continued in the same tone,
exactly as if nothing had happened.

  `How am I to get in?' asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

  `ARE you to get in at all?' said the Footman.  `That's the
first question, you know.'

  It was, no doubt:  only Alice did not like to be told so.
`It's really dreadful,' she muttered to herself, `the way all the
creatures argue.  It's enough to drive one crazy!'

  The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for
repeating his remark, with variations.  `I shall sit here,' he
said, `on and off, for days and days.'

  `But what am I to do?' said Alice.

  `Anything you like,' said the Footman, and began whistling.

  `Oh, there's no use in talking to him,' said Alice desperately:
`he's perfectly idiotic!'  And she opened the door and went in.

  The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of
smoke from one end to the other:  the Duchess was sitting on a
three-legged stool in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was
leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to
be full of soup.

  `There's certainly too much pepper in that soup!' Alice said to
herself, as well as she could for sneezing.

  There was certainly too much of it in the air.  Even the
Duchess sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was
sneezing and howling alternately without a moment's pause.  The
only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook,
and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from
ear to ear.

  `Please would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, for
she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to
speak first, `why your cat grins like that?'

  `It's a Cheshire cat,' said the Duchess, `and that's why.  Pig!'

  She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice
quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed
to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on
again:--

  `I didn't know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I
didn't know that cats COULD grin.'

  `They all can,' said the Duchess; `and most of 'em do.'

  `I don't know of any that do,' Alice said very politely,
feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.

  `You don't know much,' said the Duchess; `and that's a fact.'

  Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought
it would be as well to introduce some other subject of
conversation.  While she was trying to fix on one, the cook took
the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work
throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the baby
--the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans,
plates, and dishes.  The Duchess took no notice of them even when
they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it
was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

  `Oh, PLEASE mind what you're doing!' cried Alice, jumping up
and down in an agony of terror.  `Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS
nose'; as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very
nearly carried it off.

  `If everybody minded their own business,' the Duchess said in a
hoarse growl, `the world would go round a deal faster than it
does.'

  `Which would NOT be an advantage,' said Alice, who felt very
glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her
knowledge.  `Just think of what work it would make with the day
and night!  You see the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn
round on its axis--'

  `Talking of axes,' said the Duchess, `chop off her head!'

  Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant
to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and
seemed not to be listening, so she went on again:  `Twenty-four
hours, I THINK; or is it twelve?  I--'

  `Oh, don't bother ME,' said the Duchess; `I never could abide
figures!'  And with that she began nursing her child again,
singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a
violent shake at the end of every line:

        `Speak roughly to your little boy,
          And beat him when he sneezes:
        He only does it to annoy,
          Because he knows it teases.'

                    CHORUS.

    (In which the cook and the baby joined):--

                `Wow! wow! wow!'

  While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept
tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing
howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words:--

        `I speak severely to my boy,
          I beat him when he sneezes;
        For he can thoroughly enjoy
          The pepper when he pleases!'

                    CHORUS.

                `Wow! wow! wow!'

  `Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!' the Duchess said
to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke.  `I must go and
get ready to play croquet with the Queen,' and she hurried out of
the room.  The cook threw a frying-pan after her as she went out,
but it just missed her.

  Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-
shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all
directions, `just like a star-fish,' thought Alice.  The poor
little thing was snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it,
and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again,
so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much
as she could do to hold it.

  As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it,
(which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep
tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its
undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air.  `IF I
don't take this child away with me,' thought Alice, `they're sure
to kill it in a day or two:  wouldn't it be murder to leave it
behind?'  She said the last words out loud, and the little thing
grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).  `Don't
grunt,' said Alice; `that's not at all a proper way of expressing
yourself.'

  The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into
its face to see what was the matter with it.  There could be no
doubt that it had a VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout
than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small for
a baby:  altogether Alice did not like the look of the thing at
all.  `But perhaps it was only sobbing,' she thought, and looked
into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.

  No, there were no tears.  `If you're going to turn into a pig,
my dear,' said Alice, seriously, `I'll have nothing more to do
with you.  Mind now!'  The poor little thing sobbed again (or
grunted, it was impossible to say which), and they went on for
some while in silence.

  Alice was just beginning to think to herself, `Now, what am I
to do with this creature when I get it home?' when it grunted
again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some
alarm.  This time there could be NO mistake about it:  it was
neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be
quite absurd for her to carry it further.

  So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to
see it trot away quietly into the wood.  `If it had grown up,'
she said to herself, `it would have made a dreadfully ugly child:
but it makes rather a handsome pig, I think.'  And she began
thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as
pigs, and was just saying to herself, `if one only knew the right
way to change them--' when she was a little startled by seeing
the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off.

  The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice.  It looked good-
natured, she thought:  still it had VERY long claws and a great
many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

  `Cheshire Puss,' she began, rather timidly, as she did not at
all know whether it would like the name:  however, it only
grinned a little wider.  `Come, it's pleased so far,' thought
Alice, and she went on.  `Would you tell me, please, which way I
ought to go from here?'

  `That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,' said
the Cat.

  `I don't much care where--' said Alice.

  `Then it doesn't matter which way you go,' said the Cat.

  `--so long as I get SOMEWHERE,' Alice added as an explanation.

  `Oh, you're sure to do that,' said the Cat, `if you only walk
long enough.'

  Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another
question.  `What sort of people live about here?'

  `In THAT direction,' the Cat said, waving its right paw round,
`lives a Hatter:  and in THAT direction,' waving the other paw,
`lives a March Hare.  Visit either you like:  they're both mad.'

  `But I don't want to go among mad people,' Alice remarked.

  `Oh, you can't help that,' said the Cat:  `we're all mad here.
I'm mad.  You're mad.'

  `How do you know I'm mad?' said Alice.

  `You must be,' said the Cat, `or you wouldn't have come here.'

  Alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on
`And how do you know that you're mad?'

  `To begin with,' said the Cat, `a dog's not mad.  You grant
that?'

  `I suppose so,' said Alice.

  `Well, then,' the Cat went on, `you see, a dog growls when it's
angry, and wags its tail when it's pleased.  Now I growl when I'm
pleased, and wag my tail when I'm angry.  Therefore I'm mad.'

  `I call it purring, not growling,' said Alice.

  `Call it what you like,' said the Cat.  `Do you play croquet
with the Queen to-day?'

  `I should like it very much,' said Alice, `but I haven't been
invited yet.'

  `You'll see me there,' said the Cat, and vanished.

  Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used
to queer things happening.  While she was looking at the place
where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.

  `By-the-bye, what became of the baby?' said the Cat.  `I'd
nearly forgotten to ask.'

  `It turned into a pig,' Alice quietly said, just as if it had
come back in a natural way.

  `I thought it would,' said the Cat, and vanished again.

  Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it
did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the
direction in which the March Hare was said to live.  `I've seen
hatters before,' she said to herself; `the March Hare will be
much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it won't be
raving mad--at least not so mad as it was in March.'  As she said
this, she looked up, and there was the Cat again, sitting on a
branch of a tree.

  `Did you say pig, or fig?' said the Cat.

  `I said pig,' replied Alice; `and I wish you wouldn't keep
appearing and vanishing so suddenly:  you make one quite giddy.'

  `All right,' said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin,
which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

  `Well!  I've often seen a cat without a grin,' thought Alice;
`but a grin without a cat!  It's the most curious thing I ever
saw in my life!'

  She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the
house of the March Hare:  she thought it must be the right house,
because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was
thatched with fur.  It was so large a house, that she did not
like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand
bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high:  even
then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself
`Suppose it should be raving mad after all!  I almost wish I'd
gone to see the Hatter instead!'



                           CHAPTER VII

                         A Mad Tea-Party


  There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house,
and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it:  a
Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two
were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking
over its head.  `Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse,' thought Alice;
`only, as it's asleep, I suppose it doesn't mind.'

  The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded
together at one corner of it:  `No room!  No room!' they cried
out when they saw Alice coming.  `There's PLENTY of room!' said
Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one
end of the table.

  `Have some wine,' the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

  Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it
but tea.  `I don't see any wine,' she remarked.

  `There isn't any,' said the March Hare.

  `Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it,' said Alice
angrily.

  `It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being
invited,' said the March Hare.

  `I didn't know it was YOUR table,' said Alice; `it's laid for a
great many more than three.'

  `Your hair wants cutting,' said the Hatter.  He had been
looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was
his first speech.

  `You should learn not to make personal remarks,' Alice said
with some severity; `it's very rude.'

  The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all
he SAID was, `Why is a raven like a writing-desk?'

  `Come, we shall have some fun now!' thought Alice.  `I'm glad
they've begun asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that,' she
added aloud.

  `Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?'
said the March Hare.

  `Exactly so,' said Alice.

  `Then you should say what you mean,' the March Hare went on.

  `I do,' Alice hastily replied; `at least--at least I mean what
I say--that's the same thing, you know.'

  `Not the same thing a bit!' said the Hatter.  `You might just
as well say that "I see what I eat" is the same thing as "I eat
what I see"!'

  `You might just as well say,' added the March Hare, `that "I
like what I get" is the same thing as "I get what I like"!'

  `You might just as well say,' added the Dormouse, who seemed to
be talking in his sleep, `that "I breathe when I sleep" is the
same thing as "I sleep when I breathe"!'

  `It IS the same thing with you,' said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute,
while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
writing-desks, which wasn't much.

  The Hatter was the first to break the silence.  `What day of
the month is it?' he said, turning to Alice:  he had taken his
watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking
it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.

  Alice considered a little, and then said `The fourth.'

  `Two days wrong!' sighed the Hatter.  `I told you butter
wouldn't suit the works!' he added looking angrily at the March
Hare.

  `It was the BEST butter,' the March Hare meekly replied.

  `Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,' the Hatter
grumbled:  `you shouldn't have put it in with the bread-knife.'

  The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily:  then
he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again:  but he
could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, `It
was the BEST butter, you know.'

  Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity.
`What a funny watch!' she remarked.  `It tells the day of the
month, and doesn't tell what o'clock it is!'

  `Why should it?' muttered the Hatter.  `Does YOUR watch tell
you what year it is?'

  `Of course not,' Alice replied very readily:  `but that's
because it stays the same year for such a long time together.'

  `Which is just the case with MINE,' said the Hatter.

  Alice felt dreadfully puzzled.  The Hatter's remark seemed to
have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English.
`I don't quite understand you,' she said, as politely as she
could.

  `The Dormouse is asleep again,' said the Hatter, and he poured
a little hot tea upon its nose.

  The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without
opening its eyes, `Of course, of course; just what I was going to
remark myself.'

  `Have you guessed the riddle yet?' the Hatter said, turning to
Alice again.

  `No, I give it up,' Alice replied:  `what's the answer?'

  `I haven't the slightest idea,' said the Hatter.

  `Nor I,' said the March Hare.

  Alice sighed wearily.  `I think you might do something better
with the time,' she said, `than waste it in asking riddles that
have no answers.'

  `If you knew Time as well as I do,' said the Hatter, `you
wouldn't talk about wasting IT.  It's HIM.'

  `I don't know what you mean,' said Alice.

  `Of course you don't!' the Hatter said, tossing his head
contemptuously.  `I dare say you never even spoke to Time!'

  `Perhaps not,' Alice cautiously replied:  `but I know I have to
beat time when I learn music.'

  `Ah! that accounts for it,' said the Hatter.  `He won't stand
beating.  Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do
almost anything you liked with the clock.  For instance, suppose
it were nine o'clock in the morning, just time to begin lessons:
you'd only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the
clock in a twinkling!  Half-past one, time for dinner!'

  (`I only wish it was,' the March Hare said to itself in a
whisper.)

  `That would be grand, certainly,' said Alice thoughtfully:
`but then--I shouldn't be hungry for it, you know.'

  `Not at first, perhaps,' said the Hatter:  `but you could keep
it to half-past one as long as you liked.'

  `Is that the way YOU manage?' Alice asked.

  The Hatter shook his head mournfully.  `Not I!' he replied.
`We quarrelled last March--just before HE went mad, you know--'
(pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) `--it was at the
great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

            "Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
            How I wonder what you're at!"

You know the song, perhaps?'

  `I've heard something like it,' said Alice.

  `It goes on, you know,' the Hatter continued, `in this way:--

            "Up above the world you fly,
            Like a tea-tray in the sky.
                    Twinkle, twinkle--"'

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep
`Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--' and went on so long that
they had to pinch it to make it stop.

  `Well, I'd hardly finished the first verse,' said the Hatter,
`when the Queen jumped up and bawled out, "He's murdering the
time!  Off with his head!"'

  `How dreadfully savage!' exclaimed Alice.

  `And ever since that,' the Hatter went on in a mournful tone,
`he won't do a thing I ask!  It's always six o'clock now.'

  A bright idea came into Alice's head.  `Is that the reason so
many tea-things are put out here?' she asked.

  `Yes, that's it,' said the Hatter with a sigh:  `it's always
tea-time, and we've no time to wash the things between whiles.'

  `Then you keep moving round, I suppose?' said Alice.

  `Exactly so,' said the Hatter:  `as the things get used up.'

  `But what happens when you come to the beginning again?' Alice
ventured to ask.

  `Suppose we change the subject,' the March Hare interrupted,
yawning.  `I'm getting tired of this.  I vote the young lady
tells us a story.'

  `I'm afraid I don't know one,' said Alice, rather alarmed at
the proposal.

  `Then the Dormouse shall!' they both cried.  `Wake up,
Dormouse!'  And they pinched it on both sides at once.

  The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes.  `I wasn't asleep,' he
said in a hoarse, feeble voice:  `I heard every word you fellows
were saying.'

  `Tell us a story!' said the March Hare.

  `Yes, please do!' pleaded Alice.

  `And be quick about it,' added the Hatter, `or you'll be asleep
again before it's done.'

  `Once upon a time there were three little sisters,' the
Dormouse began in a great hurry; `and their names were Elsie,
Lacie, and Tillie; and they lived at the bottom of a well--'

  `What did they live on?' said Alice, who always took a great
interest in questions of eating and drinking.

  `They lived on treacle,' said the Dormouse, after thinking a
minute or two.

  `They couldn't have done that, you know,' Alice gently
remarked; `they'd have been ill.'

  `So they were,' said the Dormouse; `VERY ill.'

  Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways
of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went
on:  `But why did they live at the bottom of a well?'

  `Take some more tea,' the March Hare said to Alice, very
earnestly.

  `I've had nothing yet,' Alice replied in an offended tone, `so
I can't take more.'

  `You mean you can't take LESS,' said the Hatter:  `it's very
easy to take MORE than nothing.'

  `Nobody asked YOUR opinion,' said Alice.

  `Who's making personal remarks now?' the Hatter asked
triumphantly.

  Alice did not quite know what to say to this:  so she helped
herself to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the
Dormouse, and repeated her question.  `Why did they live at the
bottom of a well?'

  The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and
then said, `It was a treacle-well.'

  `There's no such thing!'  Alice was beginning very angrily, but
the Hatter and the March Hare went `Sh! sh!' and the Dormouse
sulkily remarked, `If you can't be civil, you'd better finish the
story for yourself.'

  `No, please go on!' Alice said very humbly; `I won't interrupt
again.  I dare say there may be ONE.'

  `One, indeed!' said the Dormouse indignantly.  However, he
consented to go on.  `And so these three little sisters--they
were learning to draw, you know--'

  `What did they draw?' said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

  `Treacle,' said the Dormouse, without considering at all this
time.

  `I want a clean cup,' interrupted the Hatter:  `let's all move
one place on.'

  He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him:  the
March Hare moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather
unwillingly took the place of the March Hare.  The Hatter was the
only one who got any advantage from the change:  and Alice was a
good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset
the milk-jug into his plate.

  Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began
very cautiously:  `But I don't understand.  Where did they draw
the treacle from?'

  `You can draw water out of a water-well,' said the Hatter; `so
I should think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh,
stupid?'

  `But they were IN the well,' Alice said to the Dormouse, not
choosing to notice this last remark.

  `Of course they were', said the Dormouse; `--well in.'

  This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse
go on for some time without interrupting it.

  `They were learning to draw,' the Dormouse went on, yawning and
rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; `and they drew
all manner of things--everything that begins with an M--'

  `Why with an M?' said Alice.

  `Why not?' said the March Hare.

  Alice was silent.

  The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going
off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up
again with a little shriek, and went on:  `--that begins with an
M, such as mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--
you know you say things are "much of a muchness"--did you ever
see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?'

  `Really, now you ask me,' said Alice, very much confused, `I
don't think--'

  `Then you shouldn't talk,' said the Hatter.

  This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear:  she got
up in great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep
instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her
going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that
they would call after her:  the last time she saw them, they were
trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.

  `At any rate I'll never go THERE again!' said Alice as she
picked her way through the wood.  `It's the stupidest tea-party I
ever was at in all my life!'

  Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a
door leading right into it.  `That's very curious!' she thought.
`But everything's curious today.  I think I may as well go in at once.'
And in she went.

  Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the
little glass table.  `Now, I'll manage better this time,'
she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key,
and unlocking the door that led into the garden.  Then she went
to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it
in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:  then she walked down
the little passage:  and THEN--she found herself at last in the
beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains.



                          CHAPTER VIII

                   The Queen's Croquet-Ground


  A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden:  the
roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at
it, busily painting them red.  Alice thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up
to them she heard one of them say, `Look out now, Five!  Don't go
splashing paint over me like that!'

  `I couldn't help it,' said Five, in a sulky tone; `Seven jogged
my elbow.'

  On which Seven looked up and said, `That's right, Five!  Always
lay the blame on others!'

  `YOU'D better not talk!' said Five.  `I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!'

  `What for?' said the one who had spoken first.

  `That's none of YOUR business, Two!' said Seven.

  `Yes, it IS his business!' said Five, `and I'll tell him--it
was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.'

  Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun `Well, of all
the unjust things--' when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as
she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly:  the
others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

  `Would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, `why you are
painting those roses?'

  Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two.  Two began in a
low voice, `Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to
have been a RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake;
and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads
cut off, you know.  So you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore
she comes, to--'  At this moment Five, who had been anxiously
looking across the garden, called out `The Queen!  The Queen!'
and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon
their faces.  There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice
looked round, eager to see the Queen.

  First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped
like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and
feet at the corners:  next the ten courtiers; these were
ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the
soldiers did.  After these came the royal children; there were
ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand
in hand, in couples:  they were all ornamented with hearts.  Next
came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice
recognised the White Rabbit:  it was talking in a hurried nervous
manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her.  Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the
King's crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this
grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

  Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on
her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember
ever having heard of such a rule at processions; `and besides,
what would be the use of a procession,' thought she, `if people
had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn't see it?'
So she stood still where she was, and waited.

  When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped
and looked at her, and the Queen said severely `Who is this?'
She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

  `Idiot!' said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and,
turning to Alice, she went on, `What's your name, child?'

  `My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,' said Alice very
politely; but she added, to herself, `Why, they're only a pack of
cards, after all.  I needn't be afraid of them!'

  `And who are THESE?' said the Queen, pointing to the three
gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as
they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs
was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether
they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her
own children.

  `How should I know?' said Alice, surprised at her own courage.
`It's no business of MINE.'

  The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her
for a moment like a wild beast, screamed `Off with her head!
Off--'

  `Nonsense!' said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the
Queen was silent.

  The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said
`Consider, my dear:  she is only a child!'

  The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave
`Turn them over!'

  The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

  `Get up!' said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the
three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the
King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.

  `Leave off that!' screamed the Queen.  `You make me giddy.'
And then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on, `What HAVE you
been doing here?'

  `May it please your Majesty,' said Two, in a very humble tone,
going down on one knee as he spoke, `we were trying--'

  `I see!' said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the
roses.  `Off with their heads!' and the procession moved on,
three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate
gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

  `You shan't be beheaded!' said Alice, and she put them into a
large flower-pot that stood near.  The three soldiers wandered
about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly
marched off after the others.

  `Are their heads off?' shouted the Queen.

  `Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!' the soldiers
shouted in reply.

  `That's right!' shouted the Queen.  `Can you play croquet?'

  The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.

  `Yes!' shouted Alice.

  `Come on, then!' roared the Queen, and Alice joined the
procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

  `It's--it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side.
She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously
into her face.

  `Very,' said Alice:  `--where's the Duchess?'

  `Hush!  Hush!' said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone.  He
looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised
himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered `She's under sentence of execution.'

  `What for?' said Alice.

  `Did you say "What a pity!"?' the Rabbit asked.

  `No, I didn't,' said Alice:  `I don't think it's at all a pity.
I said "What for?"'

  `She boxed the Queen's ears--' the Rabbit began.  Alice gave a
little scream of laughter.  `Oh, hush!' the Rabbit whispered in a
frightened tone.  `The Queen will hear you!  You see, she came
rather late, and the Queen said--'

  `Get to your places!' shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder,
and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up
against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or
two, and the game began.  Alice thought she had never seen such a
curious croquet-ground in her life; it was all ridges and
furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live
flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to
stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

  The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her
flamingo:  she succeeded in getting its body tucked away,
comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down,
but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened
out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it
WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a
puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing:
and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again,
it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in the act of crawling away:  besides all this,
there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers
were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the
ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very
difficult game indeed.

  The players all played at once without waiting for turns,
quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in
a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went
stamping about, and shouting `Off with his head!' or `Off with
her head!' about once in a minute.

  Alice began to feel very uneasy:  to be sure, she had not as
yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might
happen any minute, `and then,' thought she, `what would become of
me?  They're dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great
wonder is, that there's any one left alive!'

  She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering
whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a
curious appearance in the air:  it puzzled her very much at
first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to
be a grin, and she said to herself `It's the Cheshire Cat:  now I
shall have somebody to talk to.'

  `How are you getting on?' said the Cat, as soon as there was
mouth enough for it to speak with.

  Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.  `It's no
use speaking to it,' she thought, `till its ears have come, or at
least one of them.'  In another minute the whole head appeared,
and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the
game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.  The
Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and
no more of it appeared.

  `I don't think they play at all fairly,' Alice began, in rather
a complaining tone, `and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't
hear oneself speak--and they don't seem to have any rules in
particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and
you've no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive;
for instance, there's the arch I've got to go through next
walking about at the other end of the ground--and I should have
croqueted the Queen's hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it
saw mine coming!'

  `How do you like the Queen?' said the Cat in a low voice.

  `Not at all,' said Alice:  `she's so extremely--'  Just then
she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening:  so
she went on, `--likely to win, that it's hardly worth while
finishing the game.'

  The Queen smiled and passed on.

  `Who ARE you talking to?' said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cat's head with great curiosity.

  `It's a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,' said Alice:  `allow me
to introduce it.'

  `I don't like the look of it at all,' said the King:
`however, it may kiss my hand if it likes.'

  `I'd rather not,' the Cat remarked.

  `Don't be impertinent,' said the King, `and don't look at me
like that!'  He got behind Alice as he spoke.

  `A cat may look at a king,' said Alice.  `I've read that in
some book, but I don't remember where.'

  `Well, it must be removed,' said the King very decidedly, and
he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, `My dear!  I
wish you would have this cat removed!'

  The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great
or small.  `Off with his head!' she said, without even looking
round.

  `I'll fetch the executioner myself,' said the King eagerly, and
he hurried off.

  Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game
was going on, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance,
screaming with passion.  She had already heard her sentence three
of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and
she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in
such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or
not.  So she went in search of her hedgehog.

  The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog,
which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one
of them with the other:  the only difficulty was, that her
flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where
Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up
into a tree.

  By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back,
the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight:
`but it doesn't matter much,' thought Alice, `as all the arches
are gone from this side of the ground.'  So she tucked it away
under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for
a little more conversation with her friend.

  When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to
find quite a large crowd collected round it:  there was a dispute
going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who
were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent,
and looked very uncomfortable.

  The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to
settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed
to make out exactly what they said.

  The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a
head unless there was a body to cut it off from:  that he had
never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn't going to begin
at HIS time of life.

  The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

  The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about
it in less than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round.
(It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so
grave and anxious.)

  Alice could think of nothing else to say but `It belongs to the
Duchess:  you'd better ask HER about it.'

  `She's in prison,' the Queen said to the executioner:  `fetch
her here.'  And the executioner went off like an arrow.

   The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely
disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down
looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.



                           CHAPTER IX

                     The Mock Turtle's Story


  `You can't think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old
thing!' said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately
into Alice's, and they walked off together.

  Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

  `When I'M a Duchess,' she said to herself, (not in a very
hopeful tone though), `I won't have any pepper in my kitchen AT
ALL.  Soup does very well without--Maybe it's always pepper that
makes people hot-tempered,' she went on, very much pleased at
having found out a new kind of rule, `and vinegar that makes them
sour--and camomile that makes them bitter--and--and barley-sugar
and such things that make children sweet-tempered.  I only wish
people knew that:  then they wouldn't be so stingy about it, you
know--'

  She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a
little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
`You're thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk.  I can't tell you just now what the moral of that
is, but I shall remember it in a bit.'

  `Perhaps it hasn't one,' Alice ventured to remark.

  `Tut, tut, child!' said the Duchess.  `Everything's got a
moral, if only you can find it.'  And she squeezed herself up
closer to Alice's side as she spoke.

  Alice did not much like keeping so close to her:  first,
because the Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was
exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alice's shoulder,
and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.  However, she did not
like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.

  `The game's going on rather better now,' she said, by way of
keeping up the conversation a little.

  `'Tis so,' said the Duchess:  `and the moral of that is--"Oh,
'tis love, 'tis love, that makes the world go round!"'

  `Somebody said,' Alice whispered, `that it's done by everybody
minding their own business!'

  `Ah, well!  It means much the same thing,' said the Duchess,
digging her sharp little chin into Alice's shoulder as she added,
`and the moral of THAT is--"Take care of the sense, and the
sounds will take care of themselves."'

  `How fond she is of finding morals in things!' Alice thought to
herself.

  `I dare say you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your
waist,' the Duchess said after a pause:  `the reason is, that I'm
doubtful about the temper of your flamingo.  Shall I try the
experiment?'

  `HE might bite,' Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all
anxious to have the experiment tried.

  `Very true,' said the Duchess:  `flamingoes and mustard both
bite.  And the moral of that is--"Birds of a feather flock
together."'

  `Only mustard isn't a bird,' Alice remarked.

  `Right, as usual,' said the Duchess:  `what a clear way you
have of putting things!'

  `It's a mineral, I THINK,' said Alice.

  `Of course it is,' said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree
to everything that Alice said; `there's a large mustard-mine near
here.  And the moral of that is--"The more there is of mine, the
less there is of yours."'

  `Oh, I know!' exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this
last remark, `it's a vegetable.  It doesn't look like one, but it
is.'

  `I quite agree with you,' said the Duchess; `and the moral of
that is--"Be what you would seem to be"--or if you'd like it put
more simply--"Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than
what it might appear to others that what you were or might have
been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared
to them to be otherwise."'

  `I think I should understand that better,' Alice said very
politely, `if I had it written down:  but I can't quite follow it
as you say it.'

  `That's nothing to what I could say if I chose,' the Duchess
replied, in a pleased tone.

  `Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,'
said Alice.

  `Oh, don't talk about trouble!' said the Duchess.  `I make you
a present of everything I've said as yet.'

  `A cheap sort of present!' thought Alice.  `I'm glad they don't
give birthday presents like that!'  But she did not venture to
say it out loud.

  `Thinking again?' the Duchess asked, with another dig of her
sharp little chin.

  `I've a right to think,' said Alice sharply, for she was
beginning to feel a little worried.

  `Just about as much right,' said the Duchess, `as pigs have to fly;
and the m--'

  But here, to Alice's great surprise, the Duchess's voice died
away, even in the middle of her favourite word `moral,' and the
arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.  Alice looked up,
and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded,
frowning like a thunderstorm.

  `A fine day, your Majesty!' the Duchess began in a low, weak
voice.

  `Now, I give you fair warning,' shouted the Queen, stamping on
the ground as she spoke; `either you or your head must be off,
and that in about half no time!  Take your choice!'

  The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

  `Let's go on with the game,' the Queen said to Alice; and Alice
was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her
back to the croquet-ground.

  The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen's absence,
and were resting in the shade:  however, the moment they saw her,
they hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a
moment's delay would cost them their lives.

  All the time they were playing the Queen never left off
quarrelling with the other players, and shouting `Off with his
head!' or `Off with her head!'  Those whom she sentenced were
taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave
off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour
or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the
King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of
execution.

  Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to
Alice, `Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?'

  `No,' said Alice.  `I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is.'

  `It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,' said the Queen.

  `I never saw one, or heard of one,' said Alice.

  `Come on, then,' said the Queen, `and he shall tell you his
history,'

  As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low
voice, to the company generally, `You are all pardoned.'  `Come,
THAT'S a good thing!' she said to herself, for she had felt quite
unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.

  They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the
sun.  (IF you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.)
`Up, lazy thing!' said the Queen, `and take this young lady to
see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history.  I must go back and
see after some executions I have ordered'; and she walked off,
leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon.  Alice did not quite like
the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would
be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Queen:  so she waited.

  The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes:  then it watched the
Queen till she was out of sight:  then it chuckled.  `What fun!'
said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

  `What IS the fun?' said Alice.

  `Why, SHE,' said the Gryphon.  `It's all her fancy, that:  they
never executes nobody, you know.  Come on!'

  `Everybody says "come on!" here,' thought Alice, as she went
slowly after it:  `I never was so ordered about in all my life,
never!'

  They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the
distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and,
as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart
would break.  She pitied him deeply.  `What is his sorrow?' she
asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, `It's all his fancy, that:  he hasn't got
no sorrow, you know.  Come on!'

  So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with
large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.

  `This here young lady,' said the Gryphon, `she wants for to
know your history, she do.'

  `I'll tell it her,' said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow
tone:  `sit down, both of you, and don't speak a word till I've
finished.'

  So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes.  Alice
thought to herself, `I don't see how he can EVEN finish, if he
doesn't begin.'  But she waited patiently.

  `Once,' said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, `I was
a real Turtle.'

  These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only
by an occasional exclamation of `Hjckrrh!' from the Gryphon, and
the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle.  Alice was very
nearly getting up and saying, `Thank you, sir, for your
interesting story,' but she could not help thinking there MUST be
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.

  `When we were little,' the Mock Turtle went on at last, more
calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, `we went to
school in the sea.  The master was an old Turtle--we used to call
him Tortoise--'

  `Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?' Alice asked.

  `We called him Tortoise because he taught us,' said the Mock
Turtle angrily:  `really you are very dull!'

  `You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question,' added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth.  At
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, `Drive on, old fellow!
Don't be all day about it!' and he went on in these words:

  `Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn't believe
it--'

  `I never said I didn't!' interrupted Alice.

  `You did,' said the Mock Turtle.

  `Hold your tongue!' added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak
again.  The Mock Turtle went on.

  `We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school
every day--'

  `I'VE been to a day-school, too,' said Alice; `you needn't be
so proud as all that.'

  `With extras?' asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

  `Yes,' said Alice, `we learned French and music.'

  `And washing?' said the Mock Turtle.

  `Certainly not!' said Alice indignantly.

  `Ah! then yours wasn't a really good school,' said the Mock
Turtle in a tone of great relief.  `Now at OURS they had at the
end of the bill, "French, music, AND WASHING--extra."'

  `You couldn't have wanted it much,' said Alice; `living at the
bottom of the sea.'

  `I couldn't afford to learn it.' said the Mock Turtle with a
sigh.  `I only took the regular course.'

  `What was that?' inquired Alice.

  `Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,' the Mock
Turtle replied; `and then the different branches of Arithmetic--
Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.'

  `I never heard of "Uglification,"' Alice ventured to say.  `What is it?'

  The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise.  `What!  Never
heard of uglifying!' it exclaimed.  `You know what to beautify is,
I suppose?'

  `Yes,' said Alice doubtfully:  `it means--to--make--anything--prettier.'

  `Well, then,' the Gryphon went on, `if you don't know what to
uglify is, you ARE a simpleton.'

  Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about
it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said `What else had you
to learn?'

  `Well, there was Mystery,' the Mock Turtle replied, counting
off the subjects on his flappers, `--Mystery, ancient and modern,
with Seaography:  then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old
conger-eel, that used to come once a week:  HE taught us
Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.'

  `What was THAT like?' said Alice.


  `Well, I can't show it you myself,' the Mock Turtle said:  `I'm
too stiff.  And the Gryphon never learnt it.'

  `Hadn't time,' said the Gryphon:  `I went to the Classics
master, though.  He was an old crab, HE was.'

  `I never went to him,' the Mock Turtle said with a sigh:  `he
taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.'

  `So he did, so he did,' said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn;
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.

  `And how many hours a day did you do lessons?' said Alice, in a
hurry to change the subject.

  `Ten hours the first day,' said the Mock Turtle: `nine the
next, and so on.'

  `What a curious plan!' exclaimed Alice.

  `That's the reason they're called lessons,' the Gryphon
remarked:  `because they lessen from day to day.'

  This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a
little before she made her next remark.  `Then the eleventh day
must have been a holiday?'

  `Of course it was,' said the Mock Turtle.

  `And how did you manage on the twelfth?' Alice went on eagerly.

  `That's enough about lessons,' the Gryphon interrupted in a
very decided tone:  `tell her something about the games now.'



                            CHAPTER X

                      The Lobster Quadrille


  The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper
across his eyes.  He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for
a minute or two sobs choked his voice.  `Same as if he had a bone
in his throat,' said the Gryphon:  and it set to work shaking him
and punching him in the back.  At last the Mock Turtle recovered
his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on
again:--

  `You may not have lived much under the sea--' (`I haven't,' said Alice)--
`and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--'
(Alice began to say `I once tasted--' but checked herself hastily,
and said `No, never') `--so you can have no idea what a delightful
thing a Lobster Quadrille is!'

  `No, indeed,' said Alice.  `What sort of a dance is it?'

  `Why,' said the Gryphon, `you first form into a line along the sea-shore--'

  `Two lines!' cried the Mock Turtle.  `Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--'

  `THAT generally takes some time,' interrupted the Gryphon.

  `--you advance twice--'

  `Each with a lobster as a partner!' cried the Gryphon.

  `Of course,' the Mock Turtle said:  `advance twice, set to
partners--'

  `--change lobsters, and retire in same order,' continued the
Gryphon.

  `Then, you know,' the Mock Turtle went on, `you throw the--'

  `The lobsters!' shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

  `--as far out to sea as you can--'

  `Swim after them!' screamed the Gryphon.

  `Turn a somersault in the sea!' cried the Mock Turtle,
capering wildly about.

  `Change lobsters again!' yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

  `Back to land again, and that's all the first figure,' said the
Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures,
who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat
down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.

  `It must be a very pretty dance,' said Alice timidly.

  `Would you like to see a little of it?' said the Mock Turtle.

  `Very much indeed,' said Alice.

  `Come, let's try the first figure!' said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon.  `We can do without lobsters, you know.  Which shall
sing?'

  `Oh, YOU sing,' said the Gryphon.  `I've forgotten the words.'

  So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now
and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and
waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle
sang this, very slowly and sadly:--


`"Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
"There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my
 tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the
dance?

Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the
dance?
Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the
dance?


"You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to
                                                      sea!"
But the snail replied "Too far, too far!" and gave a look
                                                       askance--
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the
   dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join
        the dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join
        the dance.

`"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
"There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further off from England the nearer is to France--
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the
         dance?
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the
         dance?"'



  `Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch,' said
Alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last:  `and I do so
like that curious song about the whiting!'

  `Oh, as to the whiting,' said the Mock Turtle, `they--you've
seen them, of course?'

  `Yes,' said Alice, `I've often seen them at dinn--' she
checked herself hastily.

  `I don't know where Dinn may be,' said the Mock Turtle, `but
if you've seen them so often, of course you know what they're
like.'

  `I believe so,' Alice replied thoughtfully.  `They have their
tails in their mouths--and they're all over crumbs.'

  `You're wrong about the crumbs,' said the Mock Turtle:
`crumbs would all wash off in the sea.  But they HAVE their tails
in their mouths; and the reason is--' here the Mock Turtle
yawned and shut his eyes.--`Tell her about the reason and all
that,' he said to the Gryphon.

  `The reason is,' said the Gryphon, `that they WOULD go with
the lobsters to the dance.  So they got thrown out to sea.  So
they had to fall a long way.  So they got their tails fast in
their mouths.  So they couldn't get them out again.  That's all.'

  `Thank you,' said Alice, `it's very interesting.  I never knew
so much about a whiting before.'

  `I can tell you more than that, if you like,' said the
Gryphon.  `Do you know why it's called a whiting?'

  `I never thought about it,' said Alice.  `Why?'

  `IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.' the Gryphon replied very
solemnly.

  Alice was thoroughly puzzled.  `Does the boots and shoes!' she
repeated in a wondering tone.

  `Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?' said the Gryphon.  `I
mean, what makes them so shiny?'

  Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she
gave her answer.  `They're done with blacking, I believe.'

  `Boots and shoes under the sea,' the Gryphon went on in a deep
voice, `are done with a whiting.  Now you know.'

  `And what are they made of?' Alice asked in a tone of great
curiosity.

  `Soles and eels, of course,' the Gryphon replied rather
impatiently:  `any shrimp could have told you that.'

  `If I'd been the whiting,' said Alice, whose thoughts were
still running on the song, `I'd have said to the porpoise, "Keep
back, please:  we don't want YOU with us!"'

  `They were obliged to have him with them,' the Mock Turtle
said:  `no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.'

  `Wouldn't it really?' said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

  `Of course not,' said the Mock Turtle:  `why, if a fish came
to ME, and told me he was going a journey, I should say "With
what porpoise?"'

  `Don't you mean "purpose"?' said Alice.

  `I mean what I say,' the Mock Turtle replied in an offended
tone.  And the Gryphon added `Come, let's hear some of YOUR
adventures.'

  `I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,'
said Alice a little timidly:  `but it's no use going back to
yesterday, because I was a different person then.'

  `Explain all that,' said the Mock Turtle.

  `No, no!  The adventures first,' said the Gryphon in an
impatient tone:  `explanations take such a dreadful time.'

  So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when
she first saw the White Rabbit.  She was a little nervous about
it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on
each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she
gained courage as she went on.  Her listeners were perfectly
quiet till she got to the part about her repeating `YOU ARE OLD,
FATHER WILLIAM,' to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming
different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said
`That's very curious.'

  `It's all about as curious as it can be,' said the Gryphon.

  `It all came different!' the Mock Turtle repeated
thoughtfully.  `I should like to hear her try and repeat
something now.  Tell her to begin.'  He looked at the Gryphon as
if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.

  `Stand up and repeat "'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,"' said
the Gryphon.

  `How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat
lessons!' thought Alice; `I might as well be at school at once.'
However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so
full of the Lobster Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was
saying, and the words came very queer indeed:--

    `'Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
    "You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair."
    As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
    Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.'

              [later editions continued as follows
    When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
    And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
    But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
    His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]

  `That's different from what I used to say when I was a child,'
said the Gryphon.

  `Well, I never heard it before,' said the Mock Turtle; `but it
sounds uncommon nonsense.'

  Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her
hands, wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way
again.

  `I should like to have it explained,' said the Mock Turtle.

  `She can't explain it,' said the Gryphon hastily.  `Go on with
the next verse.'

  `But about his toes?' the Mock Turtle persisted.  `How COULD
he turn them out with his nose, you know?'

  `It's the first position in dancing.' Alice said; but was
dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the
subject.

  `Go on with the next verse,' the Gryphon repeated impatiently:
`it begins "I passed by his garden."'

  Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would
all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--

    `I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
    How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie--'

        [later editions continued as follows
    The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
    While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
    When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
    Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
    While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
    And concluded the banquet--]

  `What IS the use of repeating all that stuff,' the Mock Turtle
interrupted, `if you don't explain it as you go on?  It's by far
the most confusing thing I ever heard!'

  `Yes, I think you'd better leave off,' said the Gryphon:  and
Alice was only too glad to do so.

  `Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?' the
Gryphon went on.  `Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you
a song?'

  `Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,'
Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather
offended tone, `Hm!  No accounting for tastes!  Sing her
"Turtle Soup," will you, old fellow?'

  The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes
choked with sobs, to sing this:--


    `Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
    Waiting in a hot tureen!
    Who for such dainties would not stoop?
    Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
    Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
    Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
        Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

    `Beautiful Soup!  Who cares for fish,
    Game, or any other dish?
    Who would not give all else for two
    Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
    Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
    Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
        Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!'

  `Chorus again!' cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had
just begun to repeat it, when a cry of `The trial's beginning!'
was heard in the distance.

  `Come on!' cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand,
it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.

  `What trial is it?' Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon
only answered `Come on!' and ran the faster, while more and more
faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the
melancholy words:--

    `Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
        Beautiful, beautiful Soup!'



                           CHAPTER XI

                      Who Stole the Tarts?


  The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when
they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts
of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards:
the Knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on
each side to guard him; and near the King was the White Rabbit,
with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the
other.  In the very middle of the court was a table, with a large
dish of tarts upon it:  they looked so good, that it made Alice
quite hungry to look at them--`I wish they'd get the trial done,'
she thought, `and hand round the refreshments!'  But there seemed
to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away the time.

  Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had
read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that
she knew the name of nearly everything there.  `That's the
judge,' she said to herself, `because of his great wig.'

  The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown
over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he
did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly
not becoming.

  `And that's the jury-box,' thought Alice, `and those twelve
creatures,' (she was obliged to say `creatures,' you see, because
some of them were animals, and some were birds,) `I suppose they
are the jurors.'  She said this last word two or three times over
to herself, being rather proud of it:  for she thought, and
rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the
meaning of it at all.  However, `jury-men' would have done just
as well.

  The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates.
`What are they doing?'  Alice whispered to the Gryphon.  `They
can't have anything to put down yet, before the trial's begun.'

  `They're putting down their names,' the Gryphon whispered in
reply, `for fear they should forget them before the end of the
trial.'

  `Stupid things!' Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but
she stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, `Silence in
the court!' and the King put on his spectacles and looked
anxiously round, to make out who was talking.

  Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their
shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down `stupid things!'
on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them
didn't know how to spell `stupid,' and that he had to ask his
neighbour to tell him.  `A nice muddle their slates'll be in
before the trial's over!' thought Alice.

  One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.  This of course,
Alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got
behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it
away.  She did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was
Bill, the Lizard) could not make out at all what had become of
it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write
with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very
little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

  `Herald, read the accusation!' said the King.

  On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and
then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--

    `The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
          All on a summer day:
      The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
          And took them quite away!'

  `Consider your verdict,' the King said to the jury.

  `Not yet, not yet!' the Rabbit hastily interrupted.  `There's
a great deal to come before that!'

  `Call the first witness,' said the King; and the White Rabbit
blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, `First
witness!'

  The first witness was the Hatter.  He came in with a teacup in
one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other.  `I beg
pardon, your Majesty,' he began, `for bringing these in:  but I
hadn't quite finished my tea when I was sent for.'

  `You ought to have finished,' said the King.  `When did you
begin?'

  The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into
the court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse.  `Fourteenth of March, I
think it was,' he said.

  `Fifteenth,' said the March Hare.

  `Sixteenth,' added the Dormouse.

  `Write that down,' the King said to the jury, and the jury
eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then
added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

  `Take off your hat,' the King said to the Hatter.

  `It isn't mine,' said the Hatter.

  `Stolen!' the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who
instantly made a memorandum of the fact.

  `I keep them to sell,' the Hatter added as an explanation;
`I've none of my own.  I'm a hatter.'

  Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the
Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.

  `Give your evidence,' said the King; `and don't be nervous, or
I'll have you executed on the spot.'

  This did not seem to encourage the witness at all:  he kept
shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the
Queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his
teacup instead of the bread-and-butter.

  Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which
puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was:  she was
beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she
would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she
decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for
her.

  `I wish you wouldn't squeeze so.' said the Dormouse, who was
sitting next to her.  `I can hardly breathe.'

  `I can't help it,' said Alice very meekly:  `I'm growing.'

  `You've no right to grow here,' said the Dormouse.

  `Don't talk nonsense,' said Alice more boldly:  `you know
you're growing too.'

  `Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,' said the Dormouse:
`not in that ridiculous fashion.'  And he got up very sulkily
and crossed over to the other side of the court.

  All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the
Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to
one of the officers of the court, `Bring me the list of the
singers in the last concert!' on which the wretched Hatter
trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

  `Give your evidence,' the King repeated angrily, `or I'll have
you executed, whether you're nervous or not.'

  `I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' the Hatter began, in a
trembling voice, `--and I hadn't begun my tea--not above a week
or so--and what with the bread-and-butter getting so thin--and
the twinkling of the tea--'

  `The twinkling of the what?' said the King.

  `It began with the tea,' the Hatter replied.

  `Of course twinkling begins with a T!' said the King sharply.
`Do you take me for a dunce?  Go on!'

  `I'm a poor man,' the Hatter went on, `and most things
twinkled after that--only the March Hare said--'

  `I didn't!' the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

  `You did!' said the Hatter.

  `I deny it!' said the March Hare.

  `He denies it,' said the King:  `leave out that part.'

  `Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--' the Hatter went on,
looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too:  but the
Dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.

  `After that,' continued the Hatter, `I cut some more bread-
and-butter--'

  `But what did the Dormouse say?' one of the jury asked.

  `That I can't remember,' said the Hatter.

  `You MUST remember,' remarked the King, `or I'll have you
executed.'

  The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter,
and went down on one knee.  `I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' he
began.

  `You're a very poor speaker,' said the King.

  Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately
suppressed by the officers of the court.  (As that is rather a
hard word, I will just explain to you how it was done.  They had
a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings:
into this they slipped the guinea-pig, head first, and then sat
upon it.)

  `I'm glad I've seen that done,' thought Alice.  `I've so often
read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "There was some
attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the
officers of the court," and I never understood what it meant
till now.'

  `If that's all you know about it, you may stand down,'
continued the King.

  `I can't go no lower,' said the Hatter:  `I'm on the floor, as
it is.'

  `Then you may SIT down,' the King replied.

  Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

  `Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!' thought Alice.  `Now we
shall get on better.'

  `I'd rather finish my tea,' said the Hatter, with an anxious
look at the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

  `You may go,' said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the
court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.

  `--and just take his head off outside,' the Queen added to one
of the officers:  but the Hatter was out of sight before the
officer could get to the door.

  `Call the next witness!' said the King.

  The next witness was the Duchess's cook.  She carried the
pepper-box in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before
she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began
sneezing all at once.

  `Give your evidence,' said the King.

  `Shan't,' said the cook.

  The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a
low voice, `Your Majesty must cross-examine THIS witness.'

  `Well, if I must, I must,' the King said, with a melancholy
air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till
his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, `What
are tarts made of?'

  `Pepper, mostly,' said the cook.

  `Treacle,' said a sleepy voice behind her.

  `Collar that Dormouse,' the Queen shrieked out.  `Behead that
Dormouse!  Turn that Dormouse out of court!  Suppress him!  Pinch
him!  Off with his whiskers!'

  For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the
Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down
again, the cook had disappeared.

  `Never mind!' said the King, with an air of great relief.
`Call the next witness.'  And he added in an undertone to the
Queen, `Really, my dear, YOU must cross-examine the next witness.
It quite makes my forehead ache!'

  Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list,
feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like,
`--for they haven't got much evidence YET,' she said to herself.
Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top
of his shrill little voice, the name `Alice!'



                           CHAPTER XII

                        Alice's Evidence


  `Here!' cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the
moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she
jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with
the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads
of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding
her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset
the week before.

  `Oh, I BEG your pardon!' she exclaimed in a tone of great
dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could,
for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and
she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once
and put back into the jury-box, or they would die.

  `The trial cannot proceed,' said the King in a very grave
voice, `until all the jurymen are back in their proper places--
ALL,' he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as
he said do.

  Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she
had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing
was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable
to move.  She soon got it out again, and put it right; `not that
it signifies much,' she said to herself; `I should think it
would be QUITE as much use in the trial one way up as the other.'

  As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of
being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and
handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write
out a history of the accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed
too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open,
gazing up into the roof of the court.

  `What do you know about this business?' the King said to
Alice.

  `Nothing,' said Alice.

  `Nothing WHATEVER?' persisted the King.

  `Nothing whatever,' said Alice.

  `That's very important,' the King said, turning to the jury.
They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when
the White Rabbit interrupted:  `UNimportant, your Majesty means,
of course,' he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and
making faces at him as he spoke.

  `UNimportant, of course, I meant,' the King hastily said, and
went on to himself in an undertone, `important--unimportant--
unimportant--important--' as if he were trying which word
sounded best.

  Some of the jury wrote it down `important,' and some
`unimportant.'  Alice could see this, as she was near enough to
look over their slates; `but it doesn't matter a bit,' she
thought to herself.

  At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily
writing in his note-book, cackled out `Silence!' and read out
from his book, `Rule Forty-two.  ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE
HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.'

  Everybody looked at Alice.

  `I'M not a mile high,' said Alice.

  `You are,' said the King.

  `Nearly two miles high,' added the Queen.

  `Well, I shan't go, at any rate,' said Alice:  `besides,
that's not a regular rule:  you invented it just now.'

  `It's the oldest rule in the book,' said the King.

  `Then it ought to be Number One,' said Alice.

  The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily.
`Consider your verdict,' he said to the jury, in a low, trembling
voice.

  `There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,' said
the White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; `this paper has
just been picked up.'

  `What's in it?' said the Queen.

  `I haven't opened it yet,' said the White Rabbit, `but it seems
to be a letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody.'

  `It must have been that,' said the King, `unless it was
written to nobody, which isn't usual, you know.'

  `Who is it directed to?' said one of the jurymen.

  `It isn't directed at all,' said the White Rabbit; `in fact,
there's nothing written on the OUTSIDE.'  He unfolded the paper
as he spoke, and added `It isn't a letter, after all:  it's a set
of verses.'

  `Are they in the prisoner's handwriting?' asked another of
the jurymen.

  `No, they're not,' said the White Rabbit, `and that's the
queerest thing about it.'  (The jury all looked puzzled.)

  `He must have imitated somebody else's hand,' said the King.
(The jury all brightened up again.)

  `Please your Majesty,' said the Knave, `I didn't write it, and
they can't prove I did:  there's no name signed at the end.'

  `If you didn't sign it,' said the King, `that only makes the
matter worse.  You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you'd
have signed your name like an honest man.'

  There was a general clapping of hands at this:  it was the
first really clever thing the King had said that day.

  `That PROVES his guilt,' said the Queen.

  `It proves nothing of the sort!' said Alice.  `Why, you don't
even know what they're about!'

  `Read them,' said the King.

  The White Rabbit put on his spectacles.  `Where shall I begin,
please your Majesty?' he asked.

  `Begin at the beginning,' the King said gravely, `and go on
till you come to the end:  then stop.'

  These were the verses the White Rabbit read:--

        `They told me you had been to her,
          And mentioned me to him:
        She gave me a good character,
          But said I could not swim.

        He sent them word I had not gone
          (We know it to be true):
        If she should push the matter on,
          What would become of you?

        I gave her one, they gave him two,
          You gave us three or more;
        They all returned from him to you,
          Though they were mine before.

        If I or she should chance to be
          Involved in this affair,
        He trusts to you to set them free,
          Exactly as we were.

        My notion was that you had been
          (Before she had this fit)
        An obstacle that came between
          Him, and ourselves, and it.

        Don't let him know she liked them best,
          For this must ever be
        A secret, kept from all the rest,
          Between yourself and me.'

  `That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,'
said the King, rubbing his hands; `so now let the jury--'

  `If any one of them can explain it,' said Alice, (she had
grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit
afraid of interrupting him,) `I'll give him sixpence.  _I_ don't
believe there's an atom of meaning in it.'

  The jury all wrote down on their slates, `SHE doesn't believe
there's an atom of meaning in it,' but none of them attempted to
explain the paper.

  `If there's no meaning in it,' said the King, `that saves a
world of trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any.  And
yet I don't know,' he went on, spreading out the verses on his
knee, and looking at them with one eye; `I seem to see some
meaning in them, after all.  "--SAID I COULD NOT SWIM--" you
can't swim, can you?' he added, turning to the Knave.

  The Knave shook his head sadly.  `Do I look like it?' he said.
(Which he certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

  `All right, so far,' said the King, and he went on muttering
over the verses to himself:  `"WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--" that's
the jury, of course-- "I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--" why,
that must be what he did with the tarts, you know--'

  `But, it goes on "THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,"' said
Alice.

  `Why, there they are!' said the King triumphantly, pointing to
the tarts on the table.  `Nothing can be clearer than THAT.
Then again--"BEFORE SHE HAD THIS FIT--"  you never had fits, my
dear, I think?' he said to the Queen.

  `Never!' said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the
Lizard as she spoke.  (The unfortunate little Bill had left off
writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no
mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was
trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)

  `Then the words don't FIT you,' said the King, looking round
the court with a smile.  There was a dead silence.

  `It's a pun!' the King added in an offended tone, and
everybody laughed, `Let the jury consider their verdict,' the
King said, for about the twentieth time that day.

  `No, no!' said the Queen.  `Sentence first--verdict afterwards.'

  `Stuff and nonsense!' said Alice loudly.  `The idea of having
the sentence first!'

  `Hold your tongue!' said the Queen, turning purple.

  `I won't!' said Alice.

  `Off with her head!' the Queen shouted at the top of her voice.
Nobody moved.

  `Who cares for you?' said Alice, (she had grown to her full
size by this time.)  `You're nothing but a pack of cards!'

  At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying
down upon her:  she gave a little scream, half of fright and half
of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on
the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently
brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the
trees upon her face.

  `Wake up, Alice dear!' said her sister; `Why, what a long
sleep you've had!'

  `Oh, I've had such a curious dream!' said Alice, and she told
her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange
Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and
when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, `It WAS a
curious dream, dear, certainly:  but now run in to your tea; it's
getting late.'  So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she
ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.

  But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her
head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of
little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she too began
dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:--

  First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the
tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes
were looking up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her
voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back
the wandering hair that WOULD always get into her eyes--and
still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place
around her became alive the strange creatures of her little
sister's dream.

  The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried
by--the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the
neighbouring pool--she could hear the rattle of the teacups as
the March Hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal,
and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate
guests to execution--once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the
Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it--once
more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard's
slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable
Mock Turtle.

  So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and
all would change to dull reality--the grass would be only
rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the
reeds--the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep-
bells, and the Queen's shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd
boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and
all the other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the
confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing of the
cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's
heavy sobs.

  Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of
hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how
she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and
loving heart of her childhood:  and how she would gather about
her other little children, and make THEIR eyes bright and eager
with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of
Wonderland of long ago:  and how she would feel with all their
simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,
remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer "days".

                             THE END
Book III


Chapter 1
The Departure of Boromir
Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground. Hobbits go light, and their footprints are not easy even for a Ranger to read, but not far from the top a spring crossed the path, and in the wet earth he saw what he was seeking.

'I read the signs aright,' he said to himself. 'Frodo ran to the hill-top. I wonder what he saw there? But he returned by the same way, and went down the hill again.'

Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to see there something that would guide him in his perplexities; but time was pressing. Suddenly he leaped forward, and ran to the summit, across the great flag-stones, and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked out. But the sun seemed darkened, and the world dim and remote. He turned from the North back again to North, and saw nothing save the distant hills, unless it were that far away he could see again a great bird like an eagle high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth.

Even as he gazed his quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below, on the west side of the River. He stiffened. There were cries, and among them, to his horror, he could distinguish the harsh voices of Orcs. Then suddenly with a deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the blasts of it smote the hills and echoed in the hollows, rising in a mighty shout above the roaring of the falls.

'The horn of Boromir!' he cried. 'He is in need!' He sprang down the steps and away, leaping down the path. 'Alas! An ill fate is on me this day, and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?'

As he ran the cries came louder, but fainter now and desperately the horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs, and suddenly the horn-calls ceased. Aragorn raced down the last slope, but before he could reach the hill's foot, the sounds died away; and as he turned to the left and ran towards them they retreated, until at last he could hear them no more. Drawing his bright sword and crying Elendil! Elendil! he crashed through the trees.

A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree, as if he was resting. But Aragorn saw that he was pierced with many black-feathered arrows; his sword was still in his hand, but it was broken near the hilt; his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many Orcs lay slain, piled all about him and at his feet.

Aragorn knelt beside him. Boromir opened his eyes and strove to speak. At last slow words came. 'I tried to take the Ring from Frodo ' he said. 'I am sorry. I have paid.' His glance strayed to his fallen enemies; twenty at least lay there. 'They have gone: the Halflings: the Orcs have taken them. I think they are not dead. Orcs bound them.' He paused and his eyes closed wearily. After a moment he spoke again.

'Farewell, Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my people! I have failed.'

'No!' said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing his brow. 'You have conquered. Few have gained such a victory. Be at peace! Minas Tirith shall not fall!'

Boromir smiled.

'Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?' said Aragorn.

But Boromir did not speak again.

'Alas!' said Aragorn. 'Thus passes the heir of Denethor, Lord of the Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all in ruin. It is I that have failed. Vain was Gandalf's trust in me. What shall I do now? Boromir has laid it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it; but where are the Ring and the Bearer? How shall I find them and save the Quest from disaster?'

He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir's hand. So it was that Legolas and Gimli found him. They came from the western slopes of the hill, silently, creeping through the trees as if they were hunting. Gimli had his axe in hand, and Legolas his long knife: all his arrows were spent. When they came into the glade they halted in amazement; and then they stood a moment with heads bowed in grief, for it seemed to them plain what had happened.

'Alas!' said Legolas, coming to Aragorn's side. 'We have hunted and slain many Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more use here. We came when we heard the horn-but too late, it seems. I fear you have taken deadly hurt.'

'Boromir is dead,' said Aragorn. 'I am unscathed, for I was not here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.'

'The hobbits!' cried Gimli 'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?'

'I do not know,' answered Aragorn wearily. 'Before he died Boromir told me that the Orcs had bound them; he did not think that they were dead. I sent him to follow Merry and Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam were with him: not until it was too late. All that I have done today has gone amiss. What is to be done now?'

'First we must tend the fallen,' said Legolas. 'We cannot leave him lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.'

'But we must be swift,' said Gimli. 'He would not wish us to linger. We must follow the Orcs, if there is hope that any of our Company are living prisoners.'

'But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them or not ' said Aragorn. 'Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? An evil choice is now before us!'

'Then let us do first what we must do,' said Legolas. 'We have not the time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A cairn we might build.'

'The labour would be hard and long: there are no stones that we could use nearer than the water-side,' said Gimli.

'Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his vanquished foes,' said Aragorn. 'We will send him to the Falls of Rauros and give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil creature dishonours his bones.'

Quickly they searched the bodies of the Orcs, gathering their swords and cloven helms and shields into a heap. 'See!' cried Aragorn. 'Here we find tokens!' He picked out from the pile of grim weapons two knives, leaf-bladed, damasked in gold and red; and searching further he found also the sheaths, black, set with small red gems. 'No orc-tools these!' he said. 'They were borne by the hobbits. Doubtless the Orcs despoiled them, but feared to keep the knives, knowing them for what they are: work of Westernesse, wound about with spells for the bane of Mordor. Well, now, if they still live, our friends are weaponless. I will take these things, hoping against hope, to give them back.'

'And I,' said Legolas, 'will take all the arrows that I can find, for my quiver is empty.' He searched in the pile and on the ground about and found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft than such arrows as the Orcs were accustomed to use. He looked at them closely.

And Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: 'Here lie many that are not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty Mountains, if I know anything of Orcs and their kinds. And here are others strange to me. Their gear is not after the manner of Orcs at all!'

There were four goblin-soldiers of greater stature, swart, slant-eyed, with thick legs and large hands. They were armed with short broad-bladed swords, not with the curved scimitars usual with Orcs: and they had bows of yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men. Upon their shields they bore a strange device: a small white hand in the centre of a black field; on the front of their iron helms was set an S-rune, wrought of some white metal.

'I have not seen these tokens before,' said Aragorn. 'What do they mean?'

'S is for Sauron,' said Gimli. 'That is easy to read.'

'Nay!' said Legolas. 'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.'

'Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be spelt or spoken,' said Aragorn. 'And he does not use white. The Orcs in the service of Barad-dûr use the sign of the Red Eye.' He stood for a moment in thought. 'S is for Saruman, I guess,' he said at length. 'There is evil afoot in Isengard, and the West is no longer safe. It is as Gandalf feared: by some means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey. It is likely too that he knows of Gandalf's fall. Pursuers from Moria may have escaped the vigilance of Lórien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard by other paths. Orcs travel fast. But Saruman has many ways of learning news. Do you remember the birds?'

'Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,' said Gimli. 'Let us bear Boromir away!'

'But after that we must guess the riddles, if we are to choose our course rightly,' answered Aragorn.

'Maybe there is no right choice,' said Gimli.

Taking his axe the Dwarf now cut several branches. These they lashed together with bowstrings, and spread their cloaks upon the frame. Upon this rough bier they carried the body of their companion to the shore, together with such trophies of his last battle as they chose to send forth with him. It was only a short way, yet they found it no easy task, for Boromir was a man both tall and strong.

At the water-side Aragorn remained, watching the bier. while Legolas and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth Galen. It was a mile or more, and it was some time before they came back, paddling two boats swiftly along the shore.

'There is a strange tale to tell!' said Legolas. 'There are only two boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.'

'Have Orcs been there?' asked Aragorn.

'We saw no signs of them,' answered Gimli. 'And Orcs would have taken or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.'

'I will look at the ground when we come there,' said Aragorn.

Now they laid Boromir in the middle of the boat that was to bear him away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed beneath his head. They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden belt of Lórien gleamed about his waist. His helm they set beside him, and across his lap they laid the cloven horn and the hilts and shards of his sword; beneath his feet they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening the prow to the stern of the other boat, they drew him out into the water. They rowed sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift-running channel they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep sides of Tol Brandir were glowing: it was now mid-afternoon. As they went south the fume of Rauros rose and shimmered before them, a haze of gold. The rush and thunder of the falls shook the windless air.

Sorrowfully they cast loose the funeral boat: there Boromir lay, restful, peaceful, gliding upon the bosom of the flowing water. The stream took him while they held their own boat back with their paddles. He floated by them, and slowly his boat departed, waning to a dark spot against the golden light; and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros roared on unchanging. The River had taken Boromir son of Denethor, and he was not seen again in Minas Tirith, standing as he used to stand upon the White Tower in the morning. But in Gondor in after-days it long was said that the elven-boat rode the falls and the foaming pool, and bore him down through Osgiliath, and past the many mouths of Anduin, out into the Great Sea at night under the stars.

For a while the three companions remained silent, gazing after him. Then Aragorn spoke. 'They will look for him from the White Tower,' he said, 'but he will not return from mountain or from sea.' Then slowly he began to sing:

Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows

The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes.

'What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to me tonight?

Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?'

'I saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and grey;

I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away

Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more.

The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of Denethor.'

'O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar,

But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.'

Then Legolas sang:

From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the sandhills and the stones;

The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans.

'What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me at eve?

Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.'

'Ask not of me where he doth dwell-so many bones there lie

On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky;

So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea.

Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to me!'

'O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south,

But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea's mouth.'

Then Aragorn sang again:

From the Gate of Kings the North Wind rides, and past the roaring falls;

And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls.

'What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me today?

What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away.'

'Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought.

His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought.

His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest;

And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast.'

'O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze

To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end of days.'

So they ended. Then they turned their boat and drove it with all the speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen.

'You left the East Wind to me,' said Gimli, 'but I will say naught of it.'

'That is as it should be,' said Aragorn. 'In Minas Tirith they endure the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir has taken his road. and we must make haste to choose our own.'

He surveyed the green lawn, quickly but thoroughly, stooping often to the earth. 'The Orcs have been on this ground,' he said. 'Otherwise nothing can be made out for certain. All our footprints are here, crossing and re-crossing. I cannot tell whether any of the hobbits have come back since the search for Frodo began.' He returned to the bank, close to where the rill from the spring trickled out into the River. 'There are some clear prints here,' he said. 'A hobbit waded out into the water and back; but I cannot say how long ago.'

'How then do you read this riddle?' asked Gimli.

Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the camping-place and looked at the baggage. 'Two packs are missing.' he said, 'and one is certainly Sam's: it was rather large and heavy. This then is the answer: Frodo has gone by boat, and his servant has gone with him. Frodo must have returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to follow me; but plainly he did not do so. He guessed his master s mind and came back here before Frodo had gone. He did not find it easy to leave Sam behind!'

'But why should he leave us behind, and without a word?' said Gimli. 'That was a strange deed!'

'And a brave deed,' said Aragorn. 'Sam was right, I think. Frodo did not wish to lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he knew that he must go himself. Something happened after he left us that overcame his fear and doubt.'

'Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he fled,' said Legolas.

'He fled, certainly,' said Aragorn, 'but not, I think, from Orcs.' What he thought was the cause of Frodo's sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret.

'Well, so much at least is now clear,' said Legolas: 'Frodo is no longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken the boat. And Sam is with him; only he would have taken his pack.'

'Our choice then,' said Gimli, 'is either to take the remaining boat and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Orcs on foot. There is little hope either way. We have already lost precious hours.'

'Let me think!' said Aragorn. 'And now may I make a right choice and change the evil fate of this unhappy day!' He stood silent for a moment. 'I will follow the Orcs,' he said at last. 'I would have guided Frodo to Mordor and gone with him to the end; but if I seek him now in the wilderness, I must abandon the captives to torment and death. My heart speaks clearly at last: the fate of the Bearer is in my hands no longer. The Company has played its part. Yet we that remain cannot forsake our companions while we have strength left. Come! We will go now. Leave all that can be spared behind! We will press on by day and dark!'

They drew up the last boat and carried it to the trees. They laid beneath it such of their goods as they did not need and could not carry away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading as they came back to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they picked up the trail of the Orcs. It needed little skill to find.

'No other folk make such a trampling,' said Legolas. 'It seems their delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even in their way.'

'But they go with a great speed for all that,' said Aragorn, 'and they do not tire. And later we may have to search for our path in hard bare lands.'

'Well, after them!' said Gimli. 'Dwarves too can go swiftly, and they do not tire sooner than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they have a long start.'

'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'we shall all need the endurance of Dwarves. But come! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of our enemies. And woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We will make such a chase as shall be accounted a marvel among the Three Kindreds µ Elves. Dwarves, and Men. Forth the Three Hunters!'

Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and on he led them, tireless and swift, now that his mind was at last made up. The woods about the lake they left behind. Long slopes they climbed, dark, hard-edged against the sky already red with sunset. Dusk came. They passed away, grey shadows in a stony land.



Chapter 2
The Riders of Rohan
Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and brooded on the pale margins of the Anduin, but the sky was clear. Stars came out. The waxing moon was riding in the West, and the shadows of the rocks were black. They had come to the feet of stony hills, and their pace was slower, for the trail was no longer easy to follow. Here the highlands of the Emyn Muil ran from North to South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of each ridge was steep and difficult, but the eastward slopes were gentler, furrowed with many gullies and narrow ravines. All night the three companions scrambled in this bony land, climbing to the crest of the first and tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding valley on the other side.

There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief space. The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered above them; the first light of day had not yet come over the dark hills behind. For the moment Aragorn was at a loss: the orc-trail had descended into the valley, but there it had vanished.

'Which way would they turn, do you think?' said Legolas. 'Northward to take a straighter road to Isengard, or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?'

'They will not make for the river, whatever mark they aim at'' said Aragorn. 'And unless there is much amiss in Rohan and the power of Saruman is greatly increased; they will take the shortest way that they can find over the fields of the Rohirrim. Let us search northwards!'

The dale ran like a stony trough between the ridged hills, and a trickling stream flowed among the boulders at the bottom. A cliff frowned upon their right; to their left rose grey slopes, dim and shadowy in the late night. They went on for a mile or more northwards. Aragorn was searching. bent towards the ground, among the folds and gullies leading up into the western ridge. Legolas was some way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a cry and the others came running towards him.

'We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,' he said. 'Look!' He pointed, and they saw that what they had at first taken to be boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled bodies. Five dead Orcs lay there. They had been hewn with many cruel strokes, and two had been beheaded. The ground was wet with their dark blood.

'Here is another riddle!' said Gimli. 'But it needs the light of day and for that we cannot wait.'

'Yet however you read it, it seems not unhopeful,' said Legolas. 'Enemies of the Orcs are likely to be our friends. Do any folk dwell in these hills?'

'No,' said Aragorn. 'The Rohirrim seldom come here, and it is far from Minas Tirith. It might be that some company of Men were hunting here for reasons that we do not know. Yet I think not.'

'What do you think?' said Gimli.

'I think that the enemy brought his own enemy with him,' answered Aragorn. 'These are Northern Orcs from far away. Among the slain are none of the great Orcs with the strange badges. There was a quarrel, I guess: it is no uncommon thing with these foul folk. Maybe there was some dispute about the road.'

'Or about the captives,' said Gimli. 'Let us hope that they, too, did not meet their end here.'

Aragorn searched the ground in a wide circle, but no other traces of the fight could be found. They went on. Already the eastward sky was turning pale; the stars were fading, and a grey light was slowly growing. A little further north they came to a fold in which a tiny stream, falling and winding, had cut a stony path down into the valley. In it some bushes grew, and there were patches of grass upon its sides.

'At last!' said Aragorn. 'Here are the tracks that we seek! Up this water-channel: this is the way that the Orcs went after their debate.'

Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path. As if fresh from a night's rest they sprang from stone to stone. At last they reached the crest of the grey hill, and a sudden breeze blew in their hair and stirred their cloaks: the chill wind of dawn.

Turning back they saw across the River the far hills kindled. Day leaped into the sky. The red rim of the sun rose over the shoulders of the dark land. Before them in the West the world lay still, formless and grey; but even as they looked, the shadows of night melted, the colours of the waking earth returned: green flowed over the wide meads of Rohan; the white mists shimmered in the watervales; and far off to the left, thirty leagues or more, blue and purple stood the White Mountains, rising into peaks of jet, tipped with glimmering snows, flushed with the rose of morning.

'Gondor! Gondor!' cried Aragorn. 'Would that I looked on you again in happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your bright streams.

Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea!

West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree

Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old.

O proud walls! White towers! O winged crown and throne of gold!

O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree,

Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?

Now let us go!' he said, drawing his eyes away from the South, and looking out west and north to the way that he must tread.

The ridge upon which the companions stood went down steeply before their feet. Below it twenty fathoms or more, there was a wide and rugged shelf which ended suddenly in the brink of a sheer cliff: the East Wall of Rohan. So ended the Emyn Muil, and the green plains of the Rohirrim stretched away before them to the edge of sight.

'Look!' cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them. 'There is the eagle again! He is very high. He seems to be flying now away, from this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!'

'No, not even my eyes can see him, my good Legolas,' said Aragorn. 'He must be far aloft indeed. I wonder what is his errand, if he is the same bird that I have seen before. But look! I can see something nearer at hand and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!'

'Many things,' said Legolas. 'It is a great company on foot; but I cannot say more, nor see what kind of folk they may be. They are many leagues away: twelve, I guess; but the flatness of the plain is hard to measure.'

'I think, nonetheless, that we no longer need any trail to tell us which way to go,' said Gimli. 'Let us find a path down to the fields as quick as may be.'

'I doubt if you will find a path quicker than the one that the Orcs chose,' said Aragorn.

They followed their enemies now by the clear light of day. It seemed that the Orcs had pressed on with all possible speed. Every now and again the pursuers found things that had been dropped or cast away: food-bags, the rinds and crusts of hard grey bread. a torn black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed shoe broken on the stones. The trail led them north along the top of the escarpment, and at length they came to a deep cleft carved in the rock by a stream that splashed noisily down. In the narrow ravine a rough path descended like a steep stair into the plain.

At the bottom they came with a strange suddenness on the grass of Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn Muil. The falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and water-plants, and they could hear it tinkling away in green tunnels, down long gentle slopes towards the fens of Entwash Vale far away. They seemed to have left winter clinging to the hills behind. Here the air was softer and warmer, and faintly scented, as if spring was already stirring and the sap was flowing again in herb and leaf. Legolas took a deep breath, like one that drinks a great draught after long thirst in barren places.

'Ah! the green smell!' he said. 'It is better than much sleep. Let us run!'

'Light feet may run swiftly here,' said Aragorn. 'More swiftly, maybe, than iron-shod Orcs. Now we have a chance to lessen their lead!'

They went in single file, running like hounds on a strong scent, and an eager light was in their eyes. Nearly due west the broad swath of the marching Orcs tramped its ugly slot; the sweet grass of Rohan had been bruised and blackened as they passed. Presently Aragorn gave a cry and turned aside. 'Stay!' he shouted. 'Do not follow me yet!' He ran quickly to the right, away from the main trail; for he had seen footprints that went that way, branching off from the others, the marks of small unshod feet. These, however, did not go far before they were crossed by orc-prints, also coming out from the main trail behind and in front, and then they curved sharply back again and were lost in the trampling. At the furthest point Aragorn stooped and picked up something from the grass; then he ran back.

'Yes,' he said, 'they are quite plain: a hobbit's footprints. Pippin's I think. He is smaller than the other. And look at this! He held up a thing that glittered in the sunlight. It looked like the new-opened leaf of a beech-tree, fair and strange in that treeless plain.

'The brooch of an elven-cloak!' cried Legolas and Gimli together.

'Not idly do the leaves of Lórien fall,' said Aragorn. 'This did not drop by chance: it was cast away as a token to any that might follow. I think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose.'

'Then he at least was alive,' said Gimli. 'And he had the use of his wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue in vain.'

'Let us hope that he did not pay too dearly for his boldness,' said Legolas. 'Come! Let us go on! The thought of those merry young folk driven like cattle burns my heart.'

The sun climbed to the noon and then rode slowly down the sky. Light clouds came up out of the sea in the distant South and were blown away upon the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from the East. Still the hunters held on. One day now had passed since Boromir fell, and the Orcs were yet far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be seen in the level plains.

As nightshade was closing about them Aragorn halted. Only twice in the day's march had they rested for a brief while, and twelve leagues now lay between them and the eastern wall where they had stood at dawn.

'We have come at last to a hard choice,' he said. 'Shall we rest by night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?'

'Unless our enemies rest also, they will leave us far behind, if we stay to sleep.' said Legolas. 'Surely even Orcs must pause on the march?' said Gimli. 'Seldom will Orcs journey in the open under the sun. yet these have done so,' said Legolas. 'Certainly they will not rest by night.'

'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,' said Gimli.

'The trail is straight, and turns neither right nor left, as far as my eyes can see,' said Legolas.

'Maybe, I could lead you at guess in the darkness and hold to the line,' said Aragorn; 'but if we strayed, or they turned aside, then when light came there might be long delay before the trail was found again.'

'And there is this also,' said Gimli: 'only by day can we see if any tracks lead away. If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be carried off, eastward, say, to the Great River, towards Mordor, we might pass the signs and never know it.'

'That is true,' said Aragorn. 'But if I read the signs back yonder rightly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company is now bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.'

'Yet it would be rash to be sure of their counsels,' said Gimli. 'And what of escape? In the dark we should have passed the signs that led you to the brooch.'

'The Orcs will be doubly on their guard since then, and the prisoners even wearier,' said Legolas. 'There will be no escape again, if we do not contrive it. How that is to be done cannot be guessed, but first we must overtake them.'

'And yet even I, Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy of my folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause ' said Gimli. 'My heart burns me too, and I would have started sooner but now I must rest a little to run the better. And if we rest, then the blind night is the time to do so.'

'I said that it was a hard choice,' said Aragorn. 'How shall we end this debate?'

'You are our guide,' said Gimli, 'and you are skilled in the chase. You shall choose.'

'My heart bids me go on,' said Legolas. 'But we must hold together. I will follow your counsel.'

'You give the choice to an ill chooser,' said Aragorn. 'Since we passed through the Argonath my choices have gone amiss.' He fell silent gazing north and west into the gathering night for a long while.

'We will not walk in the dark,' he said at length. 'The peril of missing the trail or signs of other coming and going seems to me the greater. If the Moon gave enough light, we would use it, but alas! he sets early and is yet young and pale.'

'And tonight he is shrouded anyway,' Gimli murmured. 'Would that the Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!'

'It will be more needed where it is bestowed,' said Aragorn. 'With him lies the true Quest. Ours is but a small matter in the great deeds of this time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, maybe, which no choice of mine can mar or mend. Well, I have chosen. So let us use the time as best we may!'

He cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he had not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir. Before dawn was in the sky he woke and rose. Gimli was still deep in slumber, but Legolas was standing, gazing northwards into the darkness, thoughtful and silent as a young tree in a windless night.

'They are far far away,' he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. 'I know in my heart that they have not rested this night. Only an eagle could overtake them now.'

'Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,' said Aragorn. Stooping he roused the Dwarf. 'Come! We must go,' he said. 'The scent is growing cold.'

'But it is still dark,' said Gimli. 'Even Legolas on a hill-top could not see them till the Sun is up.'

'I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon or sun,' said Legolas.

'Where sight fails the earth may bring us rumour,' said Aragorn. 'The land must groan under their hated feet.' He stretched himself upon the ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay there motionless, for so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned or fallen asleep again. Dawn came glimmering, and slowly a grey light grew about them. At last he rose, and now his friends could see his face: it was pale and drawn, and his look was troubled.

'The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,' he said. 'Nothing walks upon it for many miles about us. Faint and far are the feet of our enemies. But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my mind that I heard them, even as I lay on the ground in sleep, and they troubled my dreams: horses galloping, passing in the West. But now they are drawing ever further from us, riding northward. I wonder what is happening in this land!'

'Let us go!' said Legolas.

So the third day of their pursuit began. During all its long hours of cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running, as if no weariness could quench the fire that burned them. They seldom spoke. Over the wide solitude they passed and their elven-cloaks faded against the background of the grey-green fields; even in the cool sunlight of mid-day few but elvish eyes would have marked them, until they were close at hand. Often in their hearts they thanked the Lady of Lórien for the gift of lembas, for they could eat of it and find new strength even as they ran.

All day the track of their enemies led straight on, going north-west without a break or turn. As once again the day wore to its end they came to long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards a line of low humpbacked downs ahead. The orc-trail grew fainter as it bent north towards them, for the ground became harder and the grass shorter. Far away to the left the river Entwash wound, a silver thread in a green floor. No moving thing could be seen. Often Aragorn wondered that they saw no sign of beast or man. The dwellings of the Rohirrim were for the most part many leagues away to the South, under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains, now hidden in mist and cloud; yet the Horse-lords had formerly kept many herds and studs in the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their realm, and there the herdsmen had wandered much, living in camp and tent, even in winter-time. But now all the land was empty, and there was silence that did not seem to be the quiet of peace.

At dusk they halted again. Now twice twelve leagues they had passed over the plains of Rohan and the wall of the Emyn Muil was lost in the shadows of the East. The young moon was glimmering in a misty sky, but it gave small light, and the stars were veiled.

'Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our chase ' said Legolas. 'The Orcs have run before us, as if the very whips of Sauron were behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest and the dark hills, and even now are passing into the shadows of the trees.'

Gimli ground his teeth. 'This is a bitter end to our hope and to all our toil!' he said.

'To hope, maybe, but not to toil,' said Aragorn. 'We shall not turn back here. Yet I am weary.' He gazed back along the way that they had come towards the night gathering in the East. 'There is something strange at work in this land. I distrust the silence. I distrust even the pale Moon. The stars are faint; and I am weary as I have seldom been before, weary as no Ranger should be with a clear trail to follow. There is some will that lends speed to our foes and sets an unseen barrier before us: a weariness that is in the heart more than in the limb.'

'Truly!' said Legolas. 'That I have known since first we came down from the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us.' He pointed away over the land of Rohan into the darkling West under the sickle moon. 'Saruman!' muttered Aragorn. 'But he shall not turn us back! Halt we must once more; for, see! even the Moon is falling into gathering cloud. But north lies our road between down and fen when day returns.'

As before Legolas was first afoot, if indeed he had ever slept. 'Awake! Awake!' he cried. 'It is a red dawn. Strange things await us by the eaves of the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are called. Awake!'

The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly the downs drew near. It was still an hour before noon when they reached them: green slopes rising to bare ridges that ran in a line straight towards the North. At their feet the ground was dry and the turf short, but a long strip of sunken land, some ten miles wide, lay between them and the river wandering deep in dim thickets of reed and rush. Just to the West of the southernmost slope there was a great ring, where the turf had been torn and beaten by many trampling feet. From it the orc-trail ran out again, turning north along the dry skirts of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined the tracks closely.

'They rested here a while,' he said, 'but even the outward trail is already old. I fear that your heart spoke truly, Legolas: it is thrice twelve hours, I guess, since the Orcs stood where we now stand. If they held to their pace, then at sundown yesterday they would reach the borders of Fangorn.'

'I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling into mist,' said Gimli. 'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?'

'It is still far away,' said Aragorn. 'If I remember rightly, these downs run eight leagues or more to the north, and then north-west to the issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land. another fifteen leagues it may be.'

'Well, let us go on,' said Gimli. 'My legs must forget the miles. They would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.'

The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the end of the line of downs. For many hours they had marched without rest. They were going slowly now, and Gimli's back was bent. Stone-hard are the Dwarves in labour or journey, but this endless chase began to tell on him, as all hope failed in his heart. Aragorn walked behind him, grim and silent, stooping now and again to scan some print or mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped as lightly as ever, his feet hardly seeming to press the grass. leaving no footprints as he passed; but in the waybread of the Elves he found all the sustenance that he needed, and he could sleep, if sleep it could be called by Men, resting his mind in the strange paths of elvish dreams, even as he walked open-eyed in the light of this world.

'Let us go up on to this green hill!' he said. Wearily they followed him, climbing the long slope, until they came out upon the top. It was a round hill smooth and bare, standing by itself, the most northerly of the downs. The sun sank and the shadows of evening fell like a curtain. They were alone in a grey formless world without mark or measure. Only far away north-west there was a deeper darkness against the dying light: the Mountains of Mist and the forest at their feet.

'Nothing can we see to guide us here,' said Gimli. 'Well, now we must halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!'

'The wind is north from the snows,' said Aragorn.

'And ere morning it will be in the East,' said Legolas. 'But rest if you must. Yet do not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown. Rede oft is found at the rising of the Sun.'

'Three suns already have risen on our chase and brought no counsel ' said Gimli.

The night grew ever colder. Aragorn and Gimli slept fitfully, and whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or walking to and fro, singing softly to himself in his own tongue, and as he sang the white stars opened in the hard black vault above. So the night passed. Together they watched the dawn grow slowly in the sky, now bare and cloudless, until at last the sunrise came. It was pale and clear. The wind was in the East and all the mists had rolled away; wide lands lay bleak about them in the bitter light.

Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of Rohan that they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great River. North-westward stalked the dark forest of Fangorn; still ten leagues away stood its shadowy eaves, and its further slopes faded into the distant blue. Beyond there glimmered far away, as if floating on a grey cloud, the white head of tall Methedras, the last peak of the Misty Mountains. Out of the forest the Entwash flowed to meet them, its stream now swift and narrow, and its banks deep-cloven. The orc-trail turned from the downs towards it.

Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the river back towards the forest, Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant green, a dark swift-moving blur. He cast himself upon the ground and listened again intently. But Legolas stood beside him, shading his bright elven-eyes with his long slender hand, and he saw not a shadow, nor a blur, but the small figures of horsemen, many horsemen, and the glint of morning on the tips of their spears was like the twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal sight. Far behind them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads.

There was a silence in the empty fields, arid Gimli could hear the air moving in the grass.

'Riders!' cried Aragorn, springing to his feet. 'Many riders on swift steeds are coming towards us!'

'Yes,' said Legolas, 'there are one hundred and five. Yellow is their hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.'

Aragorn smiled. 'Keen are the eyes of the Elves,' he said.

'Nay! The riders are little more than five leagues distant,' said Legolas.

'Five leagues or one,' said Gimli; 'we cannot escape them in this bare land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?'

'We will wait,' said Aragorn. 'I am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or at least others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back down the orc-trail. We may get new s from them.'

'Or spears,' said Gimli.

'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,' said Legolas.

'I did not say that we should hear good news,' said Aragorn. 'But evil or good we will await it here.'

The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might be an easy mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down the northward slope. A little above the hill's foot they halted, and wrapping their cloaks about them, they sat huddled together upon the faded grass. The time passed slowly and heavily. The wind was thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy.

'What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?' he said. 'Do we sit here waiting for sudden death?'

'I have been among them,' answered Aragorn. 'They are proud and wilful, but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold but not cruel; wise but unlearned, writing no books but singing many songs, after the manner of the children of Men before the Dark Years. But I do not know what has happened here of late, nor in what mind the Rohirrim may now be between the traitor Saruman and the threat of Sauron. They have long been the friends of the people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of the North, and their kinship is rather with the Bardings of Dale, and with the Beornings of the Wood, among whom may still be seen many men tall and fair, as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will not love the Orcs.'

'But Gandalf spoke of a rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor ' said Gimli.

'I believe it no more than did Boromir,' answered Aragorn.

'You will soon learn the truth,' said Legolas. 'Already they approach.'

At length even Gimli could hear the distant beat of galloping hoofs. The horsemen, following the trail, had turned from the river, and were drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind.

Now the cries of clear strong voices came ringing over the fields. Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and the foremost horseman swerved, passing by the foot of the hill, and leading the host back southward along the western skirts of the downs. After him they rode: a long line of mail-clad men. swift, shining, fell and fair to look upon.

Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their grey coats glistened, their long tails flowed in the wind, their manes were braided on their proud necks. The Men that rode them matched them well: tall and long-limbed; their hair, flaxen-pale, flowed under their light helms, and streamed in long braids behind them; their faces were stern and keen. In their hands were tall spears of ash, painted shields were slung at their backs, long swords were at their belts, their burnished skirts of mail hung down upon their knees.

In pairs they galloped by, and though every now and then one rose in his stirrups and gazed ahead and to either side, they appeared not to perceive the three strangers sitting silently and watching them. The host had almost passed when suddenly Aragorn stood up, and called in a loud voice:

'What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?'

With astonishing speed and skill they checked their steeds, wheeled, and came charging round. Soon the three companions found themselves in a ring of horsemen moving in a running circle, up the hill-slope behind them and down, round and round them, and drawing ever inwards. Aragorn stood silent, and the other two sat without moving, wondering what way things would turn.

Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A thicket of spears were pointed towards the strangers; and some of the horsemen had bows in hand, and their arrows were already fitted to the string. Then one rode forward, a tall man, taller than all the rest; from his helm as a crest a white horsetail flowed. He advanced until the point of his spear was within a foot of Aragorn's breast. Aragorn did not stir.

'Who are you, and what are you doing in this land?' said the Rider, using the Common Speech of the West, in manner and tone like to the speech of Boromir, Man of Gondor.

'I am called Strider,' answered Aragorn. 'I came out of the North. I am hunting Orcs.'

The Rider leaped from his horse. Giving his spear to another who rode up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood face to face with Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not without wonder. At length he spoke again.

'At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,' he said; 'but now I see that it is not so. Indeed you know little of Orcs, if you go hunting them in this fashion. They were swift and well-armed, and they were many. You would have changed from hunters to prey, if ever you had overtaken them. But there is something strange about you, Strider.' He bent his clear bright eyes again upon the Ranger. 'That is no name for a Man that you give. And strange too is your raiment. Have you sprung out of the grass? How did you escape our sight? Are you elvish folk?'

'No,' said Aragorn. 'One only of us is an Elf, Legolas from the Woodland Realm in distant Mirkwood. But we have passed through Lothlórien, and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.'

The Rider looked at them with renewed wonder, but his eyes hardened. 'Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!' he said. 'Few escape her nets, they say. These are strange days! But if you have her favour, then you also are net-weavers and sorcerers, maybe.' He turned a cold glance suddenly upon Legolas and Gimli. 'Why do you not speak, silent ones?' he demanded.

Gimli rose and planted his feet firmly apart: his hand gripped the handle of his axe, and his dark eyes flashed. 'Give me your name, horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,' he said.

'As for that,' said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, 'the stranger should declare himself first. Yet I am named Éomer son of Éomund, and am called the Third Marshal of Riddermark.'

'Then Éomer son of Éomund, Third Marshal of Riddermark, let Gimli the Dwarf Glóin's son warn you against foolish words. You speak evil of that which is fair beyond the reach of your thought, and only little wit can excuse you.'

Éomer's eyes blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed in, advancing their spears. 'I would cut off your head, beard and all, Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground ' said Éomer.

'He stands not alone,' said Legolas, bending his bow and fitting an arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. 'You would die before your stroke fell.'

Éomer raised his sword, and things might have gone ill, but Aragorn sprang between them, and raised his hand. 'Your pardon, Éomer!' he cried. 'When you know more you will understand why you have angered my companions. We intend no evil to Rohan, nor to any of its folk, neither to man nor to horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?'

'I will,' said Éomer lowering his blade. 'But wanderers in the Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt. First tell me your right name.'

'First tell me whom you serve,' said Aragorn. 'Are you friend or foe of Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?'

'I serve only the Lord of the Mark, Théoden King son of Thengel,' answered Éomer. 'We do not serve the Power of the Black Land far away, but neither are we yet at open war with him; and if you are fleeing from him, then you had best leave this land. There is trouble now on all our borders, and we are threatened; but we desire only to be free, and to live as we have lived, keeping our own, and serving no foreign lord, good or evil. We welcomed guests kindly in the better days, but in these times the unbidden stranger finds us swift and hard. Come! Who are you? Whom do you serve? At whose command do you hunt Orcs in our land?'

'I serve no man,' said Aragorn; 'but the servants of Sauron I pursue into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men who know more of Orcs; and I do not hunt them in this fashion out of choice. The Orcs whom we pursued took captive two of my friends. In such need a man that has no horse will go on foot, and he will not ask for leave to follow the trail. Nor will he count the heads of the enemy save with a sword. I am not weaponless.'

Aragorn threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered as he grasped it, and the bright blade of Andúril shone like a sudden flame as he swept it out. 'Elendil!' he cried. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn and am called Elessar, the Elfstone, Dúnadan, the heir of Isildur Elendil's son of Gondor. Here is the Sword that was Broken and is forged again! Will you aid me or thwart me? Choose swiftly!'

Gimli and Legolas looked at their companion in amazement, for they had not seen him in this mood before. He seemed to have grown in stature while Éomer had shrunk; and in his living face they caught a brief vision of the power and majesty of the kings of stone. For a moment it seemed to the eyes of Legolas that a white flame flickered on the brows of Aragorn like a shining crown.

Éomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast down his proud eyes. 'These are indeed strange days,' he muttered. 'Dreams and legends spring to life out of the grass.

'Tell me, lord,' he said, 'what brings you here? And what was the meaning of the dark words? Long has Boromir son of Denethor been gone seeking an answer, and the horse that we lent him came back riderless. What doom do you bring out of the North?'

'The doom of choice,' said Aragorn. 'You may say this to Théoden son of Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against him. None may live now as they have lived, and few shall keep what they call their own. But of these great matters we will speak later. If chance allows, I will come myself to the king. Now I am in great need, and I ask for help, or at least for tidings. You heard that we are pursuing an orc-host that carried off our friends. What can you tell us?'

'That you need not pursue them further,' said Éomer. 'The Orcs are destroyed.'

'And our friends?'

'We found none but Orcs.'

'But that is strange indeed,' said Aragorn. 'Did you search the slain? Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would be small. Only children to your eyes, unshod but clad in grey.'

'There were no dwarves nor children,' said Éomer. 'We counted all the slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.'

'We do not speak of dwarves or children,' said Gimli. 'Our friends were hobbits.'

'Hobbits?' said Éomer. 'And what may they be? It is a strange name.'

'A strange name for a strange folk,' said Gimli. 'But these were very dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.'

'Halflings!' laughed the Rider that stood beside Éomer. 'Halflings! But they are only a little people in old songs and children's tales out of the North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?'

'A man may do both,' said Aragorn. 'For not we but those who come after will make the legends of our time. The green earth, say you? That is a mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under the light of day!'

'Time is pressing,' said the Rider, not heeding Aragorn. 'We must hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or let us bind them and take them to the king.'

'Peace, Éothain!' said Éomer in his own tongue. 'Leave me a while. Tell the éored to assemble on the path' and make ready to ride to the Entwade.'

Muttering Éothain retired, and spoke to the others. Soon they drew off and left Éomer alone with the three companions.

'All that you say is strange, Aragorn.' he said. 'Yet you speak the truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore they are not easily deceived. But you have not told all. Will you not now speak more fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to do?'

'I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago,' answered Aragorn. 'With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith. My errand was to go to that city with the son of Denethor, to aid his folk in their war against Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed with had other business. Of that I cannot speak now. Gandalf the Grey was our leader.'

'Gandalf!' Éomer exclaimed. 'Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but his name, I warn you, is no longer a password to the king's favour. He has been a guest in the land many times in the memory of men, coming as he will, after a season, or after many years. He is ever the herald of strange events: a bringer of evil, some now say.

'Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone amiss. At that time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we counted Saruman our friend, hut Gandalf came then and warned us that sudden war was preparing in Isengard. He said that he himself had been a prisoner in Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and he begged for help. But Théoden would not listen to him, and he went away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in Théoden's ears! He is wroth. For Gandalf took the horse that is called Shadowfax, the most precious of all the king's steeds, chief of the Mearas, which only the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of their race was the great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men. Seven nights ago Shadowfax returned; but the king's anger is not less, for now the horse is wild and will let no man handle him.'

'Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far North,' said Aragorn; 'for it was there that he and Gandalf parted. But alas! Gandalf will ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines of Moria and comes not again.'

'That is heavy tidings,' said Éomer. 'At least to me, and to many; though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.'

'It is tidings more grievous than any in this land can understand, though it may touch them sorely ere the year is much older,' said Aragorn. 'But when the great fall, the less must lead. My part it has been to guide our Company on the long road from Moria. Through Lórien we came - of which it were well that you should learn the truth ere you speak of it again - and thence down the leagues of the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There Boromir was slain by the same Orcs whom you destroyed.'

'Your news is all of woe!' cried Éomer in dismay. 'Great harm is this death to Minas Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his praise. He came seldom to the Mark, for he was ever in the wars on the East-borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl than to the grave Men of Gondor he seemed to me, and likely to prove a great captain of his people when his time came. But we have had no word of this grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?'

'It is now the fourth day since he was slain,' answered Aragorn, 'and since the evening of that day we have journeyed from the shadow of Tol Brandir.'

'On foot?' cried Éomer.

'Yes, even as you see us.'

Wide wonder came into Éomer's eyes. 'Strider is too poor a name, son of Arathorn,' he said. 'Wingfoot I name you. This deed of the three friends should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and five you have measured ere the fourth day is ended! Hardy is the race of Elendil!

'But now, lord, what would you have me do! I must return in haste to Théoden. I spoke warily before my men. It is true that we are not yet at open war with the Black Land, and there are some, close to the king's ear, that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall not forsake our old alliance with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say I and all who hold with me. The East-mark is my charge. the ward of the Third Marshal, and I have removed all our herds and herdfolk, withdrawing them beyond Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.'

'Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?' said Gimli.

'We do not and we never have.' said Éomer with a flash of his eyes; 'though it comes to my ears that that lie has been told. Some years ago the Lord of the Black Land wished to purchase horses of us at great price, but we refused him. for he puts beasts to evil use. Then he sent plundering Orcs, and they carry off what they can, choosing always the black horses: few of these are now left. For that reason our feud with the Orcs is bitter.

'But at this time our chief concern is with Saruman. He has claimed lordship over all this land, and there has been war between us for many months. He has taken Orcs into his service, and Wolf-riders, and evil Men, and he has closed the Gap against us, so that we are likely to be beset both east and west.

'It is ill dealing with such a foe: he is a wizard both cunning and dwimmer-crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, they say, as an old man hooded and cloaked, very like to Gandalf, as many now recall. His spies slip through every net, and his birds of ill omen are abroad in the sky. I do not know how it will all end, and my heart misgives me; for it seems to me that his friends do not all dwell in Isengard. But if you come to the king's house, you shall see for yourself. Will you not come? Do I hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need?'

'I will come when I may,' said Aragorn.

'Come now!' said Éomer. 'The Heir of Elendil would be a strength indeed to the Sons of Eorl in this evil tide. There is battle even now upon the Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us.

'Indeed in this riding north I went without the king's leave, for in my absence his house is left with little guard. But scouts warned me of the orc-host coming down out of the East Wall three nights ago, and among them they reported that some bore the white badges of Saruman. So suspecting what I most fear, a league between Orthanc and the Dark Tower, I led forth my éored, men of my own household; and we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two days ago, near to the borders of the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and gave battle yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men I lost, and twelve horses alas! For the Orcs were greater in number than we counted on. Others joined them. coming out of the East across the Great River: their trail is plain to see a little north of this spot. And others, too, came out of the forest. Great Orcs, who also bore the White Hand of Isengard: that kind is stronger and more fell than all others.

'Nonetheless we put an end to them. But we have been too long away. We are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are spare horses as you see. There is work for the Sword to do. Yes, and we could find a use for Gimli's axe and the bow of Legolas, if they will pardon my rash words concerning the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do all men in my land, and I would gladly learn better.'

'I thank you for your fair words,' said Aragorn, 'and my heart desires to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope remains.'

'Hope does not remain,' said Éomer. 'You will not find your friends on the North-borders.'

'Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far from the East Wall that one at least of them was still alive there. But between the wall and the downs we have found no other trace of them, and no trail has turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill has wholly left me.'

'Then what do you think has become of them?'

'I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the Orcs; but that you will say cannot be, and I do not fear it. I can only think that they were carried off into the forest before the battle, even before you encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none escaped your net in such a way?'

'I would swear that no Orc escaped after we sighted them,' said Éomer. 'We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that any living thing broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had some elvish power.'

'Our friends were attired even as we are,' said Aragorn; 'and you passed us by under the full light of day.'

'I had forgotten that,' said Éomer. 'It is hard to be sure of anything among so many marvels. The world is all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf in company walk in our daily fields; and folk speak with the Lady of the Wood and yet live; and the Sword comes back to war that was broken in the long ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark! How shall a man judge what to do in such times?'

'As he ever has judged,' said Aragorn. 'Good and ill have not changed since yesteryear; nor are they one thing among Elves and Dwarves µ and another among Men. It is a man's part to discern them, as much in the Golden Wood as in his own house.'

'True indeed,' said Éomer. 'But I do not doubt you, nor the deed which my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It is against our law to let strangers wander at will in our land, until the king himself shall give them leave, and more strict is the command in these days of peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with me, and you will not. Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.'

'I do not think your law was made for such a chance,' said Aragorn. 'Nor indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, more than once, and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim, though under other name and in other guise. You I have not seen before, for you are young, but I have spoken with Éomund your father, and with Théoden son of Thengel. Never in former days would any high lord of this land have constrained a man to abandon such a quest as mine. My duty at least is clear, to go on. Come now, son of Éomund, the choice must be made at last. Aid us, or at the worst let us go free. Or seek to carry out your law. If you do so there will be fewer to return to your war or to your king.'

Éomer was silent for a moment, then he spoke. 'We both have need of haste,' he said. 'My company chafes to be away, and every hour lessens your hope. This is my choice. You may go; and what is more, I will lend you horses. This only I ask: when your quest is achieved, or is proved vain, return with the horses over the Entwade to Meduseld, the high house in Edoras where Théoden now sits. Thus you shall prove to him that I have not misjudged. In this I place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of your good faith. Do not fail.'

'I will not,' said Aragorn.

There was great wonder, and many dark and doubtful glances, among his men, when Éomer gave orders that the spare horses were to be lent to the strangers; but only Éothain dared to speak openly.

'It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor, as he claims,' he said, 'but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a Dwarf?'

'No one,' said Gimli. 'And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so great, free or begrudged.'

'But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,' said Aragorn.

'Come, you shall sit behind me, friend Gimli, said Legolas. Then all will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled by one.'

A great dark-grey horse was brought to Aragorn, and he mounted it. 'Hasufel is his name,' said Éomer. 'May he bear you well and to better fortune than Gárulf, his late master!'

A smaller and lighter horse, but restive and fiery, was brought to Legolas. Arod was his name. But Legolas asked them to take off saddle and rein. 'I need them not,' he said, and leaped lightly up, and to their wonder Arod was tame and willing beneath him, moving here and there with but a spoken word: such was the elvish way with all good beasts. Gimli was lifted up behind his friend. and he clung to him, not much more at ease than Sam Gamgee in a boat.

'Farewell, and may you find what you seek!' cried Éomer. 'Return with what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!'

'I will come,' said Aragorn.

'And I will come, too,' said Gimli. 'The matter of the Lady Galadriel lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. '

'We shall see,' said Éomer. 'So many strange things have chanced that to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a Dwarf's axe will seem no great wonder. Farewell!'

With that they parted. Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When after a little Gimli looked back, the company of Éomer were already small and far away. Aragorn did not look back: he was watching the trail as they sped on their way, bending low with his head beside the neck of Hasufel. Before long they came to the borders of the Entwash, and there they met the other trail of which Éomer had spoken, coming down from the East out of the Wold.

Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then leaping back into the saddle, he rode away for some distance eastward, keeping to one side and taking care not to override the footprints. Then he again dismounted and examined the ground, going backwards and forwards on foot.

'There is little to discover,' he said when he returned. 'The main trail is all confused with the passage of the horsemen as they came back; their outward course must have lain nearer the river. But this eastward trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet going the other way, back towards Anduin. Now we must ride slower, and make sure that no trace or footstep branches off on either side. The Orcs must have been aware from this point that they were pursued; they may have made some attempt to get their captives away before they were overtaken.'

As they rode forward the day was overcast. Low grey clouds came over the Wold. A mist shrouded the sun. Ever nearer the tree-clad slopes of Fangorn loomed, slowly darkling as the sun went west. They saw no sign of any trail to right or left, but here and there they passed single Orcs, fallen in their tracks as they ran, with grey-feathered arrows sticking in back or throat.

At last as the afternoon was waning they came to the eaves of the forest, and in an open glade among the first trees they found the place of the great burning: the ashes were still hot and smoking. Beside it was a great pile of helms and mail, cloven shields, and broken swords, bows and darts and other gear of war. Upon a stake in the middle was set a great goblin head; upon its shattered helm the white badge could still be seen. Further away, not far from the river, where it came streaming out from the edge of the wood, there was a mound. It was newly raised: the raw earth was covered with fresh-cut turves: about it were planted fifteen spears.

Aragorn and his companions searched far and wide about the field of battle, but the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim and misty. By nightfall they had discovered no trace of Merry and Pippin.

'We can do no more,' said Gimli sadly. 'We have been set many riddles since we came to Tol Brandir, but this is the hardest to unravel. I would guess that the burned bones of the hobbits are now mingled with the Orcs'. It will be hard news for Frodo, if he lives to hear it; and hard too for the old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond was against their coming.'

'But Gandalf was not,' said Legolas.

'But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the first to be lost ' answered Gimli. 'His foresight failed him.'

'The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety, for himself or for others,' said Aragorn. 'There are some things that it is better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be dark. But I shall not depart from this place yet. In any case we must here await the morning-light.'

A little way beyond the battle-field they made their camp under a spreading tree: it looked like a chestnut, and yet it still bore many broad brown leaves of a former year, like dry hands with long splayed fingers; they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze.

Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. 'Let us light a fire,' he said. 'I care no longer for the danger. Let the Orcs come as thick as summer-moths round a candle!'

'If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might draw them hither,' said Legolas.

'And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,' said Aragorn. 'We are near to the mountain-marches of the traitor Saruman. Also we are on the very edge of Fangorn, and it is perilous to touch the trees of that wood, it is said.'

'But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday,' said Gimli, 'and they felled trees for the fire, as can be seen. Yet they passed the night after safely here, when their labour was ended.'

'They were many,' said Aragorn, 'and they do not heed the wrath of Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under the trees. But our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself. So have a care! Cut no living wood!'

'There is no need,' said Gimli. 'The Riders have left chip and bough enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.' He went off to gather fuel, and busied himself with building and kindling a fire; but Aragorn sat silent with his back to the great tree, deep in thought; and Legolas stood alone in the open, looking towards the profound shadow of the wood, leaning forward, as one who listens to voices calling from a distance.

When the Dwarf had a small bright blaze going, the three companions drew close to it and sat together, shrouding the light with their hooded forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree reaching out above them.

'Look!' he said. 'The tree is glad of the fire!'

It may have been that the dancing shadows tricked their eyes, but certainly to each of the companions the boughs appeared to be bending this way and that so as to come above the flames, while the upper branches were stooping down; the brown leaves now stood out stiff, and rubbed together like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth.

There was a silence, for suddenly the dark and unknown forest, so near at hand, made itself felt as a great brooding presence, full of secret purpose. After a while Legolas spoke again.

'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,' he said. 'Do you know why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir had heard?'

'I have heard many tales in Gondor and elsewhere,' said Aragorn, 'but if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of asking you what was the truth of the matter. And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall a Man answer?'

'You have journeyed further than I,' said Legolas. 'I have heard nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that tell how the Onodrim, that Men call Ents, dwelt there long ago; for Fangorn is old, old even as the Elves would reckon it.'

'Yes, it is old,' said Aragorn, 'as old as the forest by the Barrow-downs, and it is far greater. Elrond says that the two are akin, the last strongholds of the mighty woods of the Elder Days, in which the Firstborn roamed while Men still slept. Yet Fangorn holds some secret of its own. What it is I do not know.'

'And I do not wish to know,' said Gimli. 'Let nothing that dwells in Fangorn be troubled on my account!'

They now drew lots for the watches, and the lot for the first watch fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at once sleep laid hold on them. 'Gimli!' said Aragorn drowsily. 'Remember, it is perilous to cut bough or twig from a living tree in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead wood. Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!'

With that he fell asleep. Legolas already lay motionless, his fair hands folded upon his breast, his eyes unclosed, blending living night and deep dream, as is the way with Elves. Gimli sat hunched by the fire, running his thumb thoughtfully along the edge of his axe. The tree rustled. There was no other sound.

Suddenly Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the fire-light stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and wrapped in a great cloak; his wide-brimmed hat was pulled down over his eyes. Gimli sprang up, too amazed for the moment to cry out, though at once the thought flashed into his mind that Saruman had caught them. Both Aragorn and Legolas, roused by his sudden movement, sat up and stared. The old man did not speak or make, sign.

'Well, father, what can we do for you?' said Aragorn, leaping to his feet. 'Come and be warm, if you are cold!' He strode forward, but the old man was gone. There was no trace of him to be found near at hand, and they did not dare to wander far. The moon had set and the night was very dark.

Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. 'The horses! The horses!'

The horses were gone. They had dragged their pickets and disappeared. For me time the three companions stood still and silent, troubled by this new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves of Fangorn, and endless leagues lay between them and the Men of Rohan, their only friends in this wide and dangerous land. As they stood, it seemed to them that they heard, far off in the night. the sound of horses whinnying and neighing. Then all was quiet again, except for the cold rustle of the wind.

'Well, they are gone,' said Aragorn at last. 'We cannot find them or catch them; so that if they do not return of their own will, we must do without. We started on our feet, and we have those still.'

'Feet!' said Gimli. 'But we cannot eat them as well as walk on them ' He threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside it.

'Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse of Rohan,' laughed Legolas. 'You will make a rider yet.'

'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,' said Gimli.

'If you wish to know what I think,' he began again after a while 'I think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember the words of Éomer: he walks about like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were the words. He has gone off with our horses, or scared them away, and here we are. There is more trouble coming to us, mark my words!'

'I mark them,' said Aragorn. 'But I marked also that this old man had a hat not a hood. Still I do not doubt that you guess right, and that we are in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we can do but rest, while we may. I will watch for a while now, Gimli. I have more need of thought than of sleep.'

The night passed slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli followed Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing happened. The old man did not appear again, and the horses did not return.



Chapter 3
The Uruk-Hai
Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream: it seemed that he could hear his own small voice echoing in black tunnels, calling Frodo, Frodo! But instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous orc-faces grinned at him out of the shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him from every side. Where was Merry?

He woke. Cold air blew on his face. He was lying on his back. Evening was coming and the sky above was growing dim. He turned and found that the dream was little worse than the waking. His wrists, legs, and ankles were tied with cords. Beside him Merry lay, white-faced, with a dirty rag bound across his brows. All about them sat or stood a great company of Orcs.

Slowly in Pippin's aching head memory pieced itself together and became separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and Merry had run off into the woods. What had come over them? Why had they dashed off like that, taking no notice of old Strider? They had run a long way shouting--he could not remember how far or how long; and then suddenly they had crashed right into a group of Orcs: they were standing listening, and they did not appear to see Merry and Pippin until they were almost in their arms. Then they yelled and dozens of other goblins had sprung out of the trees. Merry and he had drawn their swords, but the Orcs did not wish to fight, and had tried only to lay hold of them, even when Merry had cut off several of their arms and hands. Good old Merry!

Then Boromir had come leaping through the trees. He had made them fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled. But they had not gone far on the way back when they were attacked again. by a hundred Orcs at least, some of them very large, and they shot a rain of arrows: always at Boromir. Boromir had blown his great horn till the woods rang, and at first the Orcs had been dismayed and had drawn back; but when no answer but the echoes came, they had attacked more fierce than ever. Pippin did not remember much more. His last memo was of Boromir leaning against a tree, plucking out an arrow; then darkness fell suddenly.

'I suppose I was knocked on the head,' he said to himself. 'I wonder if poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to Boromir? Why didn't the Orcs kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?'

He could not answer the questions. He felt cold and sick. 'I wish Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us come,' he thought. 'What good have I been? Just a nuisance: a passenger, a piece of luggage. And now I have been stolen and I am just a piece of luggage for the Orcs. I hope Strider or someone will come and claim us! But ought I to hope for it? Won't that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!'

He struggled a little, quite uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting near laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable tongue. 'Rest while you can, little fool!' he said then to Pippin, in the Common Speech, which he made almost as hideous as his own language. 'Rest while you can! We'll find a use for your legs before long. You'll wish you had got none before we get home.'

'If I had my way, you'd wish you were dead now,' said the other. 'I'd make you squeak, you miserable rat.' He stooped over Pippin bringing his yellow fangs close to his face. He had a black knife with a long jagged blade in his hand. 'Lie quiet, or I'll tickle you with this,' he hissed. 'Don't draw attention to yourself, or I may forget my orders. Curse the Isengarders! Uglúk u bagronk sha pushdug Saruman-glob búbhosh skai': he passed into a long angry speech in his own tongue that slowly died away into muttering and snarling.

Terrified Pippin lay still, though the pain at his wrists and ankles was growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his back. To take his mind off himself he listened intently to all that he could hear. There were many voices round about, and though orc-speech sounded at all times full of hate and anger, it seemed plain that something like a quarrel had begun, and was getting hotter.

To Pippin's surprise he found that much of the talk was intelligible many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of two or three quite different tribes were present, and they could not understand one another's orc-speech. There was an angry debate concerning what they were to do now: which way they were to take and what should be done with the prisoners.

'There's no time to kill them properly,' said one. 'No time for play on this trip.'

'That can't be helped,' said another. 'But why not kill them quick, kill them now? They're a cursed nuisance, and we're in a hurry. Evening's coming on, and we ought to get a move on.'

'Orders.' said a third voice in a deep growl. 'Kill all but not the Halfings; they are to be brought back alive as quickly as possible. That's my orders.'

'What are they wanted for?' asked several voices. 'Why alive? Do they give good sport?'

'No! I heard that one of them has got something, something that's wanted for the War, some elvish plot or other. Anyway they'll both be questioned.'

'Is that all you know? Why don't we search them and find out? We might find something that we could use ourselves.'

'That is a very interesting remark,' sneered a voice, softer than the others but more evil. 'I may have to report that. The prisoners are not to be searched or plundered: those are my orders.'

'And mine too,' said the deep voice. 'Alive and as captured; no spoiling. That's my orders.'

'Not our orders!' said one of the earlier voices. 'We have come all the way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our folk. I wish to kill, and then go back north.'

'Then you can wish again,' said the growling voice. 'I am Uglúk. I command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.'

'Is Saruman the master or the Great Eye?' said the evil voice. 'We should go back at once to Lugbúrz.'

'If we could cross the Great River, we might,' said another voice. 'But there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges.'

'I came across,' said the evil voice. 'A winged Nazgûl awaits us northward on the east-bank.'

'Maybe, maybe! Then you'll fly off with our prisoners, and get all the pay and praise in Lugbúrz, and leave us to foot it as best we can through the Horse-country. No, we must stick together. These lands are dangerous: full of foul rebels and brigands.'

'Aye, we must stick together,' growled Uglúk. 'I don't trust you little swine. You've no guts outside your own sties. But for us you'd all have run away. We are the fighting Uruk-hai! We slew the great warrior. We took the prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand that gives us man's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here, and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Uglúk. I have spoken.'

'You have spoken more than enough, Uglúk,' sneered the evil voice. 'I wonder how they would like it in Lugbúrz. They might think that Uglúk's shoulders needed relieving of a swollen head. They might ask where his strange ideas came from. Did they come from Saruman, perhaps? Who does he think he is, setting up on his own with his filthy white badges? They might agree with me, with Grishnákh their trusted messenger; and I Grishnákh say this: Saruman is a fool. and a dirty treacherous fool. But the Great Eye is on him.

'Swine is it? How do you folk like being called swine by the muck-rakers of a dirty little wizard? It's orc-flesh they eat, I'll warrant.'

Many loud yells in orc-speech answered him, and the ringing clash of weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to see what would happen. His guards had gone to join in the fray. In the twilight he saw a large black Orc, probably Uglúk, standing facing Grishnákh, a short crook-legged creature, very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the ground. Round them were many smaller goblins. Pippin supposed that these were the ones from the North. They had drawn their knives and swords, but hesitated to attack Uglúk.

Uglúk shouted, and a number of other Orcs of nearly his own size ran up. Then suddenly, without warning, Uglúk sprang forwards, and with two swift strokes swept the heads off two of his opponents. Grishnákh stepped aside and vanished into the shadows. The others gave way, and one stepped backwards and fell over Merry's prostrate form with a curse. Yet that probably saved his life, for Uglúk's followers leaped over him and cut down another with their broad-bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged guard. His body fell right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife.

'Put up your weapons!' shouted Uglúk. 'And let's have no more nonsense! We go straight west from here, and down the stair. From there straight to the downs, then along the river to the forest. And we march day and night. That clear?'

'Now,' thought Pippin, 'if only it takes that ugly fellow a little while to get his troop under control, I've got a chance.' A gleam of hope had come to him. The edge of the black knife had snicked his arm, and then slid down to his wrist. He felt the blood trickling on to his hand, but he also felt the cold touch of steel against his skin.

The Orcs were getting ready to march again, but some of the Northerners were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more before the rest were cowed. There was much cursing and confusion. For the moment Pippin was unwatched. His legs were securely bound, but his arms were only tied about the wrists, and his hands were in front of him. He could move them both together, though the bonds were cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Orc to one side, then hardly daring to breathe, he drew the knot of the wrist-cord up and down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the dead hand held it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin took it in his fingers and knotted it again into a loose bracelet of two loops and slipped it over his hands. Then he lay very still.

'Pick up those prisoners!' shouted Uglúk. 'Don't play any tricks with them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will die too.'

An Orc seized Pippin like a sack. put its head between his tied hands, grabbed his arms and dragged them down, until Pippin's face was crushed against its neck; then it jolted off with him. Another treated Merry in the same way. The Orc's clawlike hand gripped Pippin's arms like iron; the nails bit into him. He shut his eyes and slipped back into evil dreams.

Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It was early night, but the slim moon was already falling westward. They were on the edge of a cliff that seemed to look out over a sea of pale mist. There was a sound of water falling nearby.

'The scouts have come back at last,' said an Orc close at hand.

'Well, what did you discover?' growled the voice of Uglúk.

'Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All's clear now.'

'Now, I daresay. But how long? You fools! You should have shot him. He'll raise the alarm. The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us by morning. Now we'll have to leg it double quick.'

A shadow bent over Pippin. It was Uglúk. 'Sit up!' said the Orc. 'My lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb down and you must use your legs. Be helpful now. No crying out, no trying to escape. We have ways of paying for tricks that you won't like, though they won't spoil your usefulness for the Master.'

He cut the thongs round Pippin's legs and ankles, picked him up by his hair and stood him on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Uglúk dragged him up by his hair again. Several Orcs laughed. Uglúk thrust a flask between his teeth and poured some burning liquid down his throat: he felt a hot fierce glow flow through him. The pain in his legs and ankles vanished. He could stand.

'Now for the other!' said Uglúk. Pippin saw him go to Merry, who was lying close by, and kick him. Merry groaned. Seizing him roughly Uglúk pulled him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off his head. Then he smeared the wound with some dark stuff out of a small wooden box. Merry cried out and struggled wildly.

The Orcs clapped and hooted. 'Can't take his medicine,' they jeered. 'Doesn't know what's good for him. Ai! We shall have some fun later.'

But at the moment Uglúk was not engaged in sport. He needed speed and had to humour unwilling followers. He was healing Merry in orc-fashion; and his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down the hobbit's throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to his feet, Merry stood up, looking pale but grim and defiant, and very much alive. The gash in his forehead gave him no more trouble, but he bore a brown scar to the end of his days.

'Hullo, Pippin!' he said. 'So you've come on this little expedition, too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?'

'Now then!' said Uglúk. 'None of that! Hold your tongues. No talk to one another. Any trouble will be reported at the other end, and He'll know how to pay you. You'll get bed and breakfast all right: more than you can stomach.'

The orc-band began to descend a narrow ravine leading down into the misty plain below. Merry and Pippin, separated by a dozen Orcs or more, climbed down with them. At the bottom they stepped on to grass, and the hearts of the hobbits rose.

'Now straight on!' shouted Uglúk. 'West and a little north. Follow Lugdush.'

'But what are we going to do at sunrise?' said some of the Northerners.

'Go on running,' said Uglúk. 'What do you think? Sit on the grass and wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?'

'But we can't run in the sunlight.'

'You'll run with me behind you,' said Uglúk. 'Run! Or you'll never see your beloved holes again. By the White Hand! What's the use of sending out mountain-maggots on a trip, only half trained. Run, curse you! Run while night lasts!'

Then the whole company began to run with the long loping strides of Orcs. They kept no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; yet their speed was very great. Each hobbit had a guard of three. Pippin was far back in the line. He wondered how long he would be able to go on at this pace: he had had no food since the morning. One of his guards had a whip. But at present the orc-liquor was still hot in him. His wits, too, were wide-awake.

Every now and again there came into his mind unbidden a vision of the keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running, running behind. But what could even a Ranger see except a confused trail of orc-feet? His own little prints and Merry's were overwhelmed by the trampling of the iron-shod shoes before them and behind them and about them.

They had gone only a mile or so from the cliff when the land sloped down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was soft and wet. Mist lay there, pale-glimmering in the last rays of the sickle moon. The dark shapes of the Orcs in front grew dim, and then were swallowed up.

'Ai! Steady now!' shouted Uglúk from the rear.

A sudden thought leaped into Pippin's mind, and he acted on it at once. He swerved aside to the right, and dived out of the reach of his clutching guard, headfirst into the mist; he landed sprawling on the grass.

'Halt!' yelled Uglúk.

There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up and ran. But the Orcs were after him. Some suddenly loomed up right in front of him.

'No hope of escape!' thought Pippin. 'But there is a hope that I have left some of my own marks unspoilt on the wet ground.' He groped with his two tied hands at his throat, and unclasped the brooch of his cloak. Just as long arms and hard claws seized him. he let it fall. 'There I suppose it will lie until the end of time,' he thought. 'I don't know why I did it. If the others have escaped, they've probably all gone with Frodo.'

A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry.

'Enough!' shouted Uglúk running up. 'He's still got to run a long way yet. Make 'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.'

'But that's not all,' he snarled, turning to Pippin. 'I shan't forget. Payment is only put off. Leg it!'

Neither Pippin nor Merry remembered much of the later part of the journey. Evil dreams and evil waking were blended into a long tunnel of misery, with hope growing ever fainter behind. They ran, and they ran, striving to keep up the pace set by the Orcs, licked every now and again with a cruel thong cunningly handled. If they halted or stumbled, they were seized and dragged for some distance.

The warmth of the orc-draught had gone. Pippin felt cold and sick again. Suddenly he fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands with rending nails gripped and lifted him. He was carried like a sack once more, and darkness grew about him: whether the darkness of another night, or a blindness of his eyes, he could not tell.

Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that many of the Orcs were demanding a halt. Uglúk was shouting. He felt himself flung to the ground, and he lay as he fell, till black dreams took him. But he did not long escape from pain; soon the iron grip of merciless hands was on him again. For a long time he was tossed and shaken, and then slowly the darkness gave way, and he came back to the waking world and found that it was morning. Orders were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass.

There he lay for a while, fighting with despair. His head swam, but from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another draught. An Orc stooped over him, and flung him some bread and a strip of raw dried flesh. He ate the stale grey bread hungrily, but not the meat. He was famished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to him by an Orc, the flesh of he dared not guess what creature.

He sat up and looked about. Merry was not far away. They were by the banks of a swift narrow river. Ahead mountains loomed: a tall peak was catching the first rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower slopes before them.

There was much shouting and debating among the Orcs; a quarrel seemed on the point of breaking out again between the Northerners and the Isengarders. Some were pointing back away south, and some were pointing eastward.

'Very well,' said Uglúk. 'Leave them to me then! No killing, as I've told you before; but if you want to throw away what we've come all the way to get, throw it away! I'll look after it. Let the fighting Uruk-hai do the work, as usual. If you're afraid of the Whiteskins, run! Run! There's the forest,' he shouted, pointing ahead. 'Get to it! It's your best hope. Off you go! And quick, before I knock a few more heads off, to put some sense into the others.'

There was some cursing and scuffling, and then most of the Northerners broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of them, running wildly along the river towards the mountains. The hobbits were left with the Isengarders: a grim dark band, four score at least of large, swart, slant-eyed Orcs with great bows and short broad-bladed swords. A few of the larger and bolder Northerners remained with them.

'Now we'll deal with Grishnákh,' said Uglúk; but some even of his own followers were looking uneasily southwards.

'I know,' growled Uglúk. 'The cursed horse-boys have got wind of us. But that's all your fault, Snaga. You and the other scouts ought to have your ears cut off. But we are the fighters. We'll feast on horseflesh yet, or something better.'

At that moment Pippin saw why some of the troop had been pointing eastward. From that direction there now came hoarse cries, and there was Grishnákh again, and at his back a couple of score of others like him: long-armed crook-legged Orcs. They had a red eye painted on their shields. Uglúk stepped forward to meet them. 'So you've come back?' he said. 'Thought better of it, eh?'

'I've returned to see that Orders are carried out and the prisoners safe,' answered Grishnákh.

'Indeed!' said Uglúk. 'Waste of effort. I'll see that orders are carried out in my command. And what else did you come back for? You went in a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?'

'I left a fool,' snarled Grishnákh. 'But there were some stout fellows with him that are too good to lose. I knew you'd lead them into a mess. I've come to help them.'

'Splendid!' laughed Uglúk. 'But unless you've got some guts for fighting, you've taken the wrong way. Lugbúrz was your road. The Whiteskins are coming. What's happened to your precious Nazgûl? Has he had another mount shot under him? Now, if you'd brought him along, that might have been useful-if these Nazgûl are all they make out.'

'Nazgûl, Nazgûl,' said Grishnákh, shivering and licking his lips, as if the word had a foul taste that he savoured painfully. 'You speak of what is deep beyond the reach of your muddy dreams, Uglúk,' he said. 'Nazgûl! Ah! All that they make out! One day you'll wish that you had not said that. Ape!' he snarled fiercely. 'You ought to know that they're the apple of the Great Eye. But the winged Nazgûl: not yet, not yet. He won't let them show themselves across the Great River yet, not too soon. They're for the War-and other purposes.'

'You seem to know a lot,' said Uglúk. 'More than is good for you, I guess. Perhaps those in Lugbúrz might wonder how, and why. But in the meantime the Uruk-hai of Isengard can do the dirty work, as usual. Don't stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging it to the forest. You'd better follow. You wouldn't get back to the Great River alive. Right off the mark! Now! I'll be on your heels.'

The Isengarders seized Merry and Pippin again and slung them on their backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran, pausing now and again only to sling the hobbits to fresh carriers. Either because they were quicker and hardier, or because of some plan of Grishnákh's, the Isengarders gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor, and Grishnákh's folk closed in behind. Soon they were gaining also on the Northerners ahead. The forest began to draw nearer.

Pippin was bruised and torn, his aching head was grated by the filthy jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in front were bowed backs, and tough thick legs going up and down, up and down, unresting, as if they were made of wire and horn, beating out the nightmare seconds of an endless time.

In the afternoon Uglúk's troop overtook the Northerners. They were flagging in the rays of the bright sun, winter sun shining in a pale cool sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues lolling out.

'Maggots!' jeered the Isengarders. 'You're cooked. The Whiteskins will catch you and eat you. They're coming!'

A cry from Grishnákh showed that this was not mere jest. Horsemen, riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still far behind, but gaining on the Orcs, gaining on them like a tide over the flats on folk straying in a quicksand.

The Isengarders began to run with a redoubled pace that astonished Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed for the end of a race. Then he saw that the sun was sinking, falling behind the Misty Mountains; shadows reached over the land. The soldiers of Mordor lifted their heads and also began to put on speed. The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a few outlying trees. The land was beginning to slope upwards. ever more steeply; but the Orcs did not halt. Both Uglúk and Grishnákh shouted, spurring them on to a last effort.

'They will make it yet. They will escape,' thought Pippin. And then he managed to twist his neck. so as to glance back with one eye over his shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already level with the Orcs, galloping over the plain. The sunset gilded their spears and helmets, and glinted in their pale flowing hair. They were hemming the Orcs in, preventing them from scattering, and driving them along the line of the river.

He wondered very much what kind of folk they were. He wished now that he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps and things; but in those days the plans for the journey seemed to be in more competent hands, and he had never reckoned with being cut off from Gandalf, or from Strider, and even from Frodo. All that he could remember about Rohan was that Gandalf's horse, Shadowfax, had come from that land. That sounded hopeful, as far as it went.

'But how will they know that we are not Orcs?' he thought. 'I don't suppose they've ever heard of hobbits down here. I suppose I ought to be glad that the beastly Orcs look like being destroyed, but I would rather be saved myself.' The chances were that he and Merry would be killed together with their captors, before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of them.

A few of the riders appeared to be bowmen, skilled at shooting from a running horse. Riding swiftly into range they shot arrows at the Orcs that straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the riders wheeled away out of the range of the answering bows of their enemies, who shot wildly, not daring to halt. This happened many times, and on one occasion arrows fell among the Isengarders. One of them, just in front of Pippin, stumbled and did not get up again.

Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many Orcs had fallen, but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness the Orcs came to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, probably no more than three furlongs away, but they could go no further. The horsemen had encircled them. A small band disobeyed Uglúk's command, and ran on towards the forest: only three returned.

'Well, here we are,' sneered Grishnákh. 'Fine leadership! I hope the great Uglúk will lead us out again.'

'Put those Halflings down!' ordered Uglúk, taking no notice of Grishnákh. 'You, Lugdush, get two others and stand guard over them! They're not to be killed, unless the filthy Whiteskins break through. Understand? As long as I'm alive, I want 'em. But they're not to cry out, and they're not to be rescued. Bind their legs!'

The last part of the order was carried out mercilessly. But Pippin found that for the first time he was close to Merry. The Orcs were making a great deal of noise, shouting and clashing their weapons, and the hobbits managed to whisper together for a while.

'I don't think much of this,' said Merry. 'I feel nearly done in. Don't think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.'

'Lembas!' whispered Pippin. 'Lembas: I've got some. Have you? I don't think they've taken anything but our swords.'

'Yes, I had a packet in my pocket,' answered Merry, 'but it must be battered to crumbs. Anyway I can't put my mouth in my pocket!'

'You won't have to. I've-'; but just then a savage kick warned Pippin that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful.

The night was cold and still. All round the knoll on which the Orcs were gathered little watch-fires sprang up, golden-red in the darkness, a complete ring of them. They were within a long bowshot. but the riders did not show themselves against the light, and the Orcs wasted many arrows shooting at the fires, until Uglúk stopped them. The riders made no sound. Later in the night when the moon came out of the mist, then occasionally they could be seen, shadowy shapes that glinted now and again in the white light, as they moved in ceaseless patrol.

'They'll wait for the Sun, curse them!' growled one of the guards. 'Why don't we get together and charge through? What's old Uglúk think he's doing, I should like to know?'

'I daresay you would,' snarled Uglúk stepping up from behind. 'Meaning I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the other rabble: the maggots and the apes of Lugbúrz. No good trying to charge with them. They'd just squeal and bolt, and there are more than enough of these filthy horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat.

'There's only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like gimlets in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than most Men, from all I've heard; and don't forget their horses! They can see the night-breeze, or so it's said. Still there's one thing the fine fellows don't know: Mauhúr and his lads are in the forest, and they should turn up any time now.'

Uglúk's words were enough, apparently, to satisfy the Isengarders; but the other Orcs were both dispirited and rebellious. They posted a few watchers, but most of them lay on the ground, resting in the pleasant darkness. It did indeed become very dark again; for the moon passed westward into thick cloud, and Pippin could not see anything a few feet away. The fires brought no light to the hillock. The riders were not, however, content merely to wait for the dawn and let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on the east side of the knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that some of the Men had ridden in close, slipped off their horses, crawled to the edge of the camp and killed several Orcs, and then had faded away again. Uglúk dashed off to stop a stampede.

Pippin and Merry sat up. Their guards, Isengarders, had gone with Uglúk. But if the hobbits had any thought of escape, it was soon dashed. A long hairy arm took each of them by the neck and drew them close together. Dimly they were aware of Grishnákh's great head and hideous face between them; his foul breath was on their cheeks. He began to paw them and feel them. Pippin shuddered as hard cold fingers groped down his back.

'Well, my little ones!' said Grishnákh in a soft whisper. 'Enjoying your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed, perhaps: swords and whips on one side, and nasty spears on the other! Little people should not meddle _in affairs that are too big for them.' His fingers continued to grope. There was a light like a pale but hot fire behind his eyes.

The thought came suddenly into Pippin's mind, as if caught direct from the urgent thought of his enemy: 'Grishnákh knows about the Ring! He's looking for it, while Uglúk is busy: he probably wants it for himself.' Cold fear was in Pippin's heart, yet at the same time he was wondering what use he could make of Grishnákh's desire.

'I don't think you will find it that way,' he whispered. 'It isn't easy to find.'

'Find it?' said Grishnákh: his fingers stopped crawling and gripped Pippin's shoulder. 'Find what? What are you talking about, little one?'. For a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the darkness he made a noise in his throat: gollum, gollum. 'Nothing, my precious,' he added.

The hobbits felt Grishnákh's fingers twitch. 'O ho!' hissed the goblin softly. 'That's what he means, is it? O ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little ones.'

'Perhaps,' said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's guess. 'Perhaps; and not only for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it, or not? And what would you give for it?'

'Do I want it? Do I want it?' said Grishnákh, as if puzzled; but his arms were trembling. 'What would I give for it? What do you mean?'

'We mean,' said Pippin, choosing his words carefully, 'that it's no good groping in the dark. We could save you time and trouble. But you must untie our legs first, or we'll do nothing, and say nothing.'

'My dear tender little fools,' hissed Grishnákh, 'everything you have, and everything you know, will be got out of you in due time: everything! You'll wish there was more that you could tell to satisfy the Questioner, indeed you will: quite soon. We shan't hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no! What do you think you've been kept alive for? My dear little fellows, please believe me when I say that it was not out of kindness: that's not even one of Uglúk's faults.'

'I find it quite easy to believe,' said Merry. 'But you haven't got your prey home yet. And it doesn't seem to be going your way, whatever happens. If we come to Isengard, it won't be the great Grishnákh that benefits: Saruman will take all that he can find. If you want anything for yourself, now's the time to do a deal.'

Grishnákh began to lose his temper. The name of Saruman seemed specially to enrage him. Time was passing and the disturbance was dying down. Uglúk or the Isengarders might return at any minute.

'Have you got it - either of you?' he snarled.

'Gollum, gollum!' said Pippin.

'Untie our legs!' said Merry.

They felt the Orc's arms trembling violently. 'Curse you, you filthy little vermin!' he hissed. 'Untie your legs? I'll untie every string in your bodies. Do you think I can't search you to the bones? Search you! I'll cut you both to quivering shreds. I don't need the help of your legs to get you away-and have you all to myself!'

Suddenly he seized them. The strength in his long arms and shoulders was terrifying. He tucked them one under each armpit, and crushed them fiercely to his sides; a great stifling hand was clapped over each of their mouths. Then he sprang forward, stooping low. Quickly and silently he went, until he came to the edge of the knoll. There, choosing a gap between the watchers, he passed like an evil shadow out into the night, down the slope and away westward towards the river that flowed out of the forest. In that direction there was a wide open space with only one fire.

After going a dozen yards he halted, peering and listening. Nothing could be seen or heard. He crept slowly on, bent almost double. Then he squatted and listened again. Then he stood up, as if to risk a sudden dash. At that very moment the dark form of a rider loomed up right in front of him. A horse snorted and reared. A man called out.

Grishnákh flung himself on the ground flat, dragging the hobbits under him; then he drew his sword. No doubt he meant to kill his captives, rather than allow them to escape or to be rescued; but it was his undoing. The sword rang faintly, and glinted a little in the light of the fire away to his left. An arrow came whistling out of the gloom: it was aimed with skill, or guided by fate, and it pierced his right hand. He dropped the sword and shrieked. There was a quick beat of hoofs, and even as Grishnákh leaped up and ran, he was ridden down and a spear passed through him. He gave a hideous shivering cry and lay still.

The hobbits remained flat on the ground, as Grishnákh had left them. Another horseman came riding swiftly to his comrade's aid. Whether because of some special keenness of sight, or because of some other sense, the horse lifted and sprang lightly over them; but its rider did not see them, lying covered in their elven-cloaks, too crushed for the moment, and too afraid to move.

At last Merry stirred and whispered softly: 'So far so good: but how are we to avoid being spitted?'

The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishnákh had roused the Orcs. From the yells and screeches that came from the knoll the hobbits guessed that their disappearance had been discovered: Uglúk was probably knocking off a few more heads. Then suddenly the answering cries of orc-voices came from the right, outside the circle of watch-fires, from the direction of the forest and the mountains. Mauhúr had apparently arrived and was attacking the besiegers. There was the sound of galloping horses. The Riders were drawing in their ring close round the knoll, risking the orc-arrows, so as to prevent any sortie, while a company rode off to deal with the newcomers. Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized that without moving they were now outside the circle: there was nothing between them and escape.

'Now,' said Merry, 'if only we had our legs and hands free, we might get away. But I can't touch the knots, and I can't bite them.'

'No need to try,' said Pippin. 'I was going to tell you: I've managed to free my hands. These loops are only left for show. You'd better have a bit of lembas first.'

He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes were broken, but good, still in their leaf-wrappings. The hobbits each ate two or three pieces. The taste brought back to them the memory of fair faces, and laughter, and wholesome food in quiet days now far away. For a while they ate thoughtfully, sitting in the dark, heedless of the cries and sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to the present.

'We must be off,' he said. 'Half a moment!' Grishnákh's sword was lying close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; so he crawled forward, and finding the body of the goblin he drew from its sheath a long sharp knife. With this he quickly cut their bonds.

'Now for it!' he said. 'When we've warmed up a bit, perhaps we shall be able to stand again, and walk. But in any case we had better start by crawling.'

They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a wide berth, and wormed their way forward bit by bit, until they came to the edge of the river, gurgling away in the black shadows under its deep banks. Then they looked back.

The sounds had died away. Evidently Mauhúr and his 'lads' had been killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent ominous vigil. It would not last very much longer. Already the night was old. In the East, which had remained unclouded, the sky was beginning to grow pale.

'We must get under cover,' said Pippin, 'or we shall be seen. It will not be any comfort to us, if these riders discover that we are not Orcs after we are dead.' He got up and stamped his feet. 'Those cords have cut me like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What about you, Merry?'

Merry got up. 'Yes,' he said, 'I can manage it. Lembas does put heart into you! A more wholesome sort of feeling, too, than the heat of that orc-draught. I wonder what it was made of. Better not to know, I expect. Let's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!'

'Not here, the banks are too steep,' said Pippin. 'Forward now!'

They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river. Behind them the light grew in the East. As they walked they compared notes, talking lightly in hobbit-fashion of the things that had happened since their capture. No listener would have guessed from their words that they had suffered cruelly, and been in dire peril, going without hope towards torment and death; or that even now, as they knew well, they had little chance of ever finding friend or safety again.

'You seem to have been doing well, Master Took,' said Merry. 'You will get almost a chapter in old Bilbo's book, if ever I get a chance to report to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain's little game, and playing up to him. But I wonder if anyone will ever pick up your trail and find that brooch. I should hate to lose mine, but I am afraid yours is gone for good.

'I shall have to brush up my toes, if I am to get level with you. Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This is where he comes in. I don't suppose you have much notion where we are; but I spent my time at Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end of the Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.'

Even as he spoke the dark edge of the forest loomed up straight before them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great trees, creeping away from the coming Dawn.

'Lead on, Master Brandybuck!' said Pippin. 'Or lead back! We have been warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgotten that.'

'I have not,' answered Merry; 'but the forest seems better to me, all the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.'

He led the way in under the huge branches of the trees. Old beyond guessing, they seemed. Great trailing beards of lichen hung from them, blowing and swaying in the breeze. Out of the shadows the hobbits peeped, gazing back down the slope: little furtive figures that in the dim light looked like elf-children in the deeps of time peering out of the Wild Wood in wonder at their first Dawn.

Far over the Great River, and the Brown Lands, leagues upon grey leagues away, the Dawn came, red as flame. Loud rang the hunting-horns to greet it. The Riders of Rohan sprang suddenly to life. Horn answered horn again.

Merry and Pippin heard, clear in the cold air, the neighing of war-horses, and the sudden singing of many men. The Sun's limb was lifted, an arc of fire, above the margin of the world. Then with a great cry the Riders charged from the East; the red light gleamed on mail and spear. The Orcs yelled and shot all the arrows that remained to them. The hobbits saw several horsemen fall; but their line held on up the hill and over it, and wheeled round and charged again. Most of the raiders that were left alive then broke and fled, this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the direction of the forest. Straight up the slope they charged towards the watchers. Now they were drawing near, and it seemed certain that they would escape: they had already hewn down three Riders that barred their way.

'We have watched too long,' said Merry. 'There's Uglúk! I don't want to meet him again.' The hobbits turned and fled deep into the shadows of the wood.

So it was that they did not sec the last stand, when Uglúk was overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he was slain at last by Éomer, the Third Marshal of the Mark, who dismounted and fought him sword to sword. And over the wide fields the keen-eyed Riders hunted down the few Orcs that had escaped and still had strength to fly.

Then when they had laid their fallen comrades in a mound and had sung their praises, the Riders made a great fire and scattered the ashes of their enemies. So ended the raid, and no news of it came ever back either to Mordor or to Isengard; but the smoke of the burning rose high to heaven and was seen by many watchful eyes.



Chapter 4

Treebeard

Meanwhile the hobbits went with as much speed as the dark and tangled forest allowed, following the line of the running stream, westward and up towards the slopes of the mountains, deeper and deeper into Fangorn. Slowly their fear of the Orcs died away, and their pace slackened. A queer stifling feeling came over them, as if the air were too thin or too scanty for breathing.

At last Merry halted. 'We can't go on like this,' he panted. 'I want some air.'

'Let's have a drink at any rate,' said Pippin. 'I'm parched.' He clambered on to a great tree-root that wound down into the stream, and stooping drew up some water in his cupped hands. It was clear and cold, and he took many draughts. Merry followed him. The water refreshed them and seemed to cheer their hearts; for a while they sat together on the brink of the stream, dabbling their sore feet and legs, and peering round at the trees that stood silently about them, rank upon rank, until they faded away into grey twilight in every direction.

'I suppose you haven't lost us already?' said Pippin, leaning back against a great tree-trunk. 'We can at least follow the course of this stream, the Entwash or whatever you call it, and get out again the way we came.'

'We could, if our legs would do it,' said Merry; 'and if we could breathe properly.'

'Yes, it is all very dim, and stuffy, in here,' said Pippin. 'It reminds me, somehow, of the old room in the Great Place of the Tooks away back in the Smials at Tuckborough: a huge place, where the furniture has never been moved or changed for generations. They say the Old Took lived in it year after year, while he and the room got older and shabbier together-and it has never changed since he died, a century ago. And Old Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that puts it back a bit. But that is nothing to the old feeling of this wood. Look at all those weeping, trailing, beards and whiskers of lichen! And most of the trees seem to be half covered with ragged dry leaves that have never fallen. Untidy. I can't imagine what spring would look like here, if it ever comes; still less a spring-cleaning.'

'But the Sun at any rate must peep in sometimes.' said Merry. 'It does not look or feel at all like Bilbo's description of Mirkwood. That was all dark and black, and the home of dark black things. This is just dim, and frightfully tree-ish. You can't imagine animals living here at all, or staying for long.'

'No, nor hobbits,' said Pippin. 'And I don't like the thought of trying to get through it either. Nothing to eat for a hundred miles, I should guess. How are our supplies?'

'Low,' said Merry. 'We ran off with nothing but a couple of spare packets of lembas, and left everything else behind.' They looked at what remained of the elven-cakes: broken fragments for about five meagre days, that was all. 'And not a wrap or a blanket,' said Merry. 'We shall be cold tonight, whichever way we go.'

'Well, we'd better decide on the way now,' said Pippin. 'The morning must be getting on.'

Just then they became aware of a yellow light that had appeared, some way further on into the wood: shafts of sunlight seemed suddenly to have pierced the forest-roof.

'Hullo!' said Merry. 'The Sun must have run into a cloud while we've been under these trees, and now she has run out again; or else she has climbed high enough to look down through some opening. It isn't far - let's go and investigate!'

They found it was further than they thought. The ground was rising steeply still, and it was becoming increasingly stony. The light grew broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock-wall before them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of some long root thrust out by the distant mountains. No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full on its stony face. The twigs of the trees at its foot were stretched out stiff and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where all had looked so shabby and grey before, the wood now gleamed with rich browns, and with the smooth black-greys of bark like polished leather. The boles of the trees glowed with a soft green like young grass: early spring or a fleeting vision of it was about them.

In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural perhaps, and made by the weathering and splitting of the rock, for it was rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the tops of forest-trees, there was a shelf under a cliff. Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at its edge, and one old stump of a tree with only two bent branches left: it looked almost like the figure of some gnarled old man, standing there, blinking in the morning-light.

'Up we go!' said Merry joyfully. 'Now for a breath of air, and a sight of the land!'

They climbed and scrambled up the rock. If the stair had been made it was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were too eager to be surprised at the remarkable way in which the cuts and sores of their captivity had healed and their vigour had returned. They came at length to the edge of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump; then they sprang up and turned round with their backs to the hill, breathing deep, and looking out eastward. They saw that they had only come some three or four miles into the forest: the heads of the trees marched down the slopes towards the plain. There, near the fringe of the forest, tall spires of curling black smoke went up, wavering and floating towards them.

'The wind's changing,' said Merry. 'It's turned east again. It feels cool up here.'

'Yes,' said Pippin; 'I'm afraid this is only a passing gleam, and it will all go grey again. What a pity! This shaggy old forest looked so different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.'

'Almost felt you liked the Forest! That's good! That's uncommonly kind of you,' said a strange voice. 'Turn round and let me have a look at your faces. I almost feel that I dislike you both, but do not let us be hasty. Turn round!' A large knob-knuckled hand was laid on each of their shoulders, and they were twisted round, gently but irresistibly; then two great arms lifted them up.

They found that they were looking at a most extraordinary face. It belonged to a large Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at least fourteen foot high, very sturdy, with a tall head, and hardly any neck. Whether it was clad in stuff like green and grey bark, or whether that was its hide, was difficult to say. At any rate the arms, at a short distance from the trunk, were not wrinkled, but covered with a brown smooth skin. The large feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long face was covered with a sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost twiggy at the roots, thin and mossy at the ends. But at the moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes. These deep eyes were now surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating. They were brown, shot with a green light. Often afterwards Pippin tried to describe his first impression of them.

'One felt as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with ages of memory and long, slow, steady thinking; but their surface was sparkling with the present: like sun shimmering on the outer leaves of a vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake. I don't know but it felt as if something that grew in the ground-asleep, you might say, or just feeling itself as something between roof-tip and leaf-tip, between deep earth and sky had suddenly waked up, and was considering you with the same slow care that it had given to its own inside affairs for endless years.'

'Hrum, Hoom,' murmured the voice, a deep voice like a very deep woodwind instrument. 'Very odd indeed! Do not be hasty, that is my motto. But if I had seen you, before I heard your voices - I liked them: nice little voices; they reminded me of something I cannot remember - if I had seen you before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little Orcs, and found out my mistake afterwards. Very odd you are, indeed. Root and twig, very odd!'

Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he felt a curious suspense, but not fear. 'Please.' he said, 'who are you? And what are you?'

A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells were covered over. 'Hrum, now,' answered the voice; 'well, I am an Ent, or that's what they call me. Yes, Ent is the word. The Ent, I am, you might say, in your manner of speaking. Fangorn is my name according to some, Treebeard others make it. Treebeard will do.'

'An Ent?' said Merry. 'What's that? But what do you call yourself? What's your real name?'

'Hoo now!' replied Treebeard. 'Hoo! Now that would be telling! Not so hasty. And I am doing the asking. You are in my country. What are you, I wonder? I cannot place you. You do not seem to come in the old lists that I learned when I was young. But that was a long, long time ago, and they may have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! How did it go?

Learn now the lore of Living Creatures!

First name the four, the free peoples:

Eldest of all, the elf-children;

Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses;

Ent the earthborn, old as mountains;

Man the mortal, master of horses:

Hm, hm, hm.

Beaver the builder, buck the leaper,

Bear bee-hunter, boar the fighter;

Hound is hungry, hare is fearful…

hm, hm.

Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture,

Hart horn-crowned; hawk is swiftest

Swan the whitest, serpent coldest…

Hoom, hm; hoom. hm. how did it go? Room tum, room tum, roomty toom tum. It was a long list. But anyway you do not seem to fit in anywhere!'

'We always seem to have got left out of the old lists, and the old stories,' said Merry. 'Yet we've been about for quite a long time. We're hobbits.'

'Why not make a new line?' said Pippin.

'Half-grown hobbits, the hole-dwellers.

Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you've got it.'

'Hm! Not bad, not bad,' said Treebeard. 'That would do. So you live in holes, eh? It sounds very right and proper. Who calls you hobbits, though? That does not sound elvish to me. Elves made all the old words: they began it.'

'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,' said Pippin.

'Hoom, hmm! Come now! Not so hasty! You call yourselves hobbits? But you should not go telling just anybody. You'll be letting out your own right names if you're not careful.'

'We aren't careful about that,' said Merry. 'As a matter of fact I'm a Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.'

'And I'm a Took, Peregrin Took, but I'm generally called Pippin, or even Pip.'

'Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,' said Treebeard. 'I am honoured by your confidence; but you should not be too free all at once. There are Ents and Ents, you know; or there are Ents and things that look like Ents but ain't, as you might say. I'll call you Merry and Pippin if you please - nice names. For I am not going to tell you my name, not yet at any rate.' A queer half-knowing, half-humorous look came with a green flicker into his eyes. 'For one thing it would take a long while: my name is growing all the time, and I've lived a very long, long time; so my name is like a story. Real names tell you the story of the things they belong to in my language, in the Old Entish as you might say. It is a lovely language, but it takes a very long time to say anything in it, because we do not say anything in it, unless it is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to.

'But now,' and the eyes became very bright and 'present', seeming to grow smaller and almost sharp, 'what is going on? What are you doing in it all? I can see and hear (and smell and feel) a great deal from this, from this, from this a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-burúmë. Excuse me: that is a part of my name for it; I do not know what the word is in the outside languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I stand and look out on fine mornings, and think about the Sun, and the grass beyond the wood, and the horses, and the clouds, and the unfolding of the world. What is going on? What is Gandalf up to? And these - burárum,' he made a deep rumbling noise like a discord on a great organ - 'these Orcs, and young Saruman down at Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.'

'There is quite a lot going on,' said Merry: 'and even if we tried to be quick, it would take a long time to tell. But you told us not to be hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we asked what you are going to do with us, and which side you are on? And did you know Gandalf?'

'Yes, I do know him: the only wizard that really cares about trees ' said Treebeard. 'Do you know him?'

'Yes,' said Pippin sadly, 'we did. He was a great friend, and he was our guide.'

'Then I can answer your other questions,' said Treebeard. 'I am not going to do anything with you: not if you mean by that 'do something to you' without your leave. We might do some things together. I don't know about sides. I go my own way; but your way may go along with mine for a while. But you speak of Master Gandalf, as if he was in a story that had come to an end.'

'Yes, we do,' said Pippin sadly. 'The story seems to be going on, but I am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.'

'Hoo, come now!' said Treebeard. 'Hoom, hm, ah well.' He paused, looking long at the hobbits: 'Hoom, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come now!'

'If you would like to hear more. said Merry, 'we will tell you. But it will take some time. Wouldn't you like to put us down? Couldn't we sit here together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us up.'

'Hm, tired? No. I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do not sit down. I am not very, hm, bendable. But there, the Sun is going in. Let us leave this - did you say what you call it?'

'Hill?' suggested Pippin. 'Shelf? Step?' suggested Merry.

Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. 'Hill. Yes, that was it. But it is a hasty word for a thing that has stood here ever since this part of the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it, and go.'

'Where shall we go?' asked Merry.

'To my home, or one of my homes,' answered Treebeard.

'Is it far?'

'I do not know. You might call it far, perhaps. But what does that matter?'

'Well, you see, we have lost all our belongings,' said Merry. 'We have only a little food.'

'O! Hm! You need not trouble about that,' said Treebeard. 'I can give you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long, long while. And if we decide to part company, I can set you down outside my country at any point you choose. Let us go!'

Holding the hobbits gently but firmly, one in the crook of each arm, Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the other, and moved them to the edge of the shelf. The rootlike toes grasped the rocks. Then carefully and solemnly, he stalked down from step to step, and reached the floor of the Forest.

At once he set off with long deliberate strides through the trees, deeper and deeper into the wood, never far from the stream, climbing steadily up towards the slopes of the mountains. Many of the trees seemed asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that merely passed by; but some quivered, and some raised up their branches above his head as he approached. All the while, as he walked, he talked to himself in a long running stream of musical sounds.

The hobbits were silent for some time. They felt, oddly enough, safe and comfortable, and they had a great deal to think and wonder about. At last Pippin ventured to speak again.

'Please, Treebeard,' he said, 'could I ask you something? Why did Celeborn warn us against your forest? He told us not to risk getting entangled in it.'

'Hmm, did he now?' rumbled Treebeard. 'And I might have said much the same, if you had been going the other way. Do not risk getting entangled in the woods of Laurelindórenan! That is what the Elves used to call it, but now they make the name shorter: Lothlórien they call it. Perhaps they are right: maybe it is fading; not growing. Land of the Valley of Singing Gold, that was it, once upon a time. Now it is the Dreamflower. Ah well! But it is a queer place, and not for just any one to venture in. I am surprised that you ever got out, but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not happened to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land.

'And so is this. Folk have come to grief here. Aye, they have, to grief. Laurelindórenan lindelorendor malinornélion ornemalin,' he hummed to himself. 'They are falling rather behind the world in there, I guess,' he said 'Neither this country, nor anything else outside the Golden Wood, is what it was when Celeborn was young. Still:

Taurelilómëa-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurëa Lómëanor,1

that is what they used to say. Things have changed, but it is still true in places.'

'What do you mean?' said Pippin. 'What is true?'

'The trees and the Ents,' said Treebeard. 'I do not understand all that goes on myself, so I cannot explain it to you. Some of us are still true Ents, and lively enough in our fashion, but many are growing sleepy, going tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are just trees, of course; but many are half awake. Some are quite wide awake, and a few are, well, ah, well getting Entish. That is going on all the time.

'When that happens to a tree, you find that some have bad hearts. Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew some good old willows down the Entwash, gone long ago, alas! They were quite hollow, indeed they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet and sweet-spoken as a young leaf. And then there are some trees in the valleys under the mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right through. That sort of thing seems to spread. There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country. There are still some very black patches.'

'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?' asked Merry.

'Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some shadow of the Great Darkness lying there still away north; and bad memories are handed down. But there are hollow dales in this land where the Darkness has never been lifted, and the trees are older than I am. Still, we do what we can. We keep off strangers and the foolhardy; and we train and we teach, we walk and we weed.

'We are tree-herds, we old Ents. Few enough of us are left now. Sheep get like shepherd, and shepherds like sheep, it is said; but slowly, and neither have long in the world. It is quicker and closer with trees and Ents, and they walk down the ages together. For Ents are more like Elves: less interested in themselves than Men are, and better at getting inside other things. And yet again Ents are more like Men, more changeable than Elves are, and quicker at taking the colour of the outside, you might say. Or better than both: for they are steadier and keep their minds on things longer. 'Some of my kin look just like trees now, and need something great to rouse them; and they speak only in whispers. But some of my trees are limb-lithe, and many can talk to me. Elves began it, of course, waking trees up and teaching them to speak and learning their tree-talk. They always wished to talk to everything, the old Elves did. But then the Great Darkness came, and they passed away over the Sea, or fled into far valleys, and hid themselves, and made songs about days that would never come again. Never again. Aye, aye, there was all one wood once upon a time: from here to the Mountains of Lune, and this was just the East End.

'Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and sing all day and hear no more than the echo of my own voice in the hollow hills. The woods were like the woods of Lothlórien. only thicker stronger, younger. And the smell of the air! I used to spend a week just breathing.'

Treebeard fell silent, striding along, and yet making hardly a sound with his great feet. Then he began to hum again, and passed into a murmuring chant. Gradually the hobbits became aware that he was chanting to them:

In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring.

Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion!

And I said that was good.

I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand.

Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir!

And I thought that was best.

To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn.

Ah! the gold and the red and the sighing of leaves in the Autumn in Taur-na-neldor!

It was more than my desire.

To the pine-trees upon the highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter.

Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black branches of Winter upon Orod-na-Thôn!

My voice went up and sang in the sky.

And now all those lands lie under the wave.

And I walk in Ambaróna, in Tauremorna, in Aldalómë.

In my own land, in the country of Fangorn,

Where the roots are long,

And the years lie thicker than the leaves

In Tauremornalómë.

He ended, and strode on silently, and in all the wood, as far as ear could reach, there was not a sound.

The day waned, and dusk was twined about the boles of the trees. At last the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land: they had come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots of tall Methedras. Down the hillside the young Entwash, leaping from its springs high above, ran noisily from step to step to meet them. On the right of the stream there was a long slope, clad with grass, now grey in the twilight. No trees grew there and it was open to the sky; stars were shining already in lakes between shores of cloud.

Treebeard strode up the slope, hardly slackening his pace. Suddenly before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees stood there, one on either side, like living gate-posts; but there was no gate save their crossing and interwoven boughs. As the old Ent approached, the trees lifted up their branches, and all their leaves quivered and rustled. For they were evergreen trees, and their leaves were dark and polished, and gleamed in the twilight. Beyond them was a wide level space, as though the floor of a great hall had been cut in the side of the hill. On either hand the walls sloped upwards, until they were fifty feet high or more, and along each wall stood an aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards.

At the far end the rock-wall was sheer, but at the bottom it had been hollowed back into a shallow bay with an arched roof: the only roof of the hall, save the branches of the trees, which at the inner end overshadowed all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle. A little stream escaped from the springs above, and leaving the main water, fell tinkling down the sheer face of the wall, pouring in silver drops, like a fine curtain in front of the arched bay. The water was gathered again into a stone basin in the floor between the trees, and thence it spilled and flowed away beside the open path, out to rejoin the Entwash in its journey through the forest.

'Hm! Here we are!' said Treebeard, breaking his long silence. 'I have brought you about seventy thousand ent-strides, but what that comes to in the measurement of your land I do not know. Anyhow we are near the roots of the Last Mountain. Part of the name of this place might be Wellinghall, if it were turned into your language. I like it. We will stay here tonight.' He set them down on the grass between the aisles of the trees, and they followed him towards the great arch. The hobbits now noticed that as he walked his knees hardly bent, but his legs opened in a great stride. He planted his big toes (and they were indeed big, and very broad) on the ground first, before any other part of his feet.

For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling spring, and took a deep breath; then he laughed, and passed inside. A great stone table stood there, but no chairs. At the back of the bay it was already quite dark. Treebeard lifted two great vessels and stood them on the table. They seemed to be filled with water; but he held his hands over them, and immediately they began to glow, one with a golden and the other with a rich green light; and the blending of the two lights lit the bay; as if the sun of summer was shining through a roof of young leaves. Looking back, the hobbits saw that the trees in the court had also begun to glow, faintly at first, but steadily quickening, until every leaf was edged with light: some green, some gold, some red as copper; while the tree-trunks looked like pillars moulded out of luminous stone.

'Well, well, now we can talk again,' said Treebeard. 'You are thirsty I expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this!' He went to the back of the bay, and then they saw that several tall stone jars stood there, with heavy lids. He removed one of the lids, and dipped in a great ladle, and with it filled three bowls, one very large bowl, and two smaller ones.

'This is an ent-house,' he said, 'and there are no seats, I fear. But you may sit on the table.' Picking up the hobbits he set them on the great stone slab, six feet above the ground, and there they sat dangling their legs, and drinking in sips.

The drink was like water, indeed very like the taste of the draughts they had drunk from the Entwash near, the borders of the forest, and yet there was some scent or savour in it which they could not describe: it was faint, but it reminded them of the smell of a distant wood borne from afar by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the draught began at the toes, and rose steadily through every limb, bringing refreshment and vigour as it coursed upwards, right to the tips of the hair. Indeed the hobbits felt that the hair on their heads was actually standing up, waving and curling and growing. As for Treebeard, he first laved his feet in the basin beyond the arch, and then he drained his bowl at one draught, one long, slow draught. The hobbits thought he would never stop.

At last he set the bowl down again. 'Ah - ah,' he sighed. 'Hm, hoom, now we can talk easier. You can sit on the floor, and I will lie down; that will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep.'

On the right side of the bay there was a great bed on low legs; not more than a couple of feet high, covered deep in dried grass and bracken. Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the slightest sign of bending at his middle), until he lay at full length, with his arms behind his head, looking up at the ceiling. upon which lights were flickering, like the play of leaves in the sunshine. Merry and Pippin sat beside him on pillows of grass.

'Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!' said Treebeard.

The hobbits began to tell him the story of their adventures ever since they left Hobbiton. They followed no very clear order, for they interrupted one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped the speaker, and went back to some earlier point, or jumped forward asking questions about later events. They said nothing whatever about the Ring, and did not tell him why they set out or where they were going to; and he did not ask for any reasons.

He was immensely interested in everything: in the Black Riders, in Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and Tom Bombadil, in the Mines of Moria, and in Lothlórien and Galadriel. He made them describe the Shire and its country over and over again. He said an odd thing at this point. 'You never see any, hm, any Ents round there do you?' he asked. 'Well, not Ents, Entwives I should really say.'

'Entwives?' said Pippin. 'Are they like you at all?'

'Yes, hm, well no: I do not really know now,' said Treebeard thoughtfully. 'But they would like your country, so I just wondered.'

Treebeard was however especially interested in everything that concerned Gandalf; and most interested of all in Saruman's doings. The hobbits regretted very much that they knew so little about them: only a rather vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told the Council. But they were clear at any rate that Uglúk and his troop came from Isengard, and spoke of Saruman as their master.

'Hm, hoom!' said Treebeard, when at last their story had wound and wandered down to the battle of the Orcs and the Riders of Rohan. 'Well, well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me all, no indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you are doing as Gandalf would wish. There is something very big going on, that I can see, and what it is maybe I shall learn in good time, or in bad time. By root and twig, but it is a strange business: up sprout a little folk that are not in the old lists, and behold the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and Gandalf takes them on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the leagues of Wilderland: indeed they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!'

'And what about yourself?' asked Merry.

'Hoom, hm, I have not troubled about the Great Wars,' said Treebeard; 'they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business of Wizards: Wizards are always troubled about the future. I do not like worrying about the future. I am not altogether on anybody's side, because nobody is altogether on my side, if you understand me: nobody cares for the woods as I care for them, not even Elves nowadays. Still, I take more kindly to Elves than to others: it was the Elves that cured us of dumbness long ago, and that was a great gift that cannot be forgotten, though our ways have parted since. And there are some things, of course, whose side I am altogether not on; I am against them altogether: these - burárum' (he again made a deep rumble of disgust)' - these Orcs, and their masters.

'I used to be anxious when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but when it removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while: Mordor is a long way away. But it seems that the wind is setting East, and the withering of all woods may be drawing near. There is naught that an old Ent can do to hold back that storm: he must weather it or crack.

'But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbour: I cannot overlook him. I must do something, I suppose. I have often wondered lately what I should do about Saruman.'

'Who is Saruman?' asked Pippin. 'Do you know anything about his history?' 'Saruman is a Wizard,' answered Treebeard. 'More than that I cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They appeared first after the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with the Ships I never can tell. Saruman was reckoned great among them, I believe. He gave up wandering about and minding the affairs of Men and Elves, some time ago - you would call it a very long time ago: and he settled down at Angrenost, or Isengard as the Men of Rohan call it. He was very quiet to begin with, but his fame began to grow. He was chosen to be head of the White Council, they say; but that did not turn out too well. I wonder now if even then Saruman was not turning to evil ways. But at any rate he used to give no trouble to his neighbours. I used to talk to him. There was a time when he was always walking about my woods. He was polite in those days, always asking my leave (at least when he met me); and always eager to listen. I told him many things that he would never have found out by himself; but he never repaid me in like kind. I cannot remember that he ever told. me anything. And he got more and more like that; his face, as I remember it - I have not seen it for many a day - became like windows in a stone wall: windows with shutters inside.

'I think that I now understand what he is up to. He is plotting to become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels; and he does not care for growing things, except as far as they serve him for the moment. And now it is clear that he is a black traitor. He has taken up with foul folk, with the Orcs. Brm, hoom! Worse than that: he has been doing something to them; something dangerous. For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a mark of evil things that came in the Great Darkness that they cannot abide the Sun; but Saruman's Orcs can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!'

Treebeard rumbled for a moment, as if he were pronouncing some deep, subterranean Entish malediction. 'Some time ago I began to wonder how Orcs dared to pass through my woods so freely,' he went on. 'Only lately did I guess that Saruman was to blame, and that long ago he had been spying out all the ways, and discovering my secrets. He and his foul folk are making havoc now. Down on the borders they are felling trees-good trees. Some of the trees they just cut down and leave to rot - orc-mischief that; but most are hewn up and carried off to feed the fires of Orthanc. There is always a smoke rising from Isengard these days.

'Curse him, root and branch! Many of those trees were my friends creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their own that are lost for ever now. And there are wastes of stump and bramble where once there were singing groves. I have been idle. I have let things slip. It must stop!'

Treebeard raised himself from his bed with a jerk, stood up, and thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and sent up two jets of flame. There was a flicker like green fire in his eyes, and his beard stood out stiff as a great besom.

'I will stop it!' he boomed. 'And you shall come with me. You may be able to help me. You will be helping your own friends that way, too; for if Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have an enemy behind as well as in front. Our roads go together - to Isengard!'

'We will come with you,' said Merry. 'We will do what we can.'

'Yes!' said Pippin. 'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I should like to be there, even if I could not be of much use: I shall never forget Uglúk and the crossing of Rohan.'

'Good! Good!' said Treebeard. 'But I spoke hastily. We must not be hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; fur it is easier to shout stop! than to do it.'

He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wherever the drops of water fell glittering from him to the ground they glinted like red and green sparks. He came back and laid himself on the bed again and was silent.

After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring again. He seemed to be counting on his fingers. 'Fangorn, Finglas, Fladrif, aye, aye,' he sighed. 'The trouble is that there are so few of us left,' he said turning towards the hobbits. 'Only three remain of the first Ents that walked in the woods before the Darkness: only myself, Fangorn, and Finglas and Fladrif - to give them their Elvish names; you may call them Leaflock and Skinbark if you like that better. And of us three Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for this business. Leaflock has grown sleepy, almost tree-ish, you might say: he has taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with the deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy hair he is. He used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been too drowsy to walk far even then. Skinbark lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is where the worst trouble has been. He was wounded by the Orcs, and many of his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up into the high places, among the birches that he loves best, and he will not come down. Still, I daresay I could get together a fair company of our younger folks - if I could make them understand the need: if I could rouse them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity there are so few of us!'

'Why are there so few when you have lived in this country so long?' asked Pippin. 'Have a great many died?'

'Oh, no!' said Treebeard. 'None have died from inside, as you might say. Some have fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of course: and more have grown tree-ish. But there were never many of us and we have not increased. There have been no Entings - no children, you would say, not for a terrible long count of years. You see, we lost the Entwives.'

'How very sad!' said Pippin. 'How was it that they all died?'

'They did not die!' said Treebeard. 'I never said died. We lost them, I said. We lost them and we cannot find them.' He sighed. 'I thought most folk knew that. There were songs about the hunt of the Ents for the Entwives sung among Elves and Men from Mirkwood to Gondor. They cannot be quite forgotten.'

'Well, I am afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to the Shire,' said Merry. 'Won't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the songs?'

'Yes, I will indeed,' said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the request. 'But I cannot tell it properly, only in short; and then we must end our talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to do, and maybe a journey to begin.'

'It is rather a strange and sad story,' he went on after a pause. 'When the world was young, and the woods were wide and wild, the Ents and the Entwives - and there were Entmaidens then: ah! the loveliness of Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the lightfooted, in the days of our youth! - they walked together and they housed together. But our hearts did not go on growing in the same way: the Ents gave their love to things that they met in the world, and the Entwives gave their thought to other things, for the Ents loved the great trees; and the wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills; and they drank of the mountain-streams, and ate only such fruit as the trees let fall in their path; and they learned of the Elves and spoke with the Trees. But the Entwives gave their minds to the lesser trees, and to the meads in the sunshine beyond the feet of the forests; and they saw the sloe in the thicket, and the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring, and the green herbs in the waterlands in summer, and the seeding grasses in the autumn fields. They did not desire to speak with these things; but they wished them to hear and obey what was said to them. The Entwives ordered them to grow according to their wishes, and bear leaf and fruit to their liking; for the Entwives desired order, and plenty, and peace (by which they meant that things should remain where they had set them). So the Entwives made gardens to live in. But we Ents went on wandering, and we only came to the gardens now and again. Then when the Darkness came in the North, the Entwives crossed the Great River, and made new gardens, and tilled new fields, and we saw them more seldom. After the Darkness was overthrown the land of the Entwives blossomed richly, and their fields were full of corn. Many men learned the crafts of the Entwives and honoured them greatly; but we were only a legend to them, a secret in the heart of the forest. Yet here we still are, while all the gardens of the Entwives are wasted: Men call them the Brown Lands now.

'I remember it was long ago - in the time of the war between Sauron and the Men of the Sea - desire came over me to see Fimbrethil again. Very fair she was still in my eyes, when I had last seen her, though little like the Entmaiden of old. For the Entwives were bent and browned by their labour; their hair parched by the sun to the hue of ripe corn and their cheeks like red apples. Yet their eyes were still the eyes of our own people. We crossed over Anduin and came to their land: but we found a desert: it was all burned and uprooted, for war had passed over it. But the Entwives were not there. Long we called, and long we searched; and we asked all folk that we met which way the Entwives had gone. Some said they had never seen them; and some said that they had seen them walking away west, and some said east, and others south. But nowhere that we went could we find them. Our sorrow was very great. Yet the wild wood called, and we returned to it. For many years we used to go out every now and again and look for the Entwives, walking far and wide and calling them by their beautiful names. But as time passed we went more seldom and wandered less far. And now the Entwives are only a memory for us, and our beards are long and grey. The Elves made many songs concerning the Search of the Ents, and some of the songs passed into the tongues of Men. But we made no songs about it, being content to chant their beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives. We believe that we may meet again in a time to come, and perhaps we shall find somewhere a land where we can live together and both be content. But it is foreboded that that will only be when we have both lost all that we now have. And it may well be that that time is drawing near at last. For if Sauron of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely to wither all the woods.

'There was an Elvish song that spoke of this, or at least so I understand it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It was never an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long song in Entish! But we know it by heart, and hum it now and again. This is how it runs in your tongue:

ent.

When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough; When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the brow; When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain-air, Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair!

entwife.

When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade; When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid; When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air, I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair.

ent.

When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold; When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the West, Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best!

entwife.

When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown; When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town; When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the West, I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best!

ent.

When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay; When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day; When wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain I'll look for thee, and call to thee; I'll come to thee again!

entwife.

When Winter comes, and singing ends; when darkness falls at last; When broken is the barren bough, and light and labour past; I'll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again: Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain!

both.

Together we will take the road that leads into the West, And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest.'

Treebeard ended his song. 'That is how it goes,' he said. 'It is Elvish, of course: lighthearted, quickworded, and soon over. I daresay it is fair enough. But the Ents could say more on their side, if they had time! But now I am going to stand up and take a little sleep. Where will you stand?'

'We usually lie down to sleep,' said Merry. 'We shall be all right where we are.'

'Lie down to sleep!' said Treebeard. 'Why of course you do! Hm, hoom: I was forgetting: singing that song put me in mind of old times; almost thought that I was talking to young Entings, I did. Well, you can lie on the bed. I am going to stand in the rain. Good night!'

Merry and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass and fern. It was fresh, and sweet-scented, and warm. The lights died down, and the glow of the trees faded; but outside under the arch they could see old Treebeard standing, motionless, with his arms raised above his head. The bright stars peered out of the sky, and lit the falling water as it spilled on to his fingers and head, and dripped, dripped, in hundreds of silver drops on to his feet. Listening to the tinkling of the drops the hobbits fell asleep.

They woke to find a cool sun shining into the great court, and on to the floor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, running on a stiff easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while Merry and Pippin were bathing in the basin by the arch, they heard him humming and singing, as he came up the path between the trees.

'Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!' he boomed, when he saw them. 'You sleep long. I have been many a hundred strides already today. Now we will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.'

He poured them out two full bowls from a stone jar; but from a different jar. The taste was not the same as it had been the night before: it was earthier and richer, more sustaining and food-like, so to speak. While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of the bed, and nibbling small pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that eating was a necessary part of breakfast than because they felt hungry), Treebeard stood, humming in Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue, and looking up at the sky.

'Where is Entmoot?' Pippin ventured to ask.

'Hoo, eh? Entmoot?' said Treebeard, turning round. 'It is not a place, it is a gathering of Ents - which does not often happen nowadays. But I have managed to make a fair number promise to come. We shall meet in the place where we have always met: Derndingle Men call it. It is away south from here. We must be there before noon.'

Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the hobbits in his arms as on the previous day. At the entrance to the court he turned to the right, stepped over the stream, and strode away southwards along the feet of great tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these the hobbits saw thickets of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark climbing pinewoods. Soon Treebeard turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves, where the trees were larger, taller, and thicker than any that the hobbits had ever seen before. For a while they felt faintly the sense of stifling which they had noticed when they first ventured into Fangorn, but it soon passed. Treebeard did not talk to them. He hummed to himself deeply and thoughtfully, but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded like boom, boom, rumboom, boorar, boom, boom, dahrar boom boom, dahrar boom, and so on with a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and again they thought they heard an answer, a hum or a quiver of sound, that seemed to come out of the earth, or from boughs above their heads, or perhaps from the boles of the trees; but Treebeard did not stop or turn his head to either side.

They had been going for a long while - Pippin had tried to keep count of the 'ent-strides' but had failed, getting lost at about three thousand - when Treebeard began to slacken his pace. Suddenly he stopped, put the hobbits down, and raised his curled hands to his mouth so that they made a hollow tube; then he blew or called through them. A great hoom, hom rang out like a deep-throated horn in the woods, and seemed to echo from the trees. Far off there came from several directions a similar hoom, hom, hoom that was not an echo but an answer.

Treebeard now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders and strode on again, every now and then sending out another horn-call, and each time the answers came louder and nearer. In this way they came at last to what looked like an impenetrable wall of dark evergreen trees, trees of a kind that the hobbits had never seen before: they branched out right from the roots, and were densely clad in dark glossy leaves like thornless holly, and they bore many stiff upright flower-spikes with large shining olive-coloured buds.

Turning to the left and skirting this huge hedge Treebeard came in a few strides to a narrow entrance. Through it a worn path passed and dived suddenly down a long steep slope. The hobbits saw that they were descending into a great dingle, almost as round as a bowl, very wide and deep, crowned at the rim with the high dark evergreen hedge. It was smooth and grassclad inside, and there were no trees except three very tall and beautiful silver-birches that stood at the bottom of the bowl. Two other paths led down into the dingle: from the west and from the east.

Several Ents had already arrived. More were coming in down the other paths, and some were now following Treebeard. As they drew near the hobbits gazed at them. They had expected to see a number of creatures as much like Treebeard as one hobbit is like another (at any rate to a stranger's eye); and they were very much surprised to see nothing of the kind. The Ents were as different from one another as trees from trees: some as different as one tree is from another of the same name but quite different growth and history; and some as different as one tree-kind from another, as birch from beech; oak from fir. There were a few older Ents, bearded and gnarled like hale but ancient trees (though none looked as ancient as Treebeard); and there were tall strong Ents, clean-limbed and smooth-skinned like forest-trees in their prime; but there were no young Ents, no saplings. Altogether there were about two dozen standing on the wide grassy floor of the dingle, and as many more were marching in.

At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety that they saw: the many shapes, and colours, the differences in girth; and height, and length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes and fingers (anything from three to nine). A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard, and reminded them of beech-trees or oaks. But there were other kinds. Some recalled the chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick legs. Some recalled the ash: tall straight grey Ents with many-fingered hands and long legs; some the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch, the rowan, and the linden. But when the Ents all gathered round Treebeard, bowing their heads slightly, murmuring in their slow musical voices, and looking long and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits saw that they were all of the same kindred, and all had the same eyes: not all so old or so deep as Treebeard's, but all with the same slow, steady, thoughtful expression, and the same green flicker.

As soon as the whole company was assembled, standing in a wide circle round Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation began. The Ents began to murmur slowly: first one joined and then another, until they were all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm, now louder on one side of the ring, now dying away there and rising to a great boom on the other side. Though he could not catch or understand any of the words - he supposed the language was Entish - Pippin found the sound very pleasant to listen to at first; but gradually his attention wavered. After a long time (and the chant showed no signs of slackening) he found himself wondering, since Entish was such an 'unhasty' language, whether they had yet got further than Good Morning; and if Treebeard was to call the roll, how many days it would take to sing all their names. 'I wonder what the Entish is for yes or no,' he thought. He yawned.

Treebeard was immediately aware of him. 'Hm, ha, hey, my Pippin!' he said, and the other Ents all stopped their chant. 'You are a hasty folk, I was forgetting; and anyway it is wearisome listening to a speech you do not understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot, and they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and that a new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry can stroll about in the dingle, if you like. There is a well of good water, if you need refreshing, away yonder in the north bank. There are still some words to speak before the Moot really begins. I will come and see you again, and tell you how things are going.'

He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed low. This feat seemed to amuse the Ents very much, to judge by the tone of their murmurs, and the flicker of their eyes; but they soon turned back to their own business. Merry and Pippin climbed up the path that came in from the west, and looked through the opening in the great hedge. Long tree-clad slopes rose from the lip of the dingle, and away beyond them, above the fir-trees of the furthest ridge there rose, sharp and white, the peak of a high mountain. Southwards to their left they could see the forest falling away down into the grey distance. There far away there was a pale green glimmer that Merry guessed to be a glimpse of the plains of Rohan.

'I wonder where Isengard is?' said Pippin.

'I don't know quite where we are,' said Merry; 'but that peak is probably Methedras, and as far as I can remember the ring of Isengard lies in a fork or deep cleft at the end of the mountains. It is probably down behind this great ridge. There seems to be a smoke or haze over there, left of the peak, don't you think?'

'What is Isengard like?' said Pippin. 'I wonder what Ents can do about it anyway.'

'So do I,' said Merry. 'Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or hills, I think, with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of rock in the middle, called Orthanc. Saruman has a tower on it. There is a gate, perhaps more than one, in the encircling wall, and I believe there is a stream running through it; it comes out of the mountains, and flows on across the Gap of Rohan. It does not seem the sort of place for Ents to tackle. But I have an odd feeling about these Ents: somehow I don't think they are quite as safe and, well funny as they seem. They seem slow, queer, and patient, almost sad; and yet I believe they could be roused. If that happened, I would rather not be on the other side.'

'Yes!' said Pippin. 'I know what you mean. There might be all the difference between an old cow sitting and thoughtfully chewing, and a bull charging; and the change might come suddenly. I wonder if Treebeard will rouse them. I am sure he means to try. But they don't like being roused. Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.'

The hobbits turned back. The voices of the Ents were still rising and falling in their conclave. The sun had now risen high enough to look over the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of the birches and lit the northward side of the dingle with a cool yellow light. There they saw a little glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of the great bowl at the feet of the evergreens-it was pleasant to feel cool grass about their toes again, and not to be in a hurry-and then they climbed down to the gushing water. They drank a little, a clean, cold, sharp draught, and sat down on a mossy stone, watching the patches of sun on the grass and the shadows of the sailing clouds passing over the floor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents went on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world, and far from everything that had ever happened to them. A great longing came over them for the faces and voices of their companions, especially for Frodo and Sam, and for Strider.

At last there came a pause in the Ent-voices; and looking up they saw Treebeard coming towards them. with another Ent at his side.

'Hm, hoom, here I am again,' said Treebeard. 'Are you getting weary, or feeling impatient, hmm, eh? Well, I am afraid that you must not get impatient yet. We have finished the first stage now; but I have still got to explain things again to those that live a long way off, far from Isengard, and those that I could not get round to before the Moot, and after that we shall have to decide what to do. However, deciding what to do does not take Ents so long as going over all the facts and events that they have to make up their minds about. Still, it is no use denying, we shall be here a long time yet: a couple of days very likely. So I have brought you a companion. He has an ent-house nearby. Bregalad is his Elvish name. He says he has already made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm, hm, he is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought to get on together. Good-bye!' Treebeard turned and left them.

Bregalad stood for some time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of 'hastiness'. He was tall, and seemed to be one of the younger Ents; he had smooth shining skin on his arms and legs; his lips were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He could bend and sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last he spoke, and his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard's.

'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go for a walk!' he said. 'I am Bregalad, that is Quickbeam in your language. But it is only a nickname, of course. They have called me that ever since I said yes to an elder Ent before he had finished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out while some are still wetting their beards. Come with me!'

He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long-fingered hand to each of the hobbits. All that day they walked about in the woods with him, singing, and laughing; for Quickbeam often laughed. He laughed if the sun came out from behind a cloud, he laughed if they came upon a stream or spring: then he stooped and splashed his feet and head with water; he laughed sometimes at some sound or whisper in the trees. Whenever he saw a rowan-tree he halted a while with his arms stretched out, and sang, and swayed as he sang.

At nightfall he brought them to his ent-house: nothing more than a mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees grew in a circle about it, and there was water (as in all ent-houses), a spring bubbling out from the bank. They talked for a while as darkness fell on the forest. Not far away the voices of the Entmoot could be heard still going on; but now they seemed deeper and less leisurely, and every now and again one great voice would rise in a high and quickening music, while all the others died away. But beside them Bregalad spoke gently in their own tongue, almost whispering; and they learned that he belonged to Skinbark's people, and the country where they had lived had been ravaged. That seemed to the hobbits quite enough to explain his 'hastiness', at least in the matter of Orcs.

'There were rowan-trees in my home,' said Bregalad, softly and sadly, 'rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many years ago in the quiet of the world. The oldest were planted by the Ents to try and please the Entwives; but they looked at them and smiled and said that they knew where whiter blossom and richer fruit were growing. Yet there are no trees of all that race, the people of the Rose, that are so beautiful to me. And these trees grew and grew, till the shadow of each was like a green hall, and their red berries in the autumn were a burden, and a beauty and a wonder. Birds used to flock there. I like birds, even when they chatter; and the rowan has enough and to spare. But the birds became unfriendly and greedy and tore at the trees, and threw the fruit down and did not eat it. Then Orcs came with axes and cut down my trees. I came and called them by their long names, but they did not quiver, they did not hear or answer: they lay dead.

O Orofarnë, Lassemista, Carnimírië!

O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay!

O rowan mine, I saw you shine upon a summer's day,

Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft:

Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft!

O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey;

Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day.

O Orofarnë, Lassemista, Carnimírië!

The hobbits fell asleep to the sound of the soft singing of Bregalad, that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had loved.

The next day they spent also in his company, but they did not go far from his 'house'. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter of the bank; for the wind was colder, and the clouds closer and greyer; there was little sunshine, and in the distance the voices of the Ents at the Moot still rose and fell, sometimes loud and strong, sometimes low and sad, sometimes quickening, sometimes slow and solemn as a dirge. A second night came and still the Ents held conclave under hurrying clouds and fitful stars.

The third day broke, bleak and windy. At sunrise the Ents' voices rose to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning wore on the wind fell and the air grew heavy with expectancy. The hobbits could see that Bregalad was now listening intently, although to them, down in the dell of his ent-house, the sound of the Moot was faint.

The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains, sent out long yellow beams between the cracks and fissures of the clouds. Suddenly they were aware that everything was very quiet; the whole forest stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent-voices had stopped. What did that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense, looking back northwards towards Derndingle.

Then with a crash came a great ringing shout: ra-hoom-rah! The trees quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was another pause, and then a marching music began like solemn drums, and above the rolling beats and booms there welled voices singing high and strong.

We come, we come with roll of drum: ta-runda runda runda rom!

The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song:

We come, we come with horn and drum: ta-rûna rûna rûna rom!

Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house.

Before long they saw the marching line approaching: the Ents were swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them. Treebeard was at their head, and some fifty followers were behind him, two abreast, keeping step with their feet and beating time with their hands upon their flanks. As they drew near the flash and flicker of their eyes could be seen.

'Hoom, hom! Here we come with a boom, here we come at last!' called Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad and the hobbits. 'Come, join the Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!'

'To Isengard!' the Ents cried in many voices.

'To Isengard!'

To Isengard! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone;

Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone,

We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door;

For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars - we go to war!

To land of gloom with tramp of doom, with roll of drum, we come, we come;

To Isengard with doom we come!

With doom we come, with doom we come!

So they sang as they marched southwards.

Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into the line beside Treebeard. The old Ent now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoulders again, and so they rode proudly at the head of the singing company with beating hearts and heads held high. Though they had expected something to happen eventually, they were amazed at the change that had come over the Ents. It seemed now as sudden as the bursting of a flood that had long been held back by a dike.

'The Ents made up their minds rather quickly, after all, didn't they?' Pippin ventured to say after some time, when for a moment the singing paused, and only the beating of hands and feet was heard.

'Quickly?' said Treebeard. 'Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected. Indeed I have not seen them roused like this for many an age. We Ents do not like being roused; and we never are roused unless it is clear to us that our trees and our lives are in great danger. That has not happened in this Forest since the wars of Sauron and the Men of the Sea. It is the orc-work, the wanton hewing - rárum - without even the bad excuse of feeding the fires, that has so angered us; and the treachery of a neighbour, who should have helped us. Wizards ought to know better: they do know better. There is no curse in Elvish, Entish, or the tongues of Men bad enough for such treachery. Down with Saruman!'

'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?' asked Merry.

'Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps, how strong we are. Maybe you have heard of Trolls? They are mighty strong. But Trolls are only counterfeits, made by the Enemy in the Great Darkness, in mockery of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves. We are stronger than Trolls. We are made of the bones of the earth. We can split stone like the roots of trees, only quicker, far quicker, if our minds are roused! If we are not hewn down, or destroyed by fire or blast of sorcery, we could split Isengard into splinters and crack its walls into rubble.'

'But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?'

'Hm, ah, yes, that is so. I have not forgotten it. Indeed I have thought long about it. But, you see, many of the Ents are younger than I am, by many lives of trees. They are all roused now, and their mind is all on one thing: breaking Isengard. But they will start thinking again before long; they will cool down a little, when we take our evening drink. What a thirst we shall have! But let them march now and sing! We have a long way to go, and there is time ahead for thought. It is something to have started.'

Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a while. But after a time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin could see that his old brow was wrinkled and knotted. At last he looked up, and Pippin could see a sad look in his eyes, sad but not unhappy. There was a light in them, as if the green flame had sunk deeper into the dark wells of his thought.

'Of course, it is likely enough, my friends,' he said slowly, 'likely enough that we are going to our doom: the last march of the Ents. But if we stayed at home and did nothing, doom would find us anyway, sooner or later. That thought has long been growing in our hearts; and that is why we are marching now. It was not a hasty resolve. Now at least the last march of the Ents may be worth a song. Aye,' he sighed, 'we may help the other peoples before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the songs come true about the Entwives. I should dearly have liked to see Fimbrethil again. But there, my friends, songs like trees bear fruit only in their own time and their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.'

The Ents went striding on at a great pace. They had descended into a long fold of the land that fell away southward; now they began to climb up, and up, on to the high western ridge. The woods fell away and they came to scattered groups of birch, and then to bare slopes where only a few gaunt pine-trees grew. The sun sank behind the dark hill-back in front. Grey dusk fell.

Pippin looked behind. The number of the Ents had grown - or what was happening? Where the dim bare slopes that they had crossed should lie, he thought he saw groves of trees. But they were moving! Could it be that the trees of Fangorn were awake, and the forest was rising, marching over the hills to war? He rubbed his eyes wondering if sleep and shadow had deceived him; but the great grey shapes moved steadily onward. There was a noise like wind in many branches. The Ents were drawing near the crest of the ridge now, and all song had ceased. Night fell, and there was silence: nothing was to be heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the feet of the Ents, and a rustle, the shade of a whisper as of many drifting leaves. At last they stood upon the summit, and looked down into a dark pit: the great cleft at the end of the mountains: Nan Curunír, the Valley of Saruman.

'Night lies over Isengard,' said Treebeard.



Chapter 5
The White Rider
'My very bones are chilled,' said Gimli, flapping his arms and stamping his feet. Day had come at last. At dawn the companions had made such breakfast as they could; now in the growing light they were getting ready to search the ground again for signs of the hobbits.

'And do not forget that old man!' said Gimli. 'I should be happier if I could see the print of a boot.'

'Why would that make you happy?' said Legolas.

'Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more than he seemed,' answered the Dwarf.

'Maybe,' said the Elf; 'but a heavy boot might leave no print here: the grass is deep and springy.'

'That would not baffle a Ranger,' said Gimli. 'A bent blade is enough for Aragorn to read. But I do not expect him to find any traces. It was an evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night. I am sure of it, even under the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even now, maybe.'

'It is likely enough,' said Aragorn; 'yet I am not sure. I am thinking of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away. But I did not think so. Did you hear them, Legolas? Did they sound to you like beasts in terror?'

'No,' said Legolas. 'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our own fear I should have guessed that they were beasts wild with some sudden gladness. They spoke as horses will when they meet a friend that they have long missed.'

'So I thought,' said Aragorn; 'but I cannot read the riddle, unless they return. Come! The light is growing fast. Let us look first and guess later! We should begin here, near to our own camping-ground, searching carefully all about, and working up the slope towards the forest. To find the hobbits is our errand, whatever we may think of our visitor in the night. If they escaped by some chance, then they must have hidden in the trees, or they would have been seen. If we find nothing between here and the eaves of the wood, then we will make a last search upon the battle-field and among the ashes. But there is little hope there: the horsemen of Rohan did their work too well.'

For some time the companions crawled and groped upon the ground. The tree stood mournfully above them, its dry leaves now hanging limp, and rattling in the chill easterly wind. Aragorn moved slowly away. He came to the ashes of the watch-fire near the river-bank, and then began to retrace the ground back towards the knoll where the battle had been fought. Suddenly he stooped and bent low with his face almost in the grass. Then he called to the others. They came running up.

'Here at last we find news!' said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken leaf for them to see, a large pale leaf of golden hue, now fading and turning brown. 'Here is a mallorn-leaf of Lórien, and there are small crumbs on it, and a few more crumbs in the grass. And see! there are some pieces of cut cord lying nearby!'

'And here is the knife that cut them!' said Gimli. He stooped and drew out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it, a short jagged blade. The haft from which it had been snapped was beside it. 'It was an orc-weapon,' he said, holding it gingerly, and looking with disgust at the carved handle: it had been shaped like a hideous head with squinting eyes and leering mouth.

'Well, here is the strangest riddle that we have yet found!' exclaimed Legolas. 'A bound prisoner escapes both from the Orcs and from the surrounding horsemen. He then stops, while still in the open, and cuts his bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why? For if his legs were tied, how did he walk? And if his arms were tied, how did he use the knife? And if neither were tied, why did he cut the cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he then sat down and quietly ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show that he was a hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that, I suppose, he turned his arms into wings and flew away singing into the trees. It should be easy to find him: we only need wings ourselves!'

'There was sorcery here right enough,' said Gimli. 'What was that old man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Legolas. Can you better it?'

'Maybe, I could,' said Aragorn, smiling. 'There are some other signs near at hand that you have not considered. I agree that the prisoner was a hobbit and must have had either legs or hands free, before he came here. I guess that it was hands, because the riddle then becomes easier, and also because, as I read the marks, he was carried to this point by an Orc. Blood was spilled there, a few paces away, orc-blood. There are deep prints of hoofs all about this spot, and signs that a heavy thing was dragged away. The Orc was slain by horsemen, and later his body was hauled to the fire. But the hobbit was not seen: he was not "in the open", for it was night and he still had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and hungry, and it is not to be wondered at that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of his fallen enemy, he rested and ate a little before he crept away. But it is a comfort to know that he had some lembas in his pocket, even though he ran away without gear or pack; that, perhaps, is like a hobbit. I say he, though I hope and guess that both Merry and Pippin were here together. There is, however, nothing to show that for certain.'

'And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have a hand free?' asked Gimli.

'I do not know how it happened,' answered Aragorn. 'Nor do I know why an Orc was carrying them away. Not to help them to escape, we may be sure. Nay, rather I think that I now begin to understand a matter that has puzzled me from the beginning: why when Boromir had fallen were the Orcs content with the capture of Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out the rest of us, nor attack our camp; but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard. Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful comrade? I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such plain orders to Orcs, even if they knew so much themselves; they would not speak openly to them of the Ring: they are not trusty servants. But I think the Orcs had been commanded to capture hobbits, alive, at all costs. An attempt was made to slip out with the precious prisoners before the battle. Treachery perhaps, likely enough with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have been trying to escape with the prize alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale. Others might be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one at least of our friends escaped. It is our task to find him and help him before we return to Rohan. We must not be daunted by Fangorn, since need drove him into that dark place.'

'I do not know which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the long road through Rohan on foot,' said Gimli.

Yes, we have won, but only the first victor and that in itself increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and Mordor, which I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news I am not sure; but they did so. The Eye of Barad-dûr will be looking impatiently towards the Wizard's Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees the better.'

The road passed slowly, winding down the valley. Now further, and now nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night came down from the mountains. All the mists were gone. A chill wind blew. The moon, now waxing round, filled the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen. The shoulders of the mountain to their right sloped down to bare hills. The wide plains opened grey before them.

At last they halted. Then they turned aside, leaving the highway and taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile or so they came to a dale. It opened southward, leaning back into the slope of round Dol Baran, the last hill of the northern ranges, greenfooted, crowned with heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last year's bracken, among which the tight-curled fronds of spring were just thrusting through the sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes grew thick upon the low banks, and under them they made their camp, two hours or so before the middle of the night. They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of a spreading hawthorn, tall as a tree, writhen with age; but hale in every limb. Buds were swelling at each twig's tip.

Guards were set, two at a watch. The rest, after they had supped, wrapped themselves in a cloak and blanket and slept. The hobbits lay in a corner by themselves upon a pile of old bracken. Merry was sleepy, but Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he twisted and turned.

'What's the matter?' asked Merry. 'Are you lying on an ant-hill?'

'No,' said Pippin, 'but I'm not comfortable. I wonder how long it is since I slept in a bed?'

Merry yawned. 'Work it out on your fingers!' he said. 'But you must know how long it is since we left Lórien.'

'Oh, that!' said Pippin. 'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.'

'Well, Rivendell then,' said Merry. 'But I could sleep anywhere tonight.'

'You had the luck, Merry,' said Pippin softly, after a long pause. 'You were riding with Gandalf.'

'Well, what of it?'

'Did you get any news, any information out of him?'

'Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it: you were close by, and we were talking no secrets. But you can go with him tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him-and if he'll have you.'

'Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.'

'Oh yes, he is!' said Merry, waking up a little, and beginning to wonder what was bothering his companion. 'He has grown, or something. He can be both kinder and more alarming, merrier and more solemn than before, I think. He has changed; but we have not had a chance to see how much, yet. But think of the last part of that business with Saruman! Remember Saruman was once Gandalf's superior: head of the Council, whatever that may be exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the White now. Saruman came when he was told, and his rod was taken; and then he was just told to go, and he went!'

'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he's closer than ever that's all,' Pippin argued. 'That-glass ball, now. He seemed mighty pleased with it. He knows or guesses something about it. But does he tell us what? No, not a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved it from rolling into a pool. Here, I'll take that, my lad - that's all. I wonder what it is? It felt so very heavy.' Pippin's voice fell very low as if he was talking to himself.

'Hullo!' said Merry. 'So that's what is bothering you? Now, Pippin my lad, don't forget Gildor's saying - the one Sam used to quote: Do not meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger.'

'But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the affairs of Wizards,' said Pippin. 'I should like a bit of information as well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.'

'Go to sleep!' said Merry. 'You'll get information enough, sooner or later. My dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a Brandybuck for inquisitiveness; but is this the time, I ask you?'

'All right! What's the harm in my telling you what I should like: a look at that stone? I know I can't have it, with old Gandalf sitting on it, like a hen on an egg. But it doesn't help much to get no more from you than a you-can't-have-it so-go-to-sleep!'

'Well, what else could I say?' said Merry. 'I'm sorry, Pippin, but you really must wait till the morning. I'll be as curious as you like after breakfast, and I'll help in any way I can at wizard-wheedling. But I can't keep awake any longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good night!'

Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away; and it was not encouraged by the sound of Merry breathing softly, asleep in a few minutes after saying good night. 'The thought of the dark globe seemed to grow stronger as all grew quiet. Pippin felt again its weight in his hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths into which he had looked for a moment. He tossed and turned and tried to think of something else.

At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round. It was chilly, and he wrapped his cloak about him. The moon was shining cold and white, down into the dell, and the shadows of the bushes were black. All about lay sleeping shapes. The two guards were not in view: they were up on the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by some impulse that he did not understand, Pippin walked softly to where Gandalf lay. He looked down at him. The wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there was a glitter of eyes under his long lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily. But Gandalf made no sign; and drawn forward once more, half against his will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard's head. He was rolled in a blanket, with his cloak spread over the top; and close beside him, between his right side and his bent arm, there was a hummock, something round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand seemed only just to have slipped off it to the ground.

Hardly breathing, Pippin crept nearer, foot by foot. At last he knelt down. Then he put his hands out stealthily, and slowly lifted the lump up: it did not seem quite so heavy as he had expected. 'Only some bundle of oddments, perhaps, after all,' he thought with a strange sense of relief; but he did not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment clasping it. Then an idea came into his mind. He tiptoed away, found a large stone, and came back.

Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he looked at the thing that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and dead, lying bare before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in his own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf moved in his sleep, and muttered some words: they seemed to be in a strange tongue; his hand groped out and clasped the wrapped stone, then he sighed and did not move again.

'You idiotic fool!' Pippin muttered to himself. 'You're going to get yourself into frightful trouble. Put it back quick!' But he found now that his knees quaked, and he did not dare to go near enough to the wizard to reach the bundle. 'I'll never get it back now without waking him,' he thought, 'not till I'm a bit calmer. So I may as well have a look first. Not just here though!' He stole away, and sat down on a green hillock not far from his bed. The moon looked in over the edge of the dell.

Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball between them. He bent low over it, looking like a greedy child stooping over a bowl of food, in a corner away from others. He drew his cloak aside and gazed at it. The air seemed still and tense about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet, with the moonlight gleaming on its surface. Then there came a faint glow and stir in the heart of it, and it held his eyes, so that now he could not look away. Soon all the inside seemed on fire; the ball was spinning, or the lights within were revolving. Suddenly the lights went out. He gave a gasp and struggled; but he remained bent, clasping the ball with both hands. Closer and closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly for a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still.

The cry was piercing. The guards leapt down from the banks. All the camp was soon astir.

'So this is the thief!' said Gandalf. Hastily he cast his cloak over the globe where it lay. 'But you, Pippin! This is a grievous turn to things!' He knelt by Pippin's body: the hobbit was lying on his back rigid, with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. 'The devilry! What mischief has he done-to himself, and to all of us?' The wizard's face was drawn and haggard.

He took Pippin's hand and bent over his face, listening for his breath; then he laid his hands on his brow. The hobbit shuddered. His eyes closed. He cried out; and sat up. staring in bewilderment at all the faces round him, pale in the moonlight.

'It is not for you, Saruman!' he cried in a shrill and toneless voice shrinking away from Gandalf. 'I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!' Then he struggled to get up and escape but Gandalf held him gently and firmly.

'Peregrin Took!' he said. 'Come back!'

The hobbit relaxed and fell back, clinging to the wizard's hand. 'Gandalf!' he cried. 'Gandalf! Forgive me!'

'Forgive you?' said the wizard. 'Tell me first what you have done!'

'I, I took the ball and looked at it,' stammered Pippin; 'and I saw things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn't. And then he came and questioned me; and he looked at me, and, and that is all I remember.'

'That won't do,' said Gandalf sternly. 'What did you see, and what did you say?'

Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared at him in silence, except Merry who turned away. But Gandalf's face was still hard. 'Speak!' he said.

In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words grew clearer and stronger. 'I saw a dark sky, and tall battlements,' he said. 'And tiny stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and clear. Then the stars went in and out-they were cut off by things with wings. Very big, I think, really; but in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round the tower. I thought there were nine of them. One began to fly straight towards me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible - no, no! I can't say.

'I tried to get away, because I thought it would fly out; but when it had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he came. He did not speak so that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood.

'"So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?"

'I did not answer. He said: "Who are you?" I still did not answer, but it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: "A hobbit."

'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel. It was like being stabbed with knives. I struggled. But he said: "Wait a moment! We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman that this dainty is not for him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!"

'Then he gloated over me. I felt I was falling to pieces. No, no! I can't say any more. I don't remember anything else.'

'Look at me!' said Gandalf.

Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a moment in silence. Then his face grew gentler, and the shadow of a smile appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin's head.

'All right!' he said. 'Say no more! You have taken no harm. There is no lie in your eyes, as I feared. But he did not speak long with you. A fool, but an honest fool, you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might have done worse in such a pass. But mark this! You have been saved, and all your friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count on it a second time. If he had questioned you, then and there, almost certainly you would have told all that you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too eager. He did not want information only: he wanted you, quickly, so that he could deal with you in the Dark Tower, slowly. Don't shudder! If you will meddle in the affairs of Wizards, you must be prepared to think of such things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as evilly as they might.'

He lifted Pippin gently and carried him back to his bed. Merry followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can, Pippin!' said Gandalf. 'Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms again, tell me of it! Such things can be cured. But anyway, my dear hobbit, don't put a lump of rock under my elbow again! Now, I will leave you two together for a while.'

With that Gandalf returned to the others, who were still standing by the Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. 'Peril comes in the night when least expected,' he said. 'We have had a narrow escape!'

'How is the hobbit, Pippin?' asked Aragorn.

'I think all will be well now,' answered Gandalf. 'He was not held long, and hobbits have an amazing power of recovery. The memory, or the horror of it, will probably fade quickly. Too quickly, perhaps. Will you, Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.'

'Dangerous indeed, but not to all,' said Aragorn. 'There is one who may claim it by right. For this assuredly is the palantír of Orthanc from the treasury of Elendil, set here by the Kings of Gondor. Now my hour draws near. I will take it.'

Gandalf looked at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others, he lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it.

'Receive it, lord!' he said: 'in earnest of other things that shall be given back. But if I may counsel you in the use of your own, do not use it - yet! Be wary!'

'When have I been hasty or unwary, who have waited and prepared for so many long years?' said Aragorn.

'Never yet. Do not then stumble at the end of the road,' answered Gandalf. 'But at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that stand here! The hobbit, Peregrin, above all should not know where it is bestowed. The evil fit may come on him again. For alas! he has handled it and looked in it, as should never have happened. He ought never to have touched it in Isengard, and there I should have been quicker. But my mind was bent on Saruman, and I did not at once guess the nature of the Stone. Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!'

'Yes, there can be no doubt,' said Aragorn. 'At last we know the link' between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is explained.' 'Strange powers have our enemies, and strange weaknesses!' said Théoden. 'But it has long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar.'

'That many times is seen,' said Gandalf. 'But at this time we have been strangely fortunate. Maybe, I have been saved by this hobbit from a grave blunder. I had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not ready for such a trial, if indeed I shall ever be so: But even if I found the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for him to see me, yet - until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.'

'That hour is now come, I think,' said Aragorn.

'Not yet,' said Gandalf. 'There remains a short while of doubt which we must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that the Stone was in Orthanc - why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit was captive there, driven to look in the glass for his torment by Saruman. That dark mind will be filled now with the voice and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it may take some time before he learns his error. We must snatch that time. We have been too leisurely. We must move. The neighbourhood of Isengard is no place now to linger in. I will ride ahead at once with Peregrin Took. It will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.'

'I will keep Éomer and ten Riders,' said the king. 'They shall ride with me at early day. The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they have a mind.'

'As you will,' said Gandalf. 'But make all the speed you may to the cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!'

At that moment a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to be suddenly cut off. Several of the Riders cried out, and crouched, holding their arms above their heads, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind fear and a deadly cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast winged shape passed over the moon like a black cloud. It wheeled and went north, flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle-earth. The stars fainted before it. It was gone.

They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and downwards, stiff, his hands clenched.

'Nazgûl!' he cried. 'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The Nazgûl have crossed the River! Ride, ride! Wait not for the dawn! Let not the swift wait for the slow! Ride!'

He sprang away, calling Shadowfax as he ran. Aragorn followed him. Going to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. 'You shall come with me this time,' he said. 'Shadowfax shall show you his paces.' Then he ran to the place where he had slept. Shadowfax stood there already. Slinging the small bag which was all his luggage across his shoulders, the wizard leapt upon the horse's back. Aragorn lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf's arms, ,wrapped in cloak and blanket.

'Farewell! Follow fast!' cried Gandalf. 'Away, Shadowfax!'

The great horse tossed his head. His flowing tail flicked in the moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the earth, and was gone like the north wind from the mountains.

'A beautiful, restful night!' said Merry to Aragorn. 'Some folk have wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf - and there he goes! Instead of being turned into a stone himself to stand here for ever as a warning.'

'If you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not he, how would it be now?' said Aragorn. 'You might have done worse. Who can say? But now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At once. Go and get ready, and bring anything that Pippin left behind. Make haste!'

Over the plains Shadowfax was flying, needing no urging and no guidance. Less than an hour had passed, and they had reached the Fords of Isen and crossed them. The Mound of the Riders and its cold spears lay grey behind them.

Pippin was recovering. He was warm, but the wind in his face was keen and refreshing. He was with Gandalf. The horror of the stone and of the hideous shadow over the moon was fading, things left behind in the mists of the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew a deep breath.

'I did not know you rode bare-back, Gandalf,' he said. 'You haven't a saddle or a bridle!'

'I do not ride elf-fashion, except on Shadowfax,' said Gandalf. 'But Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax: he is willing to carry you-or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It is then his business to see that you remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.'

'How fast is he going?' asked Pippin. 'Fast by the wind, but very smooth. And how light his footfalls are!'

'He is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop,' answered Gandalf; 'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see how the White Mountains are drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the Thrihyrne peaks like black spears. It will not be long before we reach the branching roads and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.'

Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly to himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as the miles ran under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught the words: a few lines came clear to his ears through the rushing of the wind:

Tall ships and tall kings

Three times three,

What brought they from the foundered land

Over the flowing sea?

Seven stars and seven stones

And one white tree.

'What are you saying, Gandalf?' asked Pippin.

'I was just running over some of the Rhymes of Lore in my mind ' answered the wizard. 'Hobbits, I suppose, have forgotten them, even those that they ever knew.'

'No, not all,' said Pippin. 'And we have many of our own, which wouldn't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard this one. What is it about - the seven stars and seven stones?'

'About the palantíri of the Kings of Old,' said Gandalf.

'And what are they?'

'The name meant that which looks far away. The Orthanc-stone was one.'

'Then it was not made, not made' - Pippin hesitated - 'by the Enemy?'

'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor by Saruman. It is beyond his art, and beyond Sauron's too. The palantíri came from beyond Westernesse from Eldamar. The Noldor made them. Fëanor himself, maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is nothing that Sauron cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for Saruman! It was his downfall, as I now perceive. Perilous to us all are the devices of an art deeper than we possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool! to keep it secret, for his own profit. No word did he ever speak of it to any of the Council. We had not yet given thought to the fate of the palantíri of Gondor in its ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even in Gondor they were a secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of lore among the Dúnedain.'

'What did the Men of old use them for?' asked Pippin, delighted and astonished at getting answers to so many questions, and wondering how long it would last.

'To see far off, and to converse in thought with one another,' said Gandalf. 'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring of Isengard. The chief and master of these was under the Dome of Stars at Osgiliath before its ruin. The three others were far away in the North. In the house of Elrond it is told that they were at Annúminas, and Amon Sûl, and Elendil's Stone was on the Tower Hills that look towards Mithlond in the Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie.

'Each palantír replied to each, but all those in Gondor were ever open to the view of Osgiliath. Now it appears that, as the rock of Orthanc has withstood the storms of time, so there the palantír of that tower has remained. But alone it could do nothing but see small images of things far off and days remote. Very useful, no doubt, that was to Saruman; yet it seems that he was not content. Further and further abroad he gazed, until he cast his gaze upon Barad-dûr. Then he was caught!

'Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie buried, or drowned deep? But one. at least Sauron must have obtained and mastered to his purposes. I guess that it was the Ithil-stone, for he took Minas Ithil long ago and turned it into an evil place: Minas Morgul, it has become.

'Easy it is now to guess how quickly the roving eye of Saruman was trapped and held; and how ever since he has been persuaded from afar, and daunted when persuasion would not serve. The biter bit, the hawk under the eagle's foot, the spider in a steel web! How long, I wonder, has he been constrained to come often to his glass for inspection and instruction, and the Orthanc-stone so bent towards Barad-dûr that, if any save a will of adamant now looks into it, it will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither? And how it draws one to itself! Have I not felt it? Even now my heart desires to test my will upon it, to see if I could not wrench it from him and turn it where I would-to look across the wide seas of water and of time to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Fëanor at their work, while both the White Tree and the Golden were in flower!' He sighed and fell silent.

'I wish I had known all this before,' said Pippin. 'I had no notion of what I was doing.'

'Oh yes, you had,' said Gandalf. 'You knew you were behaving wrongly and foolishly; and you told yourself so, though you did not listen. I did not tell you all this before, because it is only by musing on all that has happened that I have at last understood, even as we ride together. But if I had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier to resist. On the contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After that advice about fire goes to the heart.'

'It does,' said Pippin. 'If all the seven stones were laid out before me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.'

'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped.'

'But I should like to know-' Pippin began.

'Mercy!' cried Gandalf. 'If the giving of information is to be the cure of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my days in answering you. What more do you want to know?'

'The names of all the stars, and of all living things, and the whole history of Middle-earth and Over-heaven and of the Sundering Seas ' laughed Pippin. 'Of course! What less? But I am not in a hurry tonight. At the moment I was just wondering about the black shadow. I heard you shout "messenger of Mordor". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?'

'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgûl,' said Gandalf. 'It could have taken you away to the Dark Tower.'

'But it was not coming for me, was it?' faltered Pippin. 'I mean, it didn't know that I had… '

'Of course not,' said Gandalf. 'It is two hundred leagues or more in straight flight from Barad-dûr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgûl would take a few hours to fly between them. But Saruman certainly looked in the Stone since the orc-raid, and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been read than he intended. A messenger has been sent to find out what he is doing. And after what has happened tonight another will come, I think, and swiftly. So Saruman will come to the last pinch of the vice that he has put his hand in. He has no captive to send. He has no Stone to see with, and cannot answer the summons. Sauron will only believe that he is withholding the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will not help Saruman to tell the truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe in Orthanc. So whether he will or no, he will appear a rebel. Yet he rejected us, so as to avoid that very thing! What he will do in such a plight, I cannot guess. He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc, to resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap the Nazgûl, or at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the air. In that case let Rohan look to its horses!

'But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It may be that the counsels of the Enemy will be confused, or hindered by his wrath with Saruman. It may be that he will learn that I was there and stood upon the stairs of Orthanc-with hobbits at my tail. Or that an heir of Elendil lives and stood beside me. If Wormtongue was not deceived by the armour of Rohan, he would remember Aragorn and the title that he claimed. That is what I fear. And so we fly - not from danger but into greater danger. Every stride of Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.'

Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden chill had struck him. Grey land passed under them.

'See now!' said Gandalf. 'The Westfold dales are opening before us. Here we come back to the eastward road. The dark shadow yonder is the mouth of the Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond and the Glittering Caves. Do not ask me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time you may get an answer longer than you wish. You will not see the caves yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.'

'I thought you were going to stop at Helm's Deep!' said Pippin. 'Where are you going then?'

'To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.'

'Oh! And how far is that?'

'Leagues upon leagues,' answered Gandalf. 'Thrice as far as the dwellings of King Théoden, and they are more than a hundred miles east from here, as the messengers of Mordor fly. Shadowfax must run a longer road. Which will prove the swifter?

'We shall ride now till daybreak, and that is some hours away. Then even Shadowfax must rest, in some hollow of the hills: at Edoras, I hope. Sleep, if you can! You may see the first glimmer of dawn upon the golden roof of the house of Eorl. And in two days thence you shall see the purple shadow of Mount Mindolluin and the walls of the tower of Denethor white in the morning.

'Away now, Shadowfax! Run, greatheart, run as you have never run before! Now we are come to the lands where you were foaled and every stone you know. Run now! Hope is in speed!'

Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet had summoned him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire flew from his feet; night rushed over him.

As he fell slowly into sleep, Pippin had a strange feeling: he and Gandalf were still as stone, seated upon the statue of a running horse, while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of wind.





Book IV


Chapter 1
The Taming of Sméagol
'Well, master, we're in a fix and no mistake,' said Sam Gamgee. He stood despondently with hunched shoulders beside Frodo, and peered out with puckered eyes into the gloom.

It was the third evening since they had fled from the Company, as far as they could tell: they had almost lost count of the hours during which they had climbed and laboured among the barren slopes and stones of the Emyn Muil, sometimes retracing their steps because they could find no way forward, sometimes discovering that they had wandered in a circle back to where they had been hours before. Yet on the whole they had worked steadily eastward, keeping as near as they could find a way to the outer edge of this strange twisted knot of hills. But always they found its outward faces sheer, high and impassable, frowning over the plain below; beyond its tumbled skirts lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not even a bird was to be seen.

The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff, bare and bleak, its feet wrapped in mist; and behind them rose the broken highlands crowned with drifting cloud. A chill wind` blew from the East. Night was gathering over the shapeless lands before them; the sickly green of them was fading to a sullen brown. Far away to the right the Anduin, that had gleamed fitfully in sun-breaks during the day, was now hidden in shadow. But their eyes did not look beyond the River, back to Gondor, to their friends, to the lands of Men. South and east they stared to where, at the edge of the oncoming night, a dark line hung, like distant mountains of motionless smoke. Every now and again a tiny red gleam far away flickered upwards on the rim of earth and sky.

`What a fix! ' said Sam. `That's the one place in all the lands we've ever heard of that we don't want to see any closer; and that's the one place we're trying to get to! And that's just where we can't get, nohow. We've come the wrong way altogether, seemingly. We can't get down; and if we did get down, we'd find all that green land a nasty bog, I'll warrant. Phew! Can you smell it?' He sniffed at the wind.

'Yes, I can smell it,' said Frodo, but he did not move, and his eyes remained fixed, staring out towards the dark line and the flickering flame. `Mordor! ' he muttered under his breath. 'If I must go there I wish I could come there quickly and make an end! ' He shuddered. The wind was chilly and yet heavy with an odour of cold decay. `Well,' he said, at last withdrawing his eyes, `we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more sheltered spot, and camp once more; and perhaps another day will show us a path.'

'Or another and another and another,' muttered Sam. `Or maybe no day. We've come the wrong way.'

'I wonder,' said Frodo. 'It's my doom, I think, to go to that Shadow yonder, so that a way will be found. But will good or evil show it to me? What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy's hands-and here I am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us? All my choices have proved ill. I should have left the Company long before, and come down from the North, east of the River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard of Battle Plain to the passes of Mordor. But now it isn't possible for you and me alone to find a way back, and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank. Every day that passes is a precious day lost. I am tired, Sam. I don't know what is to be done. What food have we got left?'

'Only those, what d'you call 'em, lembas, Mr. Frodo. A fair supply. But they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought, though, when I first set tooth in them, that I should ever come to wish for a change. But I do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug - aye, half a mug - of beer would go down proper. I've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last camp, and what use has it been? Naught to make a fire with, for a start; and naught to cook, not even grass!'

They turned away and went down into a stony hollow. The westering sun was caught into clouds, and night came swiftly. They slept as well as they could for the cold, turn and turn about, in a nook among great jagged pinnacles of weathered rock; at least they were sheltered from the easterly wind.

`Did you see them again, Mr. Frodo?' asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and chilled, munching wafers of lembas, in the cold grey of early morning.

'No,' said Frodo. `I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights now.'

`Nor me,' said Sam. `Grrr! Those eyes did give me a turn! But perhaps we've shaken him off at last, the miserable slinker. Gollum! I'll give him gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.'

'I hope you'll never need to,' said Frodo. `I don't know how he followed us; but it may be that he's lost us again, as you say. In this dry bleak land we can't leave many footprints, nor much scent, even for his snuffling nose.'

'I hope that's the way of it,' said Sam. 'I wish we could be rid of him for good!'

'So do I,' said Frodo; 'but he's not my chief trouble. I wish we could get away from these hills! I hate them. I feel all naked on the east side, stuck up here with nothing but the dead flats between me and that Shadow yonder. There's an Eye in it. Come on! We've got to get down today somehow.'

But that day wore on, and when afternoon faded towards evening they were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of escape.

Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied that they heard faint sounds behind them, a stone falling, or the imagined step of flapping feet on the rock. But if they halted and stood still listening, they heard no more, nothing but the wind sighing over the edges of the stones - yet even that reminded them of breath softly hissing through sharp teeth.

All that day the outer ridge of the Emyn Muil had been bending gradually northward, as they struggled on. Along its brink there now stretched a wide tumbled flat of scored and weathered rock, cut every now and again by trench-like gullies that sloped steeply down to deep notches in the cliff-face. To find a path in these clefts, which were becoming deeper and more frequent, Frodo and Sam were driven to their left, well away from the edge, and they did not notice that for several miles they had been going slowly but steadily downhill: the cliff-top was sinking towards the level of the lowlands.

At last they were brought to a halt. The ridge took a sharper bend northward and was gashed by a deeper ravine. On the further side it reared up again, many fathoms at a single leap: a great grey cliff loomed before them, cut sheer down as if by a knife stroke. They could go no further forwards, and must turn now either west or east. But west would lead them only into more labour and delay, back towards the heart of the hills; east would take them to the outer precipice.

`There's nothing for it but to scramble down this gully, Sam,' said Frodo. `Let's see what it leads to!'

'A nasty drop, I'll bet,' said Sam.

The cleft was longer and deeper than it seemed. Some way down they found a few gnarled and stunted trees, the first they had seen for days: twisted birch for the most part, with here and there a fir-tree. Many were dead and gaunt, bitten to the core by the eastern winds. Once in milder days there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine, but now, after some fifty yards, the trees came to an end, though old broken stumps straggled on almost to the cliff's brink. The bottom of the gully, which lay along the edge of a rock-fault, was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply down. When they came at last to the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out.

`Look!' he said. `We must have come down a long way, or else the cliff has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks easier too.'

Sam knelt beside him and peered reluctantly over the edge. Then he glanced up at the great cliff rising up, away on their left. `Easier! ' he grunted. `Well, I suppose it's always easier getting down than up. Those as can't fly can jump!'

`It would be a big jump still,' said Frodo. `About, well' - he stood for a moment measuring it with his eyes - `about eighteen fathoms I should guess. Not more.'

'And that's enough! ' said Sam. `Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a height! But looking's better than climbing.'

`All the same,' said Frodo, `I think we could climb here; and I think we shall have to try. See - the rock is quite different from what it was a few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.'

The outer fall was indeed no longer sheer, but sloped outwards a little. It looked like a great rampart or sea-wall whose foundations had shifted, so that its courses were all twisted and disordered, leaving great fissures and long slanting edges that were in places almost as wide as stairs.

`And if we're going to try and get down, we had better try at once. It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.'

The smoky blur of the mountains in the East was lost in a deeper blackness that was already reaching out westwards with long arms. There was a distant mutter of thunder borne on the rising breeze. Frodo sniffed the air and looked up doubtfully at the sky. He strapped his belt outside his cloak and tightened it, and settled his light pack on his back; then he stepped towards the edge. `I'm going to try it,' he said.

`Very good! ' said Sam gloomily. `But I'm going first.'

'You? ' said Frodo. `What's made you change your mind about climbing?'

'I haven't changed my mind. But it's only sense: put the one lowest as is most likely to slip. I don't want to come down atop of you and knock you off no sense in killing two with one fall.'

Before Frodo could stop him, he sat down, swung his legs over the brink, and twisted round, scrabbling with his toes for a foothold. It is doubtful if he ever did anything braver in cold blood, or more unwise.

'No, no! Sam, you old ass! ' said Frodo. `You'll kill yourself for certain going over like that without even a look to see what to make for. Come back! ' He took Sam under the armpits and hauled him up again. 'Now, wait a bit and be patient! ' he said. Then he lay on the ground, leaning out and looking down: but the light seemed to be fading quickly, although the sun had not yet set. 'I think we could manage this,' he said presently. `I could at any rate; and you could too. if you kept your head and followed me carefully.'

`I don't know how you can be so sure,' said Sam. `Why! You can't see to the bottom in this light. What if you comes to a place where there's nowhere to put your feet or your hands?'

'Climb back, I suppose,' said Frodo.

'Easy said,' objected Sam. 'Better wait till morning and more light.'

`No! Not if I can help it,' said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence. `I grudge every hour, every minute. I'm going down to try it out. Don't you follow till I come back or call!'

Gripping the stony lip of the fall with his fingers he let himself gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, his toes found a ledge. 'On_ e step down! ' he said. 'And this ledge broadens out to the right. I could stand there without a hold. I'll-' his words were cut short.

The hurrying darkness, now gathering great speed, rushed up from the East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack of thunder right overhead. Searing lightning smote down into the hills. Then came a blast of savage wind, and with it, mingling with its roar, there came a high shrill shriek. The hobbits had heard just such a cry far away in the Marish as they fled from Hobbiton, and even there in the woods of the Shire it had frozen their blood. Out here in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced them with cold blades of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam fell flat on his face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands over his head and ears. He swayed, slipped, and slithered downwards with a wailing cry.

Sam heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. 'Master, master! ' he called. 'Master!'.

He heard no answer. He found he was shaking all over, but he gathered his breath, and once again he shouted: 'Master!' The wind seemed to blow his voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring up the gully and away over the hills, a faint answering cry came to his ears:

'All right, all right! I'm here. But I can't see.'

Frodo was calling with a weak voice. ,He was not actually very far away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his feet on a wider ledge not many yards lower down. Fortunately the rock-face at this point leaned well back and the wind had pressed him against the cliff, so that he had not toppled over. He steadied himself a little, laying his face against the cold stone, feeling his heart pounding. But either the darkness had grown complete, or else his eyes had lost their sight. All was black about him. He wondered if he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath.

`Come back! Come back! ' he heard Sam's voice out of the blackness above.

`I can't,' he said. `I can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't move yet.'

`What can I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do? ' shouted Sam, leaning out dangerously far. Why could not his master see? It was dim, certainly, but not as dark as all that. He could see Frodo below him, a grey forlorn figure splayed against the cliff. But he was far out of the reach of any helping hand.

There was another crack of thunder; and then the rain came. In a blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter cold.

'I'm coming down to you,' shouted Sam, though how he hoped to help in that way he could not have said.

`No, no! wait! ' Frodo called back, more strongly now. `I shall be better soon. I feel better already. Wait! You can't do anything without a rope.'

`Rope!' cried Sam, talking wildly to himself in his excitement and relief. `Well, if I don't deserve to be hung on the end of one as a warning to numbskulls! You're nowt but a ninnyhammer, Sam Gamgee: that's what the Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a word of his. Rope!'

`Stop chattering!' cried Frodo, now recovered enough to feel both amused and annoyed. 'Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself you've got some rope in your pocket? If so, out with it!

`Yes, Mr. Frodo, in my pack and all. Carried it hundreds of miles and I'd clean forgotten it!'

`Then get busy and let an end down!'

Quickly Sam unslung his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed at the bottom was a coil of the silken-grey rope made by the folk of Lórien. He cast an end to his master. The darkness seemed to lift from Frodo's eyes, or else his sight was returning. He could see the grey line as it came dangling down, and he thought it had a faint silver sheen. Now that he had some point in the darkness to fix his eyes on, he felt less giddy. Leaning his weight forward, he made the end fast round his waist, and then he grasped the line with both hands.

Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or two from the edge. Half hauled, half scrambling. Frodo came up and threw himself on the ground.

Thunder growled and rumbled in the distance, and the rain was still falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully; but they did not find much shelter there. Rills of water began to run down; soon they grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on the stones, and spouted out over the cliff like the gutters of a vast roof.

`I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,' said Frodo. 'What a piece of luck you had that rope!'

`Better luck if I'd thought of it sooner,' said Sam. 'Maybe you remember them putting the ropes in the boats, as we started off: in the elvish country. I took a fancy to it, and I stowed a coil in my pack. Years ago, it seems. "It may be a help in many needs," he said: Haldir, or one of those folk. And he spoke right.'

`A pity I didn't think of bringing another length,' said Frodo; `but I left the Company in such a hurry and confusion. If only we had enough we could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?'

Sam paid it out slowly, measuring it with his arms: 'Five, ten, twenty, thirty ells, more or less,' he said.

'Who'd have thought it!' Frodo exclaimed.

`Ah! Who would? ' said Sam. `Elves are wonderful folk. It looks a bit thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the hand. Packs close too, and as light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!'

`Thirty ells! ' said Frodo considering. 'I believe it would be enough. If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.'

`The rain's nearly given over already,' said Sam; 'but don't you go doing anything risky in the dim again, Mr. Frodo! And I haven't got over that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider it sounded-but one up in the air, if they can fly. I'm thinking we'd best lay up in this crack till night's over.'

'And I'm thinking that I won't spend a moment longer than I need stuck up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes,' said Frodo.

With that he stood up and went down to the bottom of the gully again. He looked out. Clear sky was growing in the East once more. The skirts of the storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the main battle had passed to spread its great wings over the Emyn Muil; upon which the dark thought of Sauron brooded for a while. Thence it turned, smiting the Vale of Anduin with hail and lightning, and casting its shadow upon Minas Tirith with threat of war. Then, lowering in the mountains, and gathering its great spires, it rolled on slowly over Gondor and the skirts of Rohan, until far away the Riders on the plain saw its black towers moving behind the sun, as they rode into the West. But here, over the desert and the reeking marshes the deep blue sky of evening opened once more, and a few pallid stars appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon.

`It's good to be able to see again,' said Frodo, breathing deep. `Do you know, I thought for a bit that I had lost my sight? From the lightning or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.'

`It does look sort of silver in the dark,' said Sam. `Never noticed it before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out since I first stowed it. But if you're so set on climbing, Mr. Frodo, how are you going to use it? Thirty ells, or say, about eighteen fathom: that's no more than your guess at the height of the cliff.'

Frodo thought for a while. `Make it fast to that stump, Sam! ' he said. `Then I think you shall have your wish this time and go first. I'll lower you, and you need do no more than use your feet and hands to fend yourself off the rock. Though, if you put your weight on some of the ledges and give me a rest, it will help. When you're down, I'll follow. I feel quite myself again now.'

'Very well,' said Sam heavily. `If it must be, let's get it over! ' He took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest to the brink; then the other end he tied about his own waist. Reluctantly he turned and prepared to go over the edge a second time.

It did not, however, turn out half as bad as he had expected. The rope seemed to give him confidence, though he shut his eyes more than once when he looked down between his feet. There was one awkward spot, where there was no ledge and the wall was sheer and even undercut for a short space; there he slipped and swung out on the silver line. But Frodo lowered him slowly and steadily, and it was over at last. His chief fear had been that the rope-length would give out while he was still high up, but there was still a good bight in Frodo's hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: `I'm down! ' His voice came up clearly from below, but Frodo could not see him; his grey elven-cloak had melted into the twilight.

Frodo took rather more time to follow him. He had the rope about his waist and it was fast above, and he had shortened it so that it would pull him up before he reached the ground; still he did not want to risk a fall, and he had not quite Sam's faith in this slender grey line. He found two places, all the same, where he had to trust wholly to it: smooth surfaces where there was no hold even for his strong hobbit fingers and the ledges were far apart. But at last he too was down.

`Well!' he cried. `We've done it! We've escaped from the Emyn Muil! And now what next, I wonder? Maybe we shall soon be sighing for good hard rock under foot again.'

But Sam did not answer: he was staring back up the cliff. `Ninnyhammers! ' he said. `Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied to a stump, and we're at the bottom. Just as nice a little stair for that slinking Gollum as we could leave. Better put up a signpost to say which way we've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.'

`If you can think of any way we could have both used the rope and yet brought it down with us, then you can pass on to me ninnyhammer, or any other name your Gaffer gave you,' said Frodo. `Climb up and untie it and let yourself down, if you want to!'

Sam scratched his head. `No, I can't think how, begging your pardon,' he said. `But I don't like leaving it, and that's a fact.' He stroked the rope's end and shook it gently. `It goes hard parting with anything I brought out of the Elf-country. Made by Galadriel herself, too, maybe. Galadriel,' he murmured nodding his head mournfully. He looked up and gave one last pull to the rope as if in farewell.

To the complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam fell over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down on top of him. Frodo laughed. `Who tied the rope? ' he said. `A good thing it held as long as it did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!'

Sam did not laugh. `I may not be much good at climbing, Mr. Frodo,' he said in injured tones, `but I do know something about rope and about knots. It's in the family, as you might say. Why, my grand-dad, and my uncle Andy after him, him that was the Gaffer's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over by Tighfield many a year. And I put as fast a hitch over the stump as any one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.'

`Then the rope must have broken - frayed on the rock-edge, I expect,' said Frodo.

`I bet it didn't! ' said Sam in an even more injured voice. He stooped and examined the ends. `Nor it hasn't neither. Not a strand!'

'Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot,' said Frodo.

Sam shook his head and did not answer. He was passing the rope through his fingers thoughtfully. `Have it your own way, Mr. Frodo,' he said at last, `but I think the rope came off itself - when I called.' He coiled it up and stowed it lovingly in his pack.

'It certainly came,' said Frodo, `and that's the chief thing. But now we've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful the stars are, and the Moon!'

'They do cheer the heart, don't they? ' said Sam looking up. 'Elvish they are. somehow. And the Moon's growing. We haven't seen him for a night or two in this cloudy weather. He's beginning to give quite a light.'

'Yes,' said Frodo; `but he won't be full for some days. I don't think we'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.'

Under the first shadows of night they started out on the next stage of their journey. After a while Sam turned and looked back at the way they had come. The mouth of the gully was a black notch in the dim cliff. `I'm glad we've got the rope,' he said. 'We've set a little puzzle for that footpad, anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!'

They picked their steps away from the skirts of the cliff, among a wilderness of boulders and rough stones, wet and slippery with the heavy rain. The ground still fell away sharply. They had not gone very far when they came upon a great fissure that yawned suddenly black before their feet. It was not wide, but it was too wide to jump across in the dim light. They thought they could hear water gurgling in its depths. It curved away on their left northward, back towards the hills. and so barred their road in that direction, at any rate while darkness lasted.

'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I think,' said Sam. `We might find some nook there, or even a cave or something.'

'I suppose so,' said Frodo. 'I'm tired. and I don't think I can scramble among stones much longer tonight - though I grudge the delay. I wish there was a clear path in front of us: then I'd go on till my legs gave way.'

They did not find the going any easier at the broken feet of the Emyn Muil. Nor did Sam find any nook or hollow to shelter in: only bare stony slopes frowned over by the cliff, which now rose again, higher and more sheer as they went back. In the end, worn out, they just cast themselves on the ground under the lee of a boulder lying not far from the foot of the precipice. There for some time they sat huddled mournfully together in the cold stony night, while sleep crept upon them in spite of all they could do to hold it off. The moon now rode high and clear. Its thin white light lit up the faces of the rocks and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff, turning all the wide looming darkness into a chill pale grey scored with black shadows.

'Well! ' said Frodo, standing up and drawing his cloak more closely round him. `You sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket. I'll walk up and down on sentry for a while.' Suddenly he stiffened, and stooping he gripped Sam by the arm. `What's that? ' he whispered. `Look over there on the cliff!'

Sam looked and breathed in sharply through his teeth. `Ssss!' he said. 'That's what it is. It's that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And to think that I thought that we'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at him! Like a nasty crawling spider on a wall.'

Down the face of a precipice, sheer and almost smooth it seemed in the pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin limbs splayed out. Maybe its soft clinging hands and toes were finding crevices and holds that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but it looked as if it was just creeping down on sticky pads, like some large prowling thing of insect-kind. And it was coming down head first, as if it was smelling its way. Now and again it lifted its head slowly, turning it right back on its long skinny neck, and the hobbits caught a glimpse of two small pale gleaming lights, its eyes that blinked at the moon for a moment and then were quickly lidded again.

`Do you think he can see us? ' said Sam.

`I don't know,' said Frodo quietly, `but I think not. It is hard even for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot see you in the shadow even at a few paces. And I've heard that he doesn't like Sun or Moon.'

`Then why is he coming down just here? ' asked Sam.

'Quietly, Sam! ' said Frodo. `He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear as keen as Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something now: our voices probably. We did a lot of shouting away back there; and we were talking far too loudly until a minute ago.'

`Well, I'm sick of him,' said Sam. `He's come once too often for me and I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. I don't suppose we could give him the slip now anyway.' Drawing his grey hood well over his face, Sam crept stealthily towards the cliff.

`Careful!' whispered Frodo coming behind. `Don't alarm him! He's much more dangerous than he looks.'

The black crawling shape was now three-quarters of the way down, and perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff's foot. Crouching stone-still in the shadow of a large boulder the hobbits watched him. He seemed to have come to a difficult passage or to be troubled about something. They could hear him snuffling, and now and again there was a harsh hiss of breath that sounded like a curse. He lifted his head, and they thought they heard him spit. Then he moved on again. Now they could hear his voice creaking and whistling.

`Ach, sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste less speed. We musstn't rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious - gollum!' He lifted his head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his eyes. `We hate it,' he hissed. `Nassty, nassty shivery light it is - sss - it spies on us, precious - it hurts our eyes.'

He was getting lower now and the hisses became sharper and clearer. 'Where iss it, where iss it: my Precious, my Precious? It's ours, it is, and we wants it. The thieves, the thieves, the filthy little thieves. Where are they with my Precious? Curse them! We hates them.'

`It doesn't sound as if he knew we were here, does it? ' whispered Sam. `And what's his Precious? Does he mean the'

`Hsh! ' breathed Frodo. 'He's getting near now, near enough to hear a whisper.'

Indeed Gollum had suddenly paused again, and his large head on its scrawny neck was lolling from side to side as if he was listening. His pale eyes were half unlidded. Sam restrained himself, though his fingers were twitching. His eyes, filled with anger and disgust, were fixed on the wretched creature as he now began to move again, still whispering and hissing to himself.

At last he was no more than a dozen feet from the ground, right above their heads. From that point there was a sheer drop, for the cliff was slightly undercut, and even Gollum could not find a hold of any kind. He seemed to be trying to twist round, so as to go legs first, when suddenly with a shrill whistling shriek he fell. As he did so, he curled his legs and arms up round him, like a spider whose descending thread is snapped.

Sam was out of his hiding in a flash and crossed the space between him and the cliff foot in a couple of leaps. Before Gollum could get up, he was on top of him. But he found Gollum more than he bargained for, even taken like that, suddenly, off his guard after a fall. Before Sam could get a hold, long legs and arms were wound round him pinning his arms, and a clinging grip, soft but horribly strong, was squeezing him like slowly tightening cords; clammy fingers were feeling for his throat. Then sharp teeth bit into his shoulder. All he could do was to butt his hard round head sideways into the creature's face. Gollum hissed and spat, but he did not let go.

Things would have gone ill with Sam, if he had been alone. But Frodo sprang up, and drew Sting from its sheath. With his left hand he drew back Gollum's head by his thin lank hair, stretching his long neck, and forcing his pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky.

`Let go! Gollum,' he said. `This is Sting. You have seen it before once upon a time. Let go, or you'll feel it this time! I'll cut your throat.'

Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up, fingering his shoulder. His eyes smouldered with anger, but he could not avenge himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering.

`Don't hurt us! Don't let them hurt us, precious! They won't hurt us will they, nice little hobbitses? We didn't mean no harm, but they jumps on us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we're so lonely, gollum. We'll be nice to them, very nice, if they'll be nice to us, won't we, yes, yess.'

`Well, what's to be done with it? ' said Sam. `Tie it up, so as it can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.'

`But that would kill us, kill us,' whimpered Gollum. `Cruel little hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands and leave us, gollum, gollum.' Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat.

`No,' said Frodo. `If we kill him, we must kill him outright. But we can't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.'

`Oh hasn't he! ' said Sam rubbing his shoulder. `Anyway he meant to, and he means to, I'll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that's his plan.'

'I daresay,' said Frodo. `But what he means to do is another matter.' He paused for a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stopped whimpering. Sam stood glowering over him.

It seemed to Frodo then that he heard, quite plainly but far off, voices out of the past:

What a pity Bilbo did not stub the vile creature, when he had a chance!

Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike without need.

I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death.

Deserves death! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too eager to deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even the wise cannot see all ends.

`Very well,' he answered aloud, lowering his sword. 'But still I am afraid. And yet, as you see, I will not touch the creature. For now that I see him, I do pity him.'

Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was not there. Gollum lifted his head.

'Yess, wretched we are, precious,' he whined. 'Misery misery! Hobbits won't kill us, nice hobbits.'

'No, we won't,' said Frodo. `But we won't let you go, either. You're full of wickedness and mischief, Gollum. You will have to come with us, that's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if you can. One good turn deserves another.'

'Yess, yes indeed,' said Gollum sitting up. 'Nice hobbits! We will come with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And where are they going in these cold hard lands, we wonders, yes we wonders? ' He looked up at them, and a faint light of cunning and eagerness flickered for a second in his pale blinking eyes.

Sam scowled at him, and sucked his teeth; but he seemed to sense that there was something odd about his master's mood and that the matter was beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo's reply.

Frodo looked straight into Gollum's eyes which flinched and twisted away. `You know that, or you guess well enough, Sméagol,' he said. quietly and sternly. `We are going to Mordor, of course. And you know the way there, I believe.'

`Ach! sss! ' said Gollum, covering his ears with his hands, as if such frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. `We guessed, yes we guessed,' he whispered; `and we didn't want them to go, did we? No, precious, not the nice hobbits. Ashes, ashes, and dust, and thirst there is; and pits, pits, pits, and Orcs, thousands of Orcses. Nice hobbits mustn't go to - sss - those places.'

`So you have been there? ' Frodo insisted. `And you're being drawn back there, aren't you?'

`Yess. Yess. No! ' shrieked Gollum. `Once, by accident it was, wasn't it, precious? Yes, by accident. But we won't go back, no, no!' Then suddenly his voice and language changed, and he sobbed in his throat, and spoke but not to them. `Leave me alone, gollum! You hurt me. O my poor hands, gollum! I, we, I don't want to come back. I can't find it. I am tired. I, we can't find it, gollum, gollum, no, nowhere. They're always awake. Dwarves, Men, and Elves, terrible Elves with bright eyes. I can't find it. Ach! ' He got up and clenched his long hand into a bony fleshless knot, shaking it towards the East. 'We won't! ' he cried. 'Not for you.' Then he collapsed again. 'Gollum, gollum,' he whimpered with his face to the ground. 'Don't look at us! Go away! Go to sleep!'

`He will not go away or go to sleep at your command, Sméagol,' said Frodo. `But if you really wish to be free of him again. then you must help me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.'

Gollum sat up again and looked at him under his eyelids. 'He's over there,' he cackled. `Always there. Orcs will take you all the way. Easy to find Orcs east of the River. Don't ask Sméagol. Poor, poor Sméagol, he went away long ago. They took his Precious, and he's lost now.'

`Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,' said Frodo.

'No, no, never! He's lost his Precious,' said Gollum.

'Get up! ' said Frodo.

Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff.

`Now! ' said Frodo. 'Can you find a path easier by day or by night? We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll start tonight.'

`The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,' Gollum whined. `Not under the White Face, not yet. It will go behind the hills soon, yess. Rest a bit first, nice hobbits!'

`Then sit down,' said Frodo, `and don't move!'

The hobbits seated themselves beside him, one on either side. with their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no need for any arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep for a moment. Slowly the moon went by. Shadows fell down from the hills, and all grew dark before them. The stars grew thick and bright in the sky above. No one stirred. Gollum sat with his legs drawn up, knees under chin, flat hands and feet splayed on the ground, his eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking or listening.

Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and they understood. They relaxed, leaning their heads back, and shutting their eyes or seeming to. Soon the sound of their soft breathing could be heard. Gollum's hands twitched a little. Hardly perceptibly his head moved to the left and the right, and first one eye and then the other opened a slit. The hobbits made no sign.

Suddenly, with startling agility and speed, straight off the ground with a jump like a grasshopper or a frog. Gollum bounded forward into the darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected. Sam was on him before he had gone two paces after his spring. Frodo coming behind grabbed his leg and threw him.

'Your rope might prove useful again, Sam.' he said.

Sam got out the rope. 'And where were you off to in the cold hard lands, Mr. Gollum?' he growled. 'We wonders. aye, we wonders. To find some of your orc-friends, I warrant. You nasty treacherous creature. It's round your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.'

Gollum lay quiet and tried no further tricks. He did not answer Sam, but gave him a swift venomous look.

`All we need is something to keep a hold on him,' said Frodo. 'We want him to walk, so it's no good tying his legs-or his arms. he seems to use them nearly as much. Tie one end to his ankle, and keep a grip on the other end.'

He stood over Gollum, while Sam tied the knot. The result surprised them both. Gollum began to scream, a thin, tearing sound, very horrible to hear. He writhed, and tried to get his mouth to his ankle and bite the rope. He kept on screaming.

At last Frodo was convinced that he really was in pain; but it could not be from the knot. He examined it and found that it was not too tight, indeed hardly tight enough. Sam was gentler than his words. 'What's the matter with you? ' he said. `If you will try to run away. you must be tied; but we don't wish to hurt you.'

'It hurts us, it hurts us,' hissed Gollum. `It freezes, it bites! Elves twisted it, curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That's why we tries to escape, of course it is, precious. We guessed they were cruel hobbits. They visits Elves, fierce Elves with bright eyes. Take it off us! It hurts us.'

`No, I will not take it off you,' said Frodo, `not unless' - he paused a moment in thought - `not unless there is any promise you can make that I can trust.'

'We will swear to do what he wants, yes, yess, said Gollum, still twisting and grabbling at his ankle. `It hurts us.'

`Swear? ' said Frodo.

'Sméagol,' said Gollum suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes wide and staring at Frodo with a strange light. 'Sméagol will swear on the Precious.'

Frodo drew himself up, and again Sam was startled by his words and his stern voice. 'On the Precious? How dare you? ' he said. 'Think!

One Ring to rule them all and in the Darkness bind them.

Would you commit your promise to that, Sméagol? It will hold you. But it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words. Beware!'

Gollum cowered. 'On the Precious. on the Precious! ' he repeated.

`And what would you swear? ' asked Frodo.

`To be very very good,' said Gollum. Then crawling to Frodo's feet he grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over him, as if the words shook his very bones with fear. 'Sméagol will swear never, never, to let Him have it. Never! Sméagol will save it. But he must swear on the Precious.'

'No! not on it,' said Frodo, looking down at him with stern pity. 'All you wish is to see it and touch it, if you can, though you know it would drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it, if you will. For you know where it is. Yes, you know, Sméagol. It is before you.'

For a moment it appeared to Sam that his master had grown and Gollum had shrunk: a tall stern shadow, a mighty lord who hid his brightness in grey cloud, and at his feet a little whining dog. Yet the two were in some way akin and not alien: they could reach one another's minds. Gollum raised himself and began pawing at Frodo, fawning at his knees.

'Down! down! ' said Frodo. `Now speak your promise!'

`We promises, yes I promise!' said Gollum. 'I will serve the master of the Precious. Good master, good Sméagol, gollum, gollum!' Suddenly he began to weep and bite at his ankle again.

'Take the rope off, Sam!' said Frodo.

Reluctantly Sam obeyed. At once Gollum got up and began prancing about, like a whipped cur whose master has patted it. From that moment a change, which lasted for some time, came over him. He spoke with less hissing and whining, and he spoke to his companions direct, not to his precious self. He would cringe and flinch, if they stepped near him or made any sudden movement, and he avoided the touch of their elven-cloaks; but he was friendly, and indeed pitifully anxious to please. He would cackle with laughter and caper, if any jest was made, or even if Frodo spoke kindly to him, and weep if Frodo rebuked him. Sam said little to him of any sort. He suspected him more deeply than ever, and if possible liked the new Gollum, the Sméagol, less than the old.

'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you,' he said. 'now for it! The Moon's gone. and the night's going. We'd better start.'

'Yes, yes,' agreed Gollum, skipping about. 'Off we go! There's only one way across between the North-end and the South-end. I found it, I did. Orcs don't use it, Orcs don't know it. Orcs don't cross the Marshes, they go round for miles and miles. Very lucky you came this way. Very lucky you found Sméagol, yes. Follow Sméagol!'

He took a few steps away and looked back inquiringly, like a dog inviting them for a walk. 'Wait a bit, Gollum!' cried Sam. `Not too far ahead now! I'm going to be at your tail, and I've got the rope handy.'

'No, no! ' said Gollum. 'Sméagol promised.'

In the deep of night under hard clear stars they set off. Gollum led them back northward for a while along the way they had come; then he slanted to the right away from the steep edge of the Emyn Muil, down the broken stony slopes towards the vast fens below. They faded swiftly and softly into the darkness. Over all the leagues of waste before the gates of Mordor there was a black silence.



Chapter 2
The Passage of the Marshes
Gollum moved quickly, with his head and neck thrust forward, often using his hands as well as his feet. Frodo and Sam were hard put to it to keep up with him; but he seemed no longer to have any thought of escaping, and if they fell behind, he would turn and wait for them. After a time he brought them to the brink of the narrow gully that they had struck before; but they were now further from the hills.

`Here it is!' he cried. 'There is a way down inside, yes. Now we follows it - out, out away over there.' He pointed south and east towards the marshes. The reek of them came to their nostrils, heavy and foul even in the cool night air. .

Gollum cast up and down along the brink, and at length he called to them. `Here! We can get down here. Sméagol went this way once: I went this way, hiding from Orcs.'

He led the way, and following him the hobbits climbed down into the gloom. It was not difficult, for the rift was at this point only some fifteen feet deep and about a dozen across. There was running water at the bottom: it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers that trickled down from the hills to feed the stagnant pools and mires beyond. Gollum turned to the right, southward more or less, and splashed along with his feet in the shallow stony stream. He seemed greatly delighted to feel the water, and chuckled to himself, sometimes even croaking in a sort of song.

The cold hard lands,

they bites our hands,

they gnaws our feet.

The rocks and stones

are like old bones

all bare of meat.

But stream and pool

is wet and cool:

so nice for feet!

And now we wish -

'Ha! ha! What does we wish?' he said, looking sidelong at the hobbits. 'We'll tell you.' he croaked. `He guessed it long ago, Baggins guessed it.' A glint came into his eyes, and Sam catching the gleam in the darkness thought it far from pleasant.

Alive without breath;

as cold as death;

never thirsting, ever drinking;

clad in mail, never clinking.

Drowns on dry land,

thinks an island

is a mountain;

thinks a fountain

is a puff of air.

So sleek, so fair!

What a joy to meet!

We only wish

to catch a fish,

so juicy-sweet!

These words only made more pressing to Sam's mind a problem that had been troubling him from the moment when he understood that hir master was going to adopt Gollum as a guide: the problem of food. It did not occur to him that his master might also have thought of it. hut he supposed Gollum had. Indeed how had Gollum kept himself in all his lonely wandering? 'Not too well,' thought Sam. 'He looks fair famished. Not too dainty to try what hobbit tastes like if there ain't no fish, I'll wager - supposing as he could catch us napping. Well, he won't: not Sam Gamgee for one.'

They stumbled along in the dark winding gully for a long time, or so it seemed to the tired feet of Frodo and Sam. The gully turned eastward, and as they went on it broadened and got gradually shallower. At last the sky above grew faint with the first grey of morning. Gollum had shown no signs of tiring, but now he looked up and halted.

`Day is near,' he whispered, as if Day was something that might overhear him and spring on him. `Sméagol will stay here: I will stay here, and the Yellow Face won't see me.'

`We should be glad to see the Sun;' said Frodo, `but we will stay here: we are too tired to go any further at present.'

`You are not wise to be glad of the Yellow Face,' said Gollum. `It shows you up. Nice sensible hobbits stay with Sméagol. Orcs and nasty things are about. They can see a long way. Stay and hide with me! '

The three of them settled down to rest at the foot of the rocky wall of the gully. It was not much more than a tall man's height now, and at its base there were wide flat shelves of dry stone; the water ran in a channel on the other side. Frodo and Sam sat on one of the flats, resting their backs. Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream.

`We must take a little food,' said Frodo. `Are you hungry, Sméagol? We have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.'

At the word hungry a greenish light was kindled in Gollum's pale eyes, and they seemed to protrude further than ever from his thin sickly face. For a moment he relapsed into his old Gollum-manner. 'We are famisshed, yes famisshed we are. precious,' he said. `What is it they eats? Have they nice fisshes? ' His tongue lolled out between his sharp yellow teeth. licking his colourless lips.

`No, we have got no fish,' said Frodo. `We have only got this' - he held up a wafer of lembas - 'and water, if the water here is fit to drink.'

`Yess, yess, nice water,' said Gollum. `Drink it, drink it, while we can! But what is it they've got, precious? Is it crunchable? Is it tasty? '

Frodo broke off a portion of a wafer and handed it to him on its leaf-wrapping. Gollum sniffed at the leaf and his face changed: a spasm of disgust came over it, and a hint of his old malice. `Sméagol smells it! ' he said. `Leaves out of the elf-country, gah! They stinks. He climbed in those trees, and he couldn't wash the smell off his hands, my nice hands.' Dropping the leaf, he took a corner of the lembas and nibbled it. He spat, and a fit of coughing shook him.

`Ach! No! ' he spluttered. `You try to choke poor Sméagol. Dust and ashes, he can't eat that. He must starve. But Sméagol doesn't mind. Nice hobbits! Sméagol has promised. He will starve. He can't eat hobbits' food. He will starve. Poor thin Sméagol! '

`I'm sorry,' said Frodo; `but I can't help you, I'm afraid. I think this food would do you good, if you would try. But perhaps you can't even try, not yet anyway.'

The hobbits munched their lembas in silence. Sam thought that it tasted far better, somehow, than it had for a good while: Gollum's behaviour had made him attend to its flavour again. But he did not feel comfortable. Gollum watched every morsel from hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by a diner's chair. Only when they had finished and were preparing to rest, was he apparently convinced that they had no hidden dainties that he could share in. Then he went and sat by himself a few paces away and whimpered a little.

'Look here! ' Sam whispered to Frodo, not too softly: he did not really care whether Gollum heard him or not. `We've got to get some sleep; but not both together with that hungry villain nigh, promise or no promise. Sméagol or Gollum, he won't change his habits in a hurry, I'll warrant. You go to sleep, Mr. Frodo, and I'll call you when I can't keep my eyelids propped up. Turn and about, same as before, while he's loose.'

'Perhaps you're right, Sam,' said Frodo speaking openly. 'There is a change in him, but just what kind of a change and how deep, I'm not sure yet. Seriously though, I don't think there is any need for fear - at present. Still watch if you wish. Give me about two hours, not more, and then call me.'

So tired was Frodo that his head fell forward on his breast and he slept. almost as soon as he had spoken the words. Gollum seemed no longer to have any fears. He curled up and went quickly to sleep, quite unconcerned. Presently his breath was hissing softly through his clenched teeth, hut he lay still as stone. After a while, fearing that he would drop off himself, if he sat listening to his two companions breathing, Sam got up and gently prodded Gollum. His hands uncurled and twitched, but he made no other movement. Sam bent down and said fissh close to his ear, but there was no response, not even a catch in Gollum's breathing.

Sam scratched his head. `Must really be asleep,' he muttered. `And if I was like Gollum, he wouldn't wake up never again.' He restrained the thoughts of his sword and the rope that sprang to his mind, and went and sat down by his master.

When he woke up the sky above was dim, not lighter but darker than when they had breakfasted. Sam leapt to his feet. Not least from his own feeling of vigour and hunger, he suddenly understood that he had slept the daylight away, nine hours at least. Frodo was still fast asleep, lying now stretched on his side. Gollum was not to be seen. Various reproachful names for himself came to Sam's mind, drawn from the Gaffer's large paternal word-hoard; then it also occurred to him that his master had been right: there had for the present been nothing to guard against. They were at any rate both alive and unthrottled.

'Poor wretch! ' he said half remorsefully. 'Now I wonder where he's got to? '

'Not far, not far! ' said a voice above him. He looked up and saw the shape of Gollum's large head and ears against the evening sky.

'Here, what are you doing? ' cried Sam, his suspicions coming back as soon as he saw that shape.

`Sméagol is hungry,' said Gollum. `Be back soon.'

'Come back now!' shouted Sam. 'Hi! Come back!' But Gollum had vanished.

Frodo woke at the sound of Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes. 'Hullo!' he said. 'Anything wrong? What's the time?'

'I dunno,' said Sam. 'After sundown, I reckon. And he's gone off. Says he's hungry.'

`Don't worry!' said Frodo. `There's no help for it. But he'll come back, you'll see. The promise will hold yet a while. And he won't leave his Precious, anyway.'

Frodo made light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly for hours with Gollum, and a very hungry Gollum too, loose beside them. `Don't think of any of your Gaffer's hard names,' he said. 'You were worn out, and it has turned out well: we are now both rested. And we have a hard road ahead, the worst road of all.'

`About the food,' said Sam. 'How long's it going to take us to do this job? And when it's done, what are we going to do then? This waybread keeps you on your legs in a wonderful way, though it doesn't satisfy the innards proper, as you might say: not to my feeling anyhow, meaning no disrespect to them as made it. But you have to eat some of it every day, and it doesn't grow. I reckon we've got enough to last, say, three weeks or so, and that with a tight belt and a light tooth, mind you. We've been a bit free with it so far.'

`I don't know how long we shall take to - to finish,' said Frodo. `We were miserably delayed in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee, my dear hobbit - indeed, Sam my dearest hobbit, friend of friends - I do not think we need give thought to what comes after that. To do the job as you put it - what hope is there that we ever shall? And if we do, who knows what will come of that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If we can nurse our limbs to bring us to Mount Doom, that is all we can do. More than I can, I begin to feel.'

Sam nodded silently. He took his master's hand and bent over it. He did not kiss it, though his tears fell on it. Then he turned away, drew his sleeve over his nose, and got up, and stamped about, trying to whistle, and saying between the efforts: 'Where's that dratted creature?'

It was actually not long before Gollum returned; but he came so quietly that they did not hear him till he stood before them. His fingers and face were soiled with black mud. He was still chewing and slavering. What he was chewing, they did not ask or like to think.

'Worms or beetles or something slimy out of holes,' thought Sam. 'Brr! The nasty creature; the poor wretch! '

Gollum said nothing to them, until he had drunk deeply and washed himself in the stream. Then he came up to them, licking his lips. 'Better now,' he said. `Are we rested? Ready to go on? Nice hobbits, they sleep beautifully. Trust Sméagol now? Very, very good.'

The next stage of their journey was much the same as the last. As they went on the gully became ever shallower and the slope of its floor more gradual. Its bottom was less stony and more earthy, and slowly its sides dwindled to mere banks. It began to wind and wander. That night drew to its end, but clouds were now over moon and star, and they knew of the coming of day only by the slow spreading of the thin grey light.

In a chill hour they came to the end of the water-course. The banks became moss-grown mounds. Over the last shelf of rotting stone the stream gurgled and fell down into a brown bog and was lost. Dry reeds hissed and rattled though they could feel no wind.

On either side and in front wide fens and mires now lay, stretching away southward and eastward into the dim half-light. Mists curled and smoked from dark and noisome pools. The reek of them hung stifling in the still air. Far away, now almost due south, the mountain-walls of Mordor loomed, like a black bar of rugged clouds floating above a dangerous fog-bound sea.

The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of Gollum. They did now know, and could not guess in that misty light. that they were in fact only just within the northern borders of the marshes. the main expanse of which lay south of them. They could, if they had known the lands, with some delay have retraced their steps a little, and then turning east have come round over hard roads to the bare plain of Dagorlad: the field of the ancient battle before the gates of Mordor. Not that there was great hope in such a course. On that stony plain there was no cover, and across it ran the highways of the Orcs and the soldiers of the Enemy. Not even the cloaks of Lórien would have concealed them there.

'How do we shape our course now, Sméagol? ' asked Frodo. 'Must we cross these evil-smelling fens? '

`No need, no need at all,' said Gollum. 'Not if hobbits want to reach the dark mountains and go to see Him very quick. Back a little, and round a little' - his skinny arm waved north and east - `and you can come on hard cold roads to the very gates of His country. Lots of His people will be there looking out for guests, very pleased to take them straight to Him, O yes. His Eye watches that way all the time. It caught Sméagol there, long ago.' Gollum shuddered. 'But Sméagol has used his eyes since then, yes, yes: I've used eyes and feet and nose since then. l know other ways. More difficult, not so quick; but better, if we don't want Him to see. Follow Sméagol! He can take you through the marshes, through the mists. nice thick mists. Follow Sméagol very carefully, and you may go a long way. quite a long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps.'

It was already day, a windless and sullen morning, and the marsh-reeks lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low clouded sky, and Gollum seemed anxious to continue the journey at once. So after a brief rest they set out again and were soon lost in a shadowy silent world, cut off from all view of the lands about, either the hills that they had left or the mountains that they sought. They went slowly in single file: Gollum, Sam, Frodo.

Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they went. he often lagged. The hobbits soon found that what had looked like one vast fen was really an endless network of pools, and soft mires. and winding half-strangled water-courses. Among these a cunning eye and foot could thread a wandering path. Gollum certainly had that cunning, and needed all of it. His head on its long neck was ever turning this way and that, while he sniffed and muttered all the time to himself. Sometimes he would hold up his hand and halt them, while he went forward a little, crouching, testing the ground with fingers or toes. or merely listening with one ear pressed to the earth.

It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway in this forsaken country. The only green was the scum of livid weed on the dark greasy surfaces of the sullen waters. Dead grasses and rotting reeds loomed up in the mists like ragged shadows of long-forgotten summers.

As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists lifted, growing thinner and more transparent. Far above the rot and vapours of the world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene country with floors of dazzling foam, but only a passing ghost of her could they see below, bleared, pale, giving no colour and no warmth. But even at this faint reminder of her presence Gollum scowled and flinched. He halted their journey, and they rested, squatting like little hunted animals, in the borders of a great brown reed-thicket. There was a deep silence, only scraped on its surfaces by the faint quiver of empty seed-plumes, and broken grass-blades trembling in small air-movements that they could not feel.

'Not a bird! ' said Sam mournfully.

`No, no birds,' said Gollum. `Nice birds! ' He licked his teeth. 'No birds here. There are snakeses, wormses, things in the pools. Lots of things, lots of nasty things. No birds,' he ended sadly. Sam looked at him with distaste.

So passed the third day of their journey with Gollum. Before the shadows of evening were long in happier lands, they went on again, always on and on with only brief halts. These they made not so much for rest as to help Gollum; for now even he had to go forward with great care, and he was sometimes at a loss for a while. They had come to the very midst of the Dead Marshes, and it was dark.

They walked slowly, stooping, keeping close in line, following attentively every move that Gollum made. The fens grew more wet, opening into wide stagnant meres, among which it grew more and more difficult to find the firmer places where feet could tread without sinking into gurgling mud. The travellers were light, or maybe none of them would ever have found a way through.

Presently it grew altogether dark: the air itself seemed black and heavy to breathe. When lights appeared Sam rubbed his eyes: he thought his head was going queer. He first saw one with the corner of his left eye, a wisp of pale sheen that faded away; but others appeared soon after: some like dimly shining smoke, some like misty flames flickering slowly above unseen candles; here and there they twisted like ghostly sheets unfurled by hidden hands. But neither of his companions spoke a word.

At last Sam could bear it no longer. `What's all this, Gollum? ' he said in a whisper. `These lights? They're all round us now. Are we trapped? Who are they? '

Gollum looked up. A dark water was before him, and he was crawling on the ground, this way and that, doubtful of the way. 'Yes, they are all round us,' he whispered. 'The tricksy lights. Candles of corpses, yes, yes. Don't you heed them! Don't look! Don't follow them! Where's the master? '

Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again. He could not see him. He went some paces back into the darkness, not daring to move far, or to call in more than a hoarse whisper. Suddenly he stumbled against Frodo, who was standing lost in thought, looking at the pale lights. His hands hung stiff at his sides; water and slime were dripping from them.

`Come, Mr. Frodo! ' said Sam. 'Don't look at them! Gollum says we mustn't. Let's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as quick as we can - if we can! '

`All right,' said Frodo, as if returning out of a dream. 'I'm coming. Go on! '

Hurrying forward again, Sam tripped, catching his foot in some old root or tussock. He fell and came heavily on his hands, which sank deep into sticky ooze, so that his face was brought close to the surface of the dark mere. There was a faint hiss, a noisome smell went up, the lights flickered and danced and swirled. For a moment the water below him looked like some window, glazed with grimy glass, through which he was peering. Wrenching his hands out of the bog, he sprang back with a cry. 'There are dead things, dead faces in the water,' he said with horror. 'Dead faces! '

Gollum laughed. 'The Dead Marshes, yes, yes: that is their names,' he cackled. `You should not look in when the candles are lit.'

`Who are they? What are they? ' asked Sam shuddering, turning to Frodo, who was now behind him.

'I don't know,' said Frodo in a dreamlike voice. 'But I have seen them too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all the pools, pale faces, deep deep under the dark water. I saw them: grim faces and evil, and noble faces and sad. Many faces proud and fair, and weeds in their silver hair. But all foul, all rotting, all dead. A fell light is in them.' Frodo hid his eyes in his hands. 'I know not who they are; but I thought I saw there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside them.'

`Yes, yes,' said Gollum. `All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and Orcs. The Dead Marshes. There was a great battle long ago, yes, so they told him when Sméagol was young, when I was young before the Precious came. It was a great battle. Tall Men with long swords, and terrible Elves, and Orcses shrieking. They fought on the plain for days and months at the Black Gates. But the Marshes have grown since then, swallowed up the graves; always creeping, creeping.'

'But that is an age and more ago,' said Sam. 'The Dead can't be really there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land? '

`Who knows? Sméagol doesn't know,' answered Gollum. 'You cannot reach them, you cannot touch them. We tried once, .yes, precious. I tried once; but you cannot reach them. Only shapes to see, perhaps, not to touch. No precious! All dead.'

Sam looked darkly at him and shuddered again, thinking that he guessed why Sméagol had tried to touch them. `Well, I don't want to see them,' he said. 'Never again! Can't we get on and get away? '

`Yes, yes,' said Gollum. `But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully! Or hobbits go down to join the Dead ones and light little candles. Follow Sméagol! Don't look at lights! '

He crawled away to the right, seeking for a path round the mere. They came close behind, stooping, often using their hands even as he did. 'Three precious little Gollums in a row we shall be, if this goes on much longer,' thought Sam.

At last they came to the end of the black mere, and they crossed it, perilously, crawling or hopping from one treacherous island tussock to another. Often they floundered, stepping or falling hands-first into waters as noisome as a cesspool, till they were slimed and fouled almost up to their necks and stank in one another's nostrils.

It was late in the night when at length they reached firmer ground again. Gollum hissed and whispered to himself, but it appeared that he was pleased: in some mysterious way, by some blended sense of feel, and smell, and uncanny memory for shapes in the dark, he seemed to know just where he was again, and to be sure of his road ahead.

`Now on we go! ' he said. 'Nice hobbits! Brave hobbits! Very very weary, of course; so we are, my precious, all of us. But we must take master away from the wicked lights, yes, yes, we must.' With these words he started off again, almost at a trot, down what appeared to be a long lane between high reeds, and they stumbled after him as quickly as they could. But in a little while he stopped suddenly and sniffed the air doubtfully, hissing as if he was troubled or displeased again.

'What is it? ' growled Sam, misinterpreting the signs. `What's the need to sniff? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held. You stink, and master stinks; the whole place stinks.'

'Yes, yes, and Sam stinks! ' answered Gollum. `Poor Sméagol smells it, but good Sméagol bears it. Helps nice master. But that's no matter. The air's moving, change is coming. Sméagol wonders; he's not happy.'

He went on again, but his uneasiness grew, and every now and again he stood up to his full height, craning his neck eastward and southward. For some time the hobbits could not hear or feel what was troubling him. Then suddenly all three halted, stiffening and listening. To Frodo and Sam it seemed that they heard, far away, a long wailing cry, high and thin and cruel. They shivered. At the same moment the stirring of the air became perceptible to them; and it grew very cold. As they stood straining their ears, they heard a noise like a wind coming in the distance. The misty lights wavered, dimmed, and went out.

Gollum would not move. He stood shaking and gibbering to himself, until with a rush the wind came upon them, hissing and snarling over the marshes. The night became less dark, light enough for them to see, or half see, shapeless drifts of fog, curling and twisting as it rolled over them and passed them. Looking up they saw the clouds breaking and shredding; and then high in the south the moon glimmered out, riding in the flying wrack.

For a moment the sight of it gladdened the hearts of the hobbits; but Gollum cowered down, muttering curses on the White Face. Then Frodo and Sam staring at the sky, breathing deeply of the fresher air, saw it come: a small cloud flying from the accursed hills; a black shadow loosed from Mordor; a vast shape winged and ominous. It scudded across the moon, and with a deadly cry went away westward, outrunning the wind in its fell speed.

They fell forward, grovelling heedlessly on the cold earth. But the shadow of horror wheeled and returned, passing lower now, right above them, sweeping the fen-reek with its ghastly wings. And then it was gone, flying back to Mordor with the speed of the wrath of Sauron; and behind it the wind roared away, leaving the Dead Marshes bare and bleak. The naked waste, as far as the eye could pierce, even to the distant menace of the mountains, was dappled with the fitful moonlight.

Frodo and Sam got up, rubbing their eyes, like children wakened from an evil dream to find the familiar night still over the world. But Gollum lay on the ground as if he had been stunned. They roused him with difficulty, and for some time he would not lift his face, but knelt forward on his elbows, covering the back of his head with his large flat hands.

`Wraiths!' he wailed. `Wraiths on wings! The Precious is their master. They see everything, everything. Nothing can hide from them. Curse the White Face! And they tell Him everything. He sees, He knows. Ach, gollum, gollum, gollum! ' It was not until the moon had sunk, westering far beyond Tol Brandir, that he would get up or make a move.

From that time on Sam thought that he sensed a change in Gollum again. He was more fawning and would-be friendly; but Sam surprised some strange looks in his eyes at times, especially towards Frodo; and he went back more and more into his old manner of speaking. And Sam had another growing anxiety. Frodo seemed to be weary, weary to the point of exhaustion. He said nothing. indeed he hardly spoke at all; and he did not complain, but he walked like one who carries a load, the weight of which is ever increasing; and he dragged along, slower and slower, so that Sam had often to beg Gollum to wait and not to leave their master behind.

In fact with every step towards the gates of Mordor Frodo felt the Ring on its chain about his neck grow more burdensome. He was now beginning to feel it as an actual weight dragging him earthwards. But far more he was troubled by the Eye: so he called it to himself. It was that more than the drag of the Ring that made him cower and stoop as he walked. The Eye: that horrible growing sense of a hostile will that strove with great power to pierce all shadows of cloud, and earth, and flesh, and to see you: to pin you under its deadly gaze, naked, immovable. So thin, so frail and thin, the veils were become that still warded it off. Frodo knew just where the present habitation and heart of that will now was: as certainly as a man can tell the direction of the sun with his eyes shut. He was facing it, and its potency beat upon his brow.

Gollum probably felt something of the same sort. But what went on in his wretched heart between the pressure of the Eye, and the lust of the Ring that was so near, and his grovelling promise made half in the fear of cold iron, the hobbits did not guess: Frodo gave no thought to it. Sam's mind was occupied mostly with his master hardly noticing the dark cloud that had fallen on his own heart. He put Frodo in front of him now, and kept a watchful eye on every movement of his, supporting him if he stumbled, and trying to encourage him with clumsy words.

When day came at last the hobbits were surprised to see how much closer the ominous mountains had already drawn. The air was now clearer and colder, and though still far off, the walls of Mordor were no longer a cloudy menace on the edge of sight, but as grim black towers they frowned across a dismal waste. The marshes were at an end, dying away into dead peats and wide flats of dry cracked mud. The land ahead rose in long shallow slopes, barren and pitiless, towards the desert that lay at Sauron's gate.

While the grey light lasted, they cowered under a black stone like worms, shrinking, lest the winged terror should pass and spy them with its cruel eyes. The remainder of that journey was a shadow of growing fear in which memory could find nothing to rest upon. For two more nights they struggled on through the weary pathless land. The air, as it seemed to them, grew harsh, and filled with a bitter reek that caught their breath and parched their mouths.

At last, on the fifth morning since they took the road with Gollum, they halted once more. Before them dark in the dawn the great mountains reached up to roofs of smoke and cloud. Out from their feet were flung huge buttresses and broken hills that were now at the nearest scarce a dozen miles away. Frodo looked round in horror. Dreadful as the Dead Marshes had been, and the arid moors of the Noman-lands, more loathsome far was the country that the crawling day now slowly unveiled to his shrinking eyes. Even to the Mere of Dead Faces some haggard phantom of green spring would come; but here neither spring nor summer would ever come again. Here nothing lived, not even the leprous growths that feed on rottenness. The gasping pools were choked with ash and crawling muds, sickly white and grey, as if the mountains had vomited the filth of their entrails upon the lands about. High mounds of crushed and powdered rock, great cones of earth fire-blasted and poison-stained, stood like an obscene graveyard in endless rows, slowly revealed in the reluctant light.

They had come to the desolation that lay before Mordor: the lasting monument to the dark labour of its slaves that should endure when all their purposes were made void; a land defiled, diseased beyond all healing - unless the Great Sea should enter in and wash it with oblivion. `I feel sick,' said Sam. Frodo did not speak.

For a while they stood there, like men on the edge of a sleep where nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they can only come to morning through the shadows. The light broadened and hardened. The gasping pits and poisonous mounds grew hideously clear. The sun was up, walking among clouds and long flags of smoke, but even the sunlight was defiled. The hobbits had no welcome for that light; unfriendly it seemed, revealing them in their helplessness - little squeaking ghosts that wandered among the ash-heaps of the Dark Lord.

Too weary to go further they sought for some place where they could rest. For a while they sat without speaking under the shadow of a mound of slag; but foul fumes leaked out of it, catching their throats and choking them. Gollum was the first to get up. Spluttering and cursing he rose, and without a word or a glance at the hobbits he crawled away on all fours. Frodo and Sam crawled after him, until they came to a wide almost circular pit, high-banked upon the west. It was cold and dead, and a foul sump of oily many-coloured ooze lay at its bottom. In this evil hole they cowered, hoping in its shadow to escape the attention of the Eye.

The day passed slowly. A great thirst troubled them, but they drank only a few drops from their bottles-last filled in the gully, which now as they looked back in thought seemed to them a place of peace and beauty. The hobbits took it in turn to watch. At first, tired as they were, neither of them could sleep at all; but as the sun far away was climbing down into slow moving cloud, Sam dozed. It was Frodo's turn to be on guard. He lay back on the slope of the pit, but that did not ease the sense of burden that was on him. He looked up at the smoke-streaked sky and saw strange phantoms, dark riding shapes, and faces out of the past. He lost count of time, hovering between sleep and waking, until forgetfulness came over him.

Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that he heard his master calling. It was evening. Frodo could not have called, for he had fallen asleep, and had slid down nearly to the bottom of the pit. Gollum was by him. For a moment Sam thought that he was trying to rouse Frodo; then he saw that it was not so. Gollum was talking to himself. Sméagol was holding a debate with some other thought that used the same voice but made it squeak and hiss. A pale light and a green light alternated in his eyes as he spoke.

`Sméagol promised,' said the first thought.

`Yes, yes, my precious,' came the answer, 'we promised: to save our Precious, not to let Him have it - never. But it's going to Him yes, nearer every step. What's the hobbit going to do with it, we wonders, yes we wonders.'

`I don't know. I can't help it. Master's got it. Sméagol promised to help the master.'

`Yes, yes, to help the master: the master of the Precious. But if we was master, then we could help ourselfs, yes, and still keep promises.'

`But Sméagol said he would be very very good. Nice hobbit! He took cruel rope off Sméagol's leg. He speaks nicely to me.'

'Very very good, eh, my precious? Let's be good, good as fish, sweet one, but to ourselfs. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no, no.'

`But the Precious holds the promise,' the voice of Sméagol objected.

`Then take it,' said the other, `and let's hold it ourselfs! Then we shall be master, gollum! Make the other hobbit, the nasty suspicious hobbit, make him crawl, yes, gollum!'

`But not the nice hobbit? '

`Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my precious, yes, a Baggins. A Baggins stole it. He found it and he said nothing, nothing. We hates Bagginses.'

'No, not this Baggins.'

'Yes, every Baggins. All peoples that keep the Precious. We must have it! '

`But He'll see, He'll know. He'll take it from us! '

'He sees. He knows. He heard us make silly promises - against His orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take it.'

'Not for Him! '

'No, sweet one. See, my precious: if we has it, then we can escape, even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grows very strong, stronger than Wraiths. Lord Sméagol? Gollum the Great? The Gollum! Eat fish every day, three times a day; fresh from the sea. Most Precious Gollum! Must have it. We wants it, we wants it, we wants it! '

'But there's two of them. They'll wake too quick and kill us,' whined Sméagol in a last effort. `Not now. Not yet.'

'We wants it! But' - and here there was a long pause, as if a new thought had wakened. `Not yet, eh? Perhaps not. She might help. She might, yes.'

`No, no! Not that way! ' wailed Sméagol.

`Yes! We wants it! We wants it! '

Each time that the second thought spoke, Gollum's long hand crept out slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back with a jerk as Sméagol spoke again. Finally both arms, with long fingers flexed and twitching, clawed towards his neck.

Sam had lain still, fascinated by this debate, but watching every move that Gollum made from under his half-closed eye-lids. To his simple mind ordinary hunger, the desire to eat hobbits, had seemed the chief danger in Gollum. He realized now that it was not so: Gollum was feeling the terrible call of the Ring. The Dark Lord was He, of course; but Sam wondered who She was. One of the nasty friends the little wretch had made in his wanderings, he supposed. Then he forgot the point, for things had plainly gone far enough, and were getting dangerous. A great heaviness was in all his limbs, but he roused himself with an effort and sat up. Something warned him to be careful and not to reveal that he had overheard the debate. He let out a loud sigh and gave a huge yawn.

`What's the time? ' he said sleepily.

Gollum sent out a long hiss through his teeth. He stood up for a moment, tense and menacing; and then he collapsed, falling forward on to all fours and crawling up the bank of the pit. 'Nice hobbits! Nice Sam! ' he said. 'Sleepy heads, yes, sleepy heads! Leave good Sméagol to watch! But it's evening. Dusk is creeping. Time to go.'

`High time! ' thought Sam. 'And time we parted, too.' Yet it crossed his mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous turned loose as kept with them. 'Curse him! I wish he was choked!' he muttered. He stumbled down the bank and roused his master.

Strangely enough, Frodo felt refreshed. He had been dreaming. The dark shadow had passed, and a fair vision had visited him in this land of disease. Nothing remained of it in his memory, yet because of it he felt glad and lighter of heart. His burden was less heavy on him. Gollum welcomed him with dog-like delight. He chuckled and chattered, cracking his long fingers, and pawing at Frodo's knees. Frodo smiled at him.

'Come! ' he said. `You have guided us well and faithfully. This is the last stage. Bring us to the Gate, and then I will not ask you to go further. Bring us to the Gate, and you may go where you wish - only not to our enemies.'

'To the Gate, eh?' Gollum squeaked, seeming surprised and frightened. 'To the Gate, master says! Yes, he says so. And good Sméagol does what he asks, O yes. But when we gets closer, we'll see perhaps we'll see then. It won't look nice at all. O no! O no!'

'Go on with you! ' said Sam. `Let's get it over! '

In the falling dusk they scrambled out of the pit and slowly threaded their way through the dead land. They had not gone far before they felt once more the fear that had fallen on them when the winged shape swept over the marshes. They halted, cowering on the evil-smelling ground; but they saw nothing in the gloomy evening sky above, and soon the menace passed, high overhead, going maybe on some swift errand from Barad-dûr. After a while Gollum got up and crept forward again, muttering and shaking.

About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time, but it now seemed more remote, as if it were passing far above the clouds, rushing with terrible speed into the West. Gollum, however, was helpless with terror, and was convinced that they were being hunted, that their approach was known.

`Three times! ' he whimpered. 'Three times is a threat. They feel us here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We cannot go any further this way, no. It's no use, no use! '

Pleading and kind words were no longer of any avail. It was not until Frodo commanded him angrily and laid a hand on his sword-hilt that Gollum would get up again. Then at last he rose with a snarl, and went before them like a beaten dog.

So they stumbled on through the weary end of the night, and until the coming of another day of fear they walked in silence with bowed heads, seeing nothing, and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in their ears.



Chapter 3
The Black Gate is Closed
Before the next day dawned their journey to Mordor was over. The marshes and the desert were behind them. Before them, darkling against a pallid sky, the great mountains reared their threatening heads.

Upon the west of Mordor marched the gloomy range of Ephel Dúath, the Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north the broken peaks and barren ridges of Ered Lithui, grey as ash. But as these ranges approached one another, being indeed but parts of one great wall about the mournful plains of Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the bitter inland sea of Núrnen amidmost, they swung out long arms northward; and between these arms there was a deep defile. This was Cirith Gorgor, the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the land of the Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward from its mouth were two sheer hills, black-boned and bare. Upon them stood the Teeth of Mordor, two towers strong and tall. In days long past they were built by the Men of Gondor in their pride and power, after the overthrow of Sauron and his flight, lest he should seek to return to his old realm. But the strength of Gondor failed, and men slept, and for long years the towers stood empty. Then Sauron returned. Now the watch-towers, which had fallen into decay, were repaired, and filled with arms, and garrisoned with ceaseless vigilance. Stony-faced they were, with dark window-holes staring north and east and west, and each window was full of sleepless eyes.

Across the mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff, the Dark Lord had built a rampart of stone. In it there was a single gate of iron, and upon its battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the hills on either side the rock was bored into a hundred caves and maggot-holes: there a host of orcs lurked, ready at a signal to issue forth like black ants going to war. None could pass the Teeth of Mordor and not feel their bite, unless they were summoned by Sauron, or knew the secret passwords that would open the Morannon, the black gate of his land.

The two hobbits gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even from a distance they could see in the dim light the movement of the black guards upon the wall, and the patrols before the gate. They lay now peering over the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the out-stretched shadow of the northmost buttress of Ephel Dúath. Winging the heavy air in a straight flight a crow, maybe, would have flown but a furlong from their hiding-place to the black summit of the nearer tower. A faint smoke curled above it, as if fire smouldered in the hill beneath.

Day came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless ridges of Ered Lithui. Then suddenly the cry of brazen-throated trumpets was heard: from the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden holds and outposts in the hills came answering calls; and further still, remote but deep and ominous, there echoed in the hollow land beyond the mighty horns and drums of Barad-dûr. Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor; and the night-guards were summoned to their dungeons and deep halls, and the day-guards, evil-eyed and fell, were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed dimly on the battlement.

`Well, here we are! ' said Sam. `Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as if that's about as far as we are ever going to get. My word, but the Gaffer would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now! Often said I'd come to a bad end, if I didn't watch my step, he did. But now I don't suppose I'll ever see the old fellow again. He'll miss his chance of I told'ee so, Sam: more's the pity. He could go on telling me as long as he'd got breath, if only I could see his old face again. But I'd have to get a wash first, or he wouldn't know me.

`I suppose it's no good asking "what way do we go now?" We can't go no further-unless we want to ask the orcs for a lift.'

`No, no! ' said Gollum. `No use. We can't go further. Sméagol said so. He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. And we do see. O yes. my precious, we do see. Sméagol knew hobbits could not go this way. O yes. Sméagol knew '

'Then what the plague did you bring us here for? ' said Sam, not feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable.

`Master said so. Master says: Bring us to the Gate. So good Sméagol does so. Master said so, wise master.'

'I did,' said Frodo. His face was grim and set. but resolute. He was filthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness, but he cowered no longer, and his eyes were clear. `I said so, because I purpose to enter Mordor, and I know no other way. Therefore I shall go this way. I do not ask anyone to go with me.'

`No, no, master! ' wailed Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great distress. `No use that way! No use! Don't take the Precious to Him! He'll eat us all, if He gets it, eat all the world. Keep it, nice master, and be kind to Sméagol. Don't let Him have it. Or go away. go to nice places, and give it back to little Sméagol. Yes, yes, master: give it back, eh? Sméagol will keep it safe; he will do lots of good, especially to nice hobbits. Hobbits go home. Don't go to the Gate! '

'I am commanded to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,' said Frodo. 'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after must come.'

Sam said nothing. The look on Frodo's face was enough for him he knew that words of his were useless. And after all he never had any real hope in the affair from the beginning; but being a cheerful hobbit he had not needed hope, as long as despair could be postponed. Now they were come to the bitter end. But he had stuck to his master all the way; that was what he had chiefly come for, and he would still stick to him. His master would not go to Mordor alone. Sam would go with him-and at any rate they would get rid of Gollum.

Gollum, however, did not intend to be got rid of, yet. He knelt at Frodo's feet, wringing his hands and squeaking. 'Not this way, master! ' he pleaded, 'There is another way. O yes indeed there is. Another way. darker, more difficult to find, more secret. But Sméagol knows it. Let Sméagol show you! '

'Another way! ' said Frodo doubtfully, looking down at Gollum with searching eyes.

'Yess! Yess indeed! There was another way. Sméagol found it. Let's go and see if it's still there! '

`You have not spoken of this before.'

`No. Master did not ask. Master did not say what he meant to do. He does not tell poor Sméagol. He says: Sméagol, take me to the Gate - and then good bye! Sméagol can run away and be good. But now he says: I purpose to enter Mordor this way. So Sméagol is very afraid. He does not want to lose nice master. And he promised, master made him promise, to save the Precious. But master is going to take it to Him, straight to the Black Hand, if master will go this way. So Sméagol must save them both, and he thinks of another way that there was, once upon a time. Nice master. Sméagol very good, always helps.'

Sam frowned. If he could have bored holes in Gollum with his eyes, he would have done. His mind was full of doubt. To all appearances Gollum was genuinely distressed and anxious to help Frodo. But Sam, remembering the overheard debate, found it hard to believe that the long submerged Sméagol had come out on top: that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the debate. Sam's guess was that the Sméagol and Gollum halves (or what in his own mind he called Slinker and Stinker) had made a truce and a temporary alliance: neither wanted the Enemy to get the Ring; both wished to keep Frodo from capture, and under their eye, as long as possible - at any rate as long as Stinker still had a chance of laying hands on his 'Precious'. Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted.

`And it's a good thing neither half of the old villain don't know what master means to do,' he thought. `If he knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put an end to his Precious for good and all, there'd be trouble pretty quick, I bet. Anyhow old Stinker is so frightened of the Enemy - and he's under orders of some kind from him, or was - that he'd give us away rather than be caught helping us; and rather than let his Precious be melted, maybe. At least that's my idea. And I hope the master will think it out carefully. He's as wise as any, but he's soft-hearted, that's what he is. It's beyond any Gamgee to guess what he'll do next.'

Frodo did not answer Gollum at once. While these doubts were passing through Sam's slow but shrewd mind, he stood gazing out towards the dark cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they had taken refuge was delved in the side of a low hill, at some little height above a long trenchlike valley that lay between it and the outer buttresses of the mountains. In the midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western watch-tower. By morning-light the roads that converged upon the Gate of Mordor could now be clearly seen, pale and dusty; one winding back northwards; another dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui; and a third that ran towards him. As it bent sharply round the tower, it entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where he stood. Westward, to his right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of the mountains, and went off southwards into the deep shadows that mantled all the western sides of Ephel Dúath; beyond his sight it journeyed on into the narrow land between the mountains and the Great River.

As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the march, though for the most part they were hidden by the reeks and fumes drifting from the fens and wastes beyond. But here and there he caught the gleam of spears and helmets; and over the levels beside the roads horsemen could be seen riding in many companies. He remembered his vision from afar upon Amon Hen, so few days before, though now it seemed many years ago. Then he knew that the hope that had for one wild moment stirred in his heart was vain. The trumpets had not rung in challenge but in greeting. This was no assault upon the Dark Lord by the men of Gondor, risen like avenging ghosts from the graves of valour long passed away. These were Men of other race, out of the wide Eastlands, gathering to the summons of their Overlord; armies that had encamped before his Gate by night and now marched in to swell his mounting power. As if suddenly made fully aware of the peril of their position, alone, in the growing light of day, so near to this vast menace, Frodo quickly drew his frail grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then he turned to Gollum.

`Sméagol,' he said, `I will trust you once more. lndeed it seems that I must do so, and that it is my fate to receive help from you. where I least looked for it, and your fate to help me whom you long pursued with evil purpose. So far you have deserved well of me and have kept your promise truly. Truly, I say and mean,' he added with a glance at Sam, 'for twice now we have been in your power, and you have done no harm to us. Nor have you tried to take from me what you once sought. May the third time prove the best! But I warn you, Sméagol, you are in danger.'

`Yes, yes, master! ' said Gollum. `Dreadful danger! Sméagol's bones shake to think of it. but he doesn't run away. He must help nice master.'

'I did not mean the danger that we all share,' said Frodo. 'I mean a danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious. Remember that! It will hold you to it; but it will seek a way to twist it to your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me just now, foolishly. Give it back to Sméagol you said. Do not say that again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will never get it back. But the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back. In the last need, Sméagol, I should put on the Precious; and the Precious mastered you long ago. If I, wearing it, were to command you, you would obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice or to cast yourself into the fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Sméagol!'

Sam looked at his master with approval, but also with surprise: there was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not known before. It had always been a notion of his that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was of such a high degree that it must imply a fair measure of blindness. Of course, he also firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the wisest person in the world (with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and of Gandalf). Gollum in his own way, and with much more excuse as his acquaintance was much briefer, may have _made a similar mistake, confusing kindness and blindness. At any rate this speech abashed and terrified him. He grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice master.

Frodo waited patiently for a while, then he spoke again less sternly. `Come now, Gollum or Sméagol if you wish, tell me of this other way, and show me, if you can, what hope there is in it, enough to justify me in turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.'

But Gollum was in a pitiable state, and Frodo's threat had quite unnerved him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `poor little Sméagol'. After a while he grew a little calmer, and Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if a traveller followed the road that turned west of Ephel Dúath, he would come in time to a crossing in a circle of dark trees. On the right a road went down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went on southwards.

`On, on, on,' said Gollum. `We never went that way, but they say it goes a hundred leagues, until you can see the Great Water that is never still. There are lots of fishes there, and big birds eat fishes: nice birds: but we never went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And further still there are more lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is very hot there, and there are seldom any clouds, and the men are fierce and have dark faces. We do not want to see that land.'

`No! ' said Frodo. `But do not wander from your road. What of the third turning? '

`O yes, O yes, there is a third way,' said Gollum. `That is the road to the left. At once it begins to climb up, up, winding and climbing back towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock, you'll see it. suddenly you'll see it above you, and you'll want to hide.'

`See it, see it? What will you see? '

`The old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used to hear tales from the South, when Sméagol was young, long ago. O yes. we used to tell lots of tales in the evening, sitting by the banks of the Great River, in the willow-lands, when the River was younger too, gollum, gollum.' He began to weep and mutter. The hobbits waited patiently.

`Tales out of the South,' Gollum went on again, `about the tall Men with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills of stone, and the silver crown of their King and his White Tree: wonderful tales. They built very tall towers, and one they raised was silver-white, and in it there was a stone like the Moon, and round it were great white walls. O yes, there were many tales about the Tower of the Moon.'

`That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built ' said Frodo. `It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy.'

`Yes, He has only four on the Black Hand, but they are enough,' said Gollum shuddering. 'And He hated Isildur's city.'

'What does he not hate? ' said Frodo. 'But what has the Tower of the Moon to do with us? '

'Well, master, there it was and there it is: the tall tower and the white houses and the wall; but not nice now, not beautiful. He conquered it long ago. It is a very terrible place now. Travellers shiver when they see it, they creep out of sight, they avoid its shadow. But master will have to go that way. That is the only other way, For the mountains are lower there, and the old road goes up and up, until it reaches a dark pass at the top, and then it goes down, down, again - to Gorgoroth.' His voice sank to a whisper and he shuddered.

`But how will that help us? ' asked Sam. `Surely the Enemy knows all about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as close as this? The tower isn't empty, is it? '

`O no, not empty! ' whispered Gollum. `It seems empty, but it isn't, O no! Very dreadful things live there. Orcs. yes always Orcs; but worse things, worse things live there too. The road climbs right under the shadow of the walls and passes the gate. Nothing moves on the road that they don't know about. The things inside know: the Silent Watchers.'

`So that's your advice is it,' said Sam, 'that we should go another long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one, when we get there, if we ever do? '

`No, no indeed,' said Gollum. `Hobbits must see, must try to understand. He does not expect attack that way. His Eye is all round, but it attends more to some places than to others. He can't see everything all at once, not yet. You see, He has conquered all the country west of the Shadowy Mountains down to the River, and He holds the bridges now. He thinks no one can come to the Moontower without fighting big battle at the bridges, or getting lots of boats which they cannot hide and He will know about.'

'You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and thinking,' said Sam. `Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? '

'Not nice hobbit, not sensible,' said Gollum, giving Sam an angry glance and turning to Frodo. 'Sméagol has talked to Orcs, yes of course, before he met master, and to many peoples: he has walked very far. And what he says now many peoples are saying. It's here in the North that the big danger is for Him, and for us. He will come out of the Black Gate one day, one day soon. That is the only way big armies can come. But away down west He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.'

`Just so! ' said Sam, not to be put off. `And so we are to walk up and knock at their gate and ask if we're on the right road for Mordor? Or are they too silent to answer? It's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and save ourselves a long tramp.'

'Don't make jokes about it,' hissed Gollum. `It isn't funny, O no! Not amusing. It's nut sense to try and get into Mordor at all. But if master says I must go or I will go, then he must try some way. But he must not go to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where Sméagol helps. nice Sméagol. though no one tells him what it is all about. Sméagol helps again. He found it. He knows it.'

'What did you find? ' asked Frodo.

Gollum crouched down and his voice sank to a whisper again. 'A little path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narrow stair, O yes, very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then' - his voice sank even lower - `a tunnel, a dark tunnel; and at last a little cleft, and a path high above the main pass. It was that way that Sméagol got out of the darkness. But it was years ago. The path may have vanished now; but perhaps not, perhaps not.'

`I don't like the sound of it at all,' said Sam. `Sounds too easy at any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it'll be guarded too. Wasn't it guarded, Gollum? ' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught a green gleam in Gollum's eye. Gollum muttered but did not reply.

'Is it not guarded? ' asked Frodo sternly. `And did you escape out of the darkness, Sméagol? Were you not rather permitted to depart upon an errand? That at least is w hat Aragorn thought, who found you by the Dead Marshes some years ago.'

'It's a lie! ' hissed Gollum, and an evil light came into his eyes at the naming of Aragorn. `He lied on me, yes he did. I did escape, all by my poor self. Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious; and I have searched and searched, of course I have. But not for the Black One. The Precious was ours, it was mine I tell you. I did escape.'

Frodo felt a strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once not so far from the truth as might be suspected; that he had somehow found a way out of Mordor, and at least believed that it was by his own cunning. For one thing, he noted that Gollum used I, and that seemed usually to be a sign, on its rare appearances. that some remnants of old truth and sincerity were for the moment on top. But even if Gollum could be trusted on this point, Frodo did not forget the wiles of the Enemy. The 'escape' may have been allowed or arranged, and well known in the Dark Tower. And in any case Gollum was plainly keeping a good deal back.

'I ask you again,' he said: `is not this secret way guarded? '

But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen mood. He had all the injured air of a liar suspected when for once he has told the truth. or part of it. He did not answer.

'Is it not guarded? ' Frodo repeated.

`Yes, yes, perhaps. No safe places in this country,' said Gollum sulkily. 'No safe places. But master must try it or go home. . No other way.' They could not get him to say more. The name of the perilous place and the high pass he could not tell, or would not.

Its name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful rumour. Aragorn could perhaps have told them that name and its significance: Gandalf would have warned them. But they were alone, and Aragorn was far away, and Gandalf stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with Saruman, delayed by treason. Yet even as he spoke his last words to Saruman, and the palantír crashed in fire upon the steps of Orthanc. his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise, over the long leagues his mind sought for them in hope and pity.

Maybe Frodo felt it, not knowing it, as he had upon Amon Hen, even though he believed that Gandalf was gone, gone for ever into the shadow in Moria far away. He sat upon the ground for a long while, silent, his head bowed, striving to recall all that Gandalf had said to him. But for this choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed Gandalf's guidance had been taken from them too soon, too soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away. How they should enter it at the last Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could not say. Into the stronghold of the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he had once ventured. But into Mordor, to the Mountain of Fire and to Barad-dûr, since the Dark Lord rose in power again, had he ever journeyed there? Frodo did not think so. And here he was a little halfling from the Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where the great ones could not go, or dared not go. It was an evil fate. But he had taken it on himself in his own sitting-room in the far-off spring of another year, so remote now that it was like a chapter in a story of the world's youth, when the Trees of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This was an evil choice. Which way should he choose? And if both led to terror and death, what good lay in choice?

The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little grey hollow where they lay, so near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence that could be felt, as if it were a thick veil that cut them off from all the world about them. Above them was a dome of pale sky barred with fleeting smoke, but it seemed high and far away. as if seen through great deeps of air heavy with brooding thought.

Not even an eagle poised against the sun would have marked the hobbits sitting there, under the weight of doom, silent, µ not moving, shrouded in their thin grey cloaks. For a moment he might have paused to consider Gollum, a tiny figure sprawling on the ground: there perhaps lay the famished skeleton of some child of Men, its ragged garment still clinging to it, its long arms and legs almost bone-white and bone-thin: no flesh worth a peck.

Frodo's head was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands behind his head, staring out of his hood at the empty sky. At least for a long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought he saw a dark bird-like figure wheel into the circle of his sight, and hover, and then wheel away again. Two more followed, and then a fourth. They were very small to look at, yet he knew, somehow, that they were huge, with a vast stretch of pinion, flying at a great height. He covered his eyes and bent forward, cowering. The same warning fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of the Black Riders, the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind and the shadow on the moon, though now it was not so crushing or compelling: the menace was more remote. But menace it was. Frodo felt it too. His thought was broken. He stirred and shivered, but he did not look up. Gollum huddled himself together like a cornered spider. The winged shapes wheeled, and stooped swiftly down, speeding back to Mordor.

Sam took a deep breath. `The Riders are about again, up in the air,' he said in a hoarse whisper. 'I saw them. Do you think they could see us? They were very high up. And if they are Black Riders same as before, then they can't see much by daylight, can they? '

'No, perhaps not,' said Frodo. `But their steeds could see. And these winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably see more than any other creature. They are like great carrion birds. They are looking for something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.'

The feeling of dread passed, but the enfolding silence was broken. For some time they had been cut off from the world, as if in an invisible island; now they were laid bare again, peril had returned. But still Frodo did not speak to Gollum or make his choice. His eyes were closed, as if he were dreaming, or looking inward into his heart and memory. At last he stirred and stood up, and it seemed that he was about to speak and to decide. But `hark!' he said. `What is that?'

A new fear was upon them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At first it seemed a long way off, but it drew nearer: it was coming towards them. It leaped into all their minds that the Black Wings had spied them and had sent armed soldiers to seize them: no speed seemed too great for these terrible servants of Sauron. They crouched, listening. The voices and the clink of weapons and harness were very close. Frodo and Sam loosened their small swords in their sheaths. Flight was impossible.

Gollum rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the lip of the hollow. Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch, until he could peer over it between two broken points of stone. He remained there without moving for some time, making no sound. Presently the voices began to recede again, and then they slowly faded away. Far off a horn blew on the ramparts of the Morannon. Then quietly Gollum drew back and slipped down into the hollow.

'More Men going to Mordor,' he said in a low voice. `Dark faces. We have not seen Men like these before, no, Sméagol has not. They are fierce. They have black eyes, and long black hair, and gold rings in their ears; yes, lots of beautiful gold. And some have red paint on their cheeks, and red cloaks; and their flags are red, and the tips of their spears; and they have round shields, yellow and black with big spikes. Not nice; very cruel wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as Orcs, and much bigger. Sméagol thinks they have come out of the South beyond the Great River's end: they came up that road. They have passed on to the Black Gate; but more may follow. Always more people coming to Mordor. One day all the peoples will be inside.'

`Were there any oliphaunts?' asked Sam, forgetting his fear in his eagerness for news of strange places.

`No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? ' said Gollum.

Sam stood up, putting his hands behind his back (as he always did when 'speaking poetry'), and began:

Grey as a mouse,

Big as a house.

Nose like a snake,

I make the earth shake,

As I tramp through the grass;

Trees crack as I pass.

With horns in my mouth

I walk in the South,

Flapping big ears.

Beyond count of years

I stump round and round,

Never lie on the ground,

Not even to die.

Oliphaunt am I,

Biggest of all,

Huge, old, and tall.

If ever you'd met me

You wouldn't forget me.

If you never do,

You won't think I'm true;

But old Oliphaunt am I,

And I never lie.

'That,' said Sam, when he had finished reciting, `that's a rhyme we have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have our tales too, and news out of the South, you know. In the old days hobbits used to go on their travels now and again. Not that many ever came back, and not that all they said was believed: news from Bree, and not sure as Shiretalk, as the sayings go. But I've heard tales of the big folk down away in the Sunlands. Swertings we call 'em in our tales; and they ride on oliphaunts, 'tis said, when they fight. They put houses and towers on the oliphauntses backs and all, and the oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So when you said "Men out of the South, all in red and gold;" I said "were there any oliphaunts? " For if there was, I was going to take a look, risk or no. But now I don't suppose I'll ever see an oliphaunt. Maybe there ain't no such a beast.' He sighed.

`No, no oliphaunts,' said Gollum again. 'Sméagol has not heard of them. He does not want to see them. He does not want them to be. Sméagol wants to go away from here and hide somewhere safer. Sméagol wants master to go. Nice master, won't he come with Sméagol? '

Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst of all his cares when Sam trotted out the old fireside rhyme of Oliphaunt, and the laugh had released him from hesitation. `I wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a white one at their head,' he said. `Then we'd break a way into this evil land, perhaps. But we've not; just our own tired legs, that's all. Well, Sméagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.'

'Good master, wise master, nice master!' cried Gollum in delight, patting Frodo's knees. `Good master! Then rest now, nice hobbits, under the shadow of the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie quiet, till the Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft and quick as shadows we must be!'



Chapter 4
Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit
For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into the shade as the sun moved, until at last the shadow of the western rim of their dell grew long, and darkness filled all the hollow. Then they ate a little, and drank sparingly. Gollum ate nothing, but he accepted water gladly.

`Soon get more now,' he said, licking his lips. `Good water runs down in streams to the Great River, nice water in the lands we are going to. Sméagol will get food there too, perhaps. He's very hungry, yes, gollum!' He set his two large flat hands on his shrunken belly, and a pale green light came into his eyes.

The dusk was deep when at length they set out, creeping over the westward rim of the dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken country on the borders of the road: The moon was now three nights from the full, but it did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight, and the early night was very dark. A single red light burned high up in the Towers of the Teeth, but otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch on the Morannon.

For many miles the red eye seemed to stare at them as they fled, stumbling through a barren stony country. They did not dare to take the road, but they kept it on their left, following its line as well as they could at a little distance. At last, when night was growing old and they were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest, the eye dwindled to a small fiery point and then vanished: they had turned the dark northern shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards.

With hearts strangely lightened they now rested again, but not for long. They were not going quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning it was nearly thirty leagues from the Morannon to the cross-roads above Osgiliath, and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys. So soon they struggled on once more, until the dawn began to spread slowly in the wide grey solitude. They had then walked almost eight leagues; and the hobbits could not have gone any further, even if they had dared.

The growing light revealed to them a land already, less barren and ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their left, but near at hand they could see the southward road, now bearing away from the black roots of the hills and slanting westwards. Beyond it were slopes covered with sombre trees like dark clouds. but all about them lay a tumbled heathland, grown with ling and broom and cornel, and other shrubs that they did not know. Here and there they saw knots of tall pine-trees. The hearts of the hobbits rose again a little in spite of weariness: the air was fresh and fragrant, and it reminded them of the uplands of the Northfarthing far away. It seemed good to be reprieved, to walk in a land that had only been for a few years under the dominion of the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen wholly into decay. But they did not forget their danger, nor the Black Gate that was still all too near, hidden though it was behind the gloomy heights. They looked about for a hiding-place where they could shelter from evil eyes while the light lasted.

The day passed uneasily. They lay deep in the heather and counted out the slow hours, in which there seemed little change; for they were still under the shadows of the Ephel Dúath, and the sun was veiled. Frodo slept at times, deeply and peacefully, either trusting Gollum or too tired to trouble about him; but Sam found it difficult to do more than doze, even when Gollum was plainly fast asleep, whiffling and twitching in his secret dreams. Hunger, perhaps, more than mistrust kept him wakeful: he had begun to long for a good homely meal, `something hot out of the pot'.

As soon as the land faded into a formless grey under coming night, they started out again. In a little while Gollum led them down on to the southward road; and after that they went on more quickly, though the danger was greater. Their ears were strained for the sound of hoof or foot on the road ahead, or following them from behind; but the night passed, and they heard no sound of walker or rider.

The road had been made in a long lost time: and for perhaps thirty miles below the Morannon it had been newly repaired, but as it went south the wild encroached upon it. The handiwork of Men of old could still be seen in its straight sure flight and level course: now and again it cut its way through hillside slopes, or leaped over a stream upon a wide shapely arch of enduring masonry; but at last all signs of stonework faded, save for a broken pillar here and there, peering out of bushes at the side, or old paving-stones still lurking amid weeds and moss. Heather and trees and bracken scrambled down and overhung the banks, or sprawled out over the surface. It dwindled at last to a country cart-road little used; but it did not wind: it held on its own sure course and guided them by the swiftest way.

So they passed into the northern marches of that land that Men once called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift-falling streams. The night became fine under star and round moon, and it seemed to the hobbits that the fragrance of the air grew as they went forward; and from the blowing and muttering of Gollum it seemed that he noticed it too, and did not relish it. At the first signs of day they halted again. They had come to the end of a long cutting, deep, and sheer-sided in the middle, by which the road clove its way through a stony ridge. Now they climbed up the westward bank and looked abroad.

Day was opening in the sky, and they saw that the mountains were now much further off, receding eastward in a long curve that was lost in the distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes ran down into dim hazes far below. All about them were small woods of resinous trees, fir and cedar and cypress. and other kinds unknown in the Shire, with wide glades among them; and everywhere there was a wealth of sweet-smelling herbs and shrubs. The long journey from Rivendell had brought them far south of their own land, but not until now in this more sheltered region had the hobbits felt the change of clime. Here Spring was already busy about them: fronds pierced moss and mould, larches were green-fingered, small flowers were opening in the turf, birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of Gondor now desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.

South and west it looked towards the warm lower vales of Anduin, shielded from the east by the Ephel Dúath and yet not under the mountain-shadow, protected from the north by the Emyn Muil, open to the southern airs and the moist winds from the Sea far away. Many great trees grew there, planted long ago, falling into untended age amid a riot of careless descendants; and groves and thickets there were of tamarisk and pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and there were junipers and myrtles; and thymes that grew in bushes, or with their woody creeping stems mantled in deep tapestries the hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue flowers, or red, or pale green; and marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys, and many herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots and rocky walls were already starred with saxifrages and stonecrops. Primeroles and anemones were awake in the filbert-brakes; and asphodel and many lily-flowers nodded their half-opened heads in the grass: deep green grass beside the pools, where falling streams halted in cool hollows on their journey down to Anduin.

The travellers turned their backs on the road and went downhill. As they walked, brushing their way through bush and herb, sweet odours rose about them. Gollum coughed and retched; but the hobbits breathed deep, and suddenly Sam laughed, for heart's ease not for jest. They followed a stream that went quickly down before them. Presently it brought them to a small clear lake in a shallow dell: it lay in the broken ruins of an ancient stone basin, the carven rim of which was almost wholly covered with mosses and rose-brambles; iris-swords stood in ranks about it. and water-lily leaves floated on its dark gently-rippling surface; but it was deep and fresh, and spilled ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end.

Here they washed themselves and drank their fill at the in-falling freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-place: for this land, fair-seeming still, was nonetheless now territory of the Enemy. They had not come very far from the road, and yet even in so short a space they had seen scars of the old wars, and the newer wounds made by the Orcs and other foul servants of the Dark Lord: a pit of uncovered filth and refuse; trees hewn down wantonly and left to die, with evil runes or the fell sign of the Eye cut in rude strokes on their bark.

Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake. smelling and touching the unfamiliar plants and trees, forgetful for the moment of Mordor, was reminded suddenly of their ever-present peril. He stumbled on a ring still scorched by fire, and in the midst of it he found a pile of charred and broken bones and skulls. The swift growth of the wild with briar and eglantine and trailing clematis was already drawing a veil over this place of dreadful feast and slaughter; but it was not ancient. He hurried back to his companions, but he said nothing: the bones were best left in peace and not pawed and routed by Gollum.

`Let's find a place to lie up in,' he said. 'Not lower down. Higher up for me.'

A little way back above the lake they found a deep brown bed of last year's fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved bay-trees climbing up a steep bank that was crowned with old cedars. Here they decided to rest and pass the day, which already promised to be bright and warm. A good day for strolling on their way along the groves and glades of Ithilien; but though Orcs may shun the sunlight. there were too many places here where they could lie hid and watch; and other evil eyes were abroad: Sauron had many servants. Gollum, in any case, would not move under the Yellow. Face. Soon it would look over the dark ridges of the Ephel Dúath, and he would faint and cower in the light and heat.

Sam had been giving earnest thought to food as they marched. Now that the despair of the impassable Gate was behind him, he did not feel so inclined as his master to take no thought for their livelihood beyond the end of their errand; and anyway it seemed wiser to him to save the waybread of the Elves for worse times ahead. Six days or more had passed since he reckoned that they had only a bare supply for three weeks.

'If we reach the Fire in that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! ' he thought. `And we might be wanting to get back. We might! '

Besides, at the end of a long night-march, and after bathing and drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper, or a breakfast, by the fire in the old kitchen at Bagshot Row was what he really wanted. An idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had just begun to sneak off on his own, and he was crawling away on all fours through the fern.

`Hi! Gollum! ' said Sam. `Where are you going? Hunting? Well see here, old noser, you don't like our food, and I'd not be sorry for a change myself. Your new motto's always ready to help. Could you find anything fit for a hungry hobbit? '

`Yes, perhaps, yes,' said Gollum. `Sméagol always helps, if they asks - if they asks nicely.'

`Right!' said Sam `I does ask. And if that isn't nice enough, I begs.'

Gollum disappeared. He was away some time, and Frodo after a few mouthfuls of lembas settled deep into the brown fern and went to sleep. Sam looked at him. The early daylight was only just creeping down into the shadows under the trees, but he saw his master's face very clearly, and his hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in the house of Elrond, after his deadly wound. Then as he had kept watch Sam had noticed that at times a light seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light was even clearer and stronger. Frodo's face was peaceful, the marks of fear and care had left it; but it looked old, old and beautiful, as if the chiselling of the shaping years was now revealed in many fine lines that had before been hidden, though the identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee put it that way to himself. He shook his head, as if finding words useless, and murmured: `I love him. He's like that, and sometimes it shines through, somehow. But I love him, whether or no.'

Gollum returned quietly and peered over Sam's shoulder. Looking at Frodo, he shut his eyes and crawled away without a sound. Sam came to him a moment later and found him chewing something and muttering to himself. On the ground beside him lay two small rabbits, which he was beginning to eye greedily.

'Sméagol always helps,' he said. `He has brought rabbits, nice rabbits. But master has gone to sleep, and perhaps Sam wants to sleep. Doesn't want rabbits now? Sméagol tries to help, but he can't catch things all in a minute.'

Sam, however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At least not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of course, can cook, for they begin to learn the art before their letters (which many never reach): but Sam was a good cook, even by hobbit reckoning, and he had done a good deal of the camp-cooking on their travels, when there was a chance. He still hopefully carried some of his gear in his pack: a small tinder-box, two small shallow pans, the smaller fitting into the larger; inside them a wooden spoon, a short two-pronged fork and some skewers were stowed; and hidden at the bottom of the pack in a flat wooden box a dwindling treasure, some salt. But he needed a fire, and other things besides. He thought for a bit, while he took out his knife, cleaned and whetted it, and began to dress the rabbits. He was not going to leave Frodo alone asleep even for a few minutes.

'Now, Gollum,' he said, 'I've another job for you. Go and fill these pans with water, and bring 'em back! '

'Sméagol will fetch water, yes,' said Gollum. 'But what does the hobbit want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.'

'Never you mind,' said Sam. `If you can't guess, you'll soon find out. And the sooner you fetch the water, the sooner you'll learn. Don't you damage one of my pans, or I'll carve you into mincemeat.'

While Gollum was away Sam took another look at Frodo. He was still sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck most by the leanness of his face and hands. 'Too thin and drawn he is,' he muttered. 'Not right for a hobbit. If I can get these coneys cooked, I'm going to wake him up.'

Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern, and then scrambled up the bank collecting a bundle of twigs and broken wood; the fallen branch of a cedar at the top gave him a good supply. He cut out some turves at the foot of the bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow hole and laid his fuel in it. Being handy with flint and tinder he soon had a small blaze going. It made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent. He was just stooping over his fire, shielding it and building it up with heavier wood, when Gollum returned, carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.

He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing. He gave a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened and angry. `Ach! Sss - no!' he cried. `No! Silly hobbits, foolish, yes foolish! They mustn't do it!'

`Mustn't do what?' asked Sam in surprise.

`Not make the nassty red tongues,' hissed Gollum. `Fire, fire! It's dangerous, yes it is. It burns, it kills. And it will bring enemies, yes it will.'

'I don't think so,' said Sam. `Don't see why it should, if you don't put wet stuff on it and make a smother. But if it does, it does. I'm going to risk it, anyhow. I'm going to stew these coneys.'

'Stew the rabbits!' squealed Gollum in dismay. `Spoil beautiful meat Sméagol saved for you, poor hungry Sméagol! What for? What for, silly hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat them, eat them!' He clawed at the nearest rabbit, already skinned and lying by the fire.

`Now, now! ' said Sam. `Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes you, and raw coney chokes me. If you give me a coney, the coney's mine, see, to cook, if I have a mind. And I have. You needn't watch me. Go and catch another and eat it as you fancy - somewhere private and out o' my sight. Then you won't see the fire, and I shan't see you, and we'll both be the happier. I'll see the fire don't smoke, if that's any comfort to you.'

Gollum withdrew grumbling, and crawled into the fern. Sam busied himself with his pans. `What a hobbit needs with coney,' he said to himself, `is some herbs and roots, especially taters - not to mention bread. Herbs we can manage, seemingly.'

`Gollum!' he called softly. `Third time pays for all. I want some herbs.' Gollum's head peeped out of the fern, but his looks were neither helpful nor friendly. `A few bay-leaves, some thyme and sage, will do - before the water boils,' said Sam.

`No! ' said Gollum. `Sméagol is not pleased. And Sméagol doesn't like smelly leaves. He doesn't eat grasses or roots, no precious, not till he's starving or very sick, poor Sméagol. '

`Sméagol'll get into real true hot water, when this water boils, if he don't do as he's asked,' growled Sam. `Sam'll put his head in it, yes precious. And I'd make him look for turnips and carrots, and taters too, if it was the time o' the year. I'll bet there's all sorts of good things running wild in this country. I'd give a lot for half a dozen taters.'

`Sméagol won't go, O no precious, not this time,' hissed Gollum. `He's frightened, and he's very tired, and this hobbit's not nice, not nice at all. Sméagol won't grub for roots and carrotses and - taters. What's taters, precious, eh, what's taters?

`Po-ta-toes,' said Sam. 'The Gaffer's delight, and rare good ballast for an empty belly. But you won't find any, so you needn't look. But be good Sméagol and fetch me the herbs, and I'll think better of you. What's more, if you turn over a new leaf, and keep it turned, I'll cook you some taters one of these days. I will: fried fish and chips served by S. Gamgee. You couldn't say no to that.'

`Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice fish, scorching it. Give me fish now, and keep nassty chips! '

`Oh you're hopeless,' said Sam. 'Go to sleep!'

In the end he had to find what he wanted for himself; but he did not have to go far, not out of sight of the place where his master lay, still sleeping. For a while Sam sat musing, and tending the fire till the water boiled. The daylight grew and the air became warm; the dew faded off turf and leaf. Soon the rabbits cut up lay simmering in their pans with the bunched herbs. Almost Sam fell asleep as the time went by. He let them stew for close on an hour, testing them now and again with his fork, and tasting the broth.

When he thought all was ready he lifted the pans off the fire, and crept along to Frodo. Frodo half opened his eyes as Sam stood over him, and then he wakened from his dreaming: another gentle, unrecoverable dream of peace.

`Hullo, Sam! ' he said. `Not resting? Is anything wrong? What is the time? '

`About a couple of hours after daybreak,' said Sam, `and nigh on half past eight by Shire clocks, maybe. But nothing's wrong. Though it ain't quite what I'd call right: no stock, no onions, no taters. I've got a bit of a stew for you, and some broth, Mr. Frodo. Do you good. You'll have to sup it in your mug; or straight from the pan, when it's cooled a bit. I haven't brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.'

Frodo yawned and stretched. 'You should have been resting Sam,' he said. 'And lighting a fire was dangerous in these parts. But I do feel hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? '

'A present from Sméagol,' said Sam: `a brace o' young coneys; though I fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nought to go with them but a few herbs.'

Sam and his master sat just within the fern-brake and ate their stew from the pans, sharing the old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast.

'Wheew! Gollum! ' Sam called and whistled softly. 'Come on! Still time to change your mind. There's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.' There was no answer.

`Oh well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll finish it,' said Sam.

`And then you must take some sleep,' said Frodo.

`Don't you drop off, while I'm nodding, Mr. Frodo. I don't feel too sure of him. There's a good deal of Stinker-the bad Gollum, if you understand me-in him still, and it's getting stronger again. Not but what I think he'd try to throttle me first now. We don't see eye to eye, and he's not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased at all.'

They finished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his gear. As he stood up to return, he looked back up the slope. At that moment he saw the sun rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or whatever it was, that lay ever to the east, and it sent its golden beams down upon the trees and glades about him. Then he noticed a thin spiral of blue-grey, smoke, plain to see as it caught the sunlight, rising from a thicket above him. With a shock he realized that this was the smoke from his little cooking-fire, which he had neglected to put out.

`That won't do! Never thought it would show like that! ' he muttered, and he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened. Had he heard a whistle or not? Or was it the call of some strange bird? If it was a whistle, it did not come from Frodo's direction. There it went again from another place! Sam began to run as well as he could uphill.

He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled some fern at the edge of the fire, and the fern blazing up had set the turves smouldering. Hastily he stamped out what was left of the fire, scattered the ashes, and laid the turves on the hole. Then he crept back to Frodo.

'Did you hear a whistle, and what sounded like an answer? ' he asked. `A few minutes back. I hope it was only a bird, but it didn't sound quite like that: more like somebody mimicking a bird-call, I thought. And I'm afraid my bit of fire's been smoking. Now if I've gone and brought trouble, I'll never forgive myself. Nor won't have a chance, maybe! '

`Hush! ' whispered Frodo. `I thought I heard voices.'

The two hobbits trussed their small packs, put them on ready for flight, and then crawled deeper into the fern. There they crouched listening.

There was no doubt of the voices. They were speaking low and furtively, but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly one spoke clearly close at hand.

`Here! Here is where the smoke came from! ' it said. `'Twill be nigh at hand. In the fern, no doubt. We shall have it like a coney in a trap. Then we shall learn what kind of thing it is.'

`Aye, and what it knows! ' said a second voice.

At once four men came striding through the fern from different directions. Since flight and hiding were no longer possible, Frodo and Sam sprang to their feet, putting back to back and whipping out their small swords.

If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even more astonished. Four tall Men stood there. Two had spears in their hands with broad bright heads. Two had great bows, almost of their own height, and great quivers of long green-feathered arrows. All had swords at their sides, and were clad in green and brown of varied hues, as if the better to walk unseen in the glades of Ithilien. Green gauntlets covered their hands, and their faces were hooded and masked with green, except for their eyes, which were very keen and bright. At once Frodo thought of Boromir, for these Men were like him in stature and bearing, and in their manner of speech.

`We have not found what we sought,' said one. `But what have we found? '

'Not Orcs,' said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he had seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo's hand.

`Elves? ' said a third, doubtfully.

`Nay! Not Elves,' said the fourth, the tallest, and as it appeared the chief among them. `Elves do not walk in Ithilien in these days. And Elves are wondrous fair to look upon, or so 'tis said.'

'Meaning we're not, I take you,' said Sam. `Thank you kindly. And when you've finished discussing us, perhaps you'll say who you are, and why you can't let two tired travellers rest.'

The tall green man laughed grimly. `I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,' he said. `But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the Dark Tower, or of the White.'

`But we are neither,' said Frodo. `And travellers we are, whatever Captain Faramir may say.'

'Then make haste to declare yourselves and your errand,' said Faramir. 'We have a work to do, and this is no time or place for riddling or parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? '

`The third? '

'Yes, the skulking fellow that we saw with his nose in the pool down yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of Orc, I guess, or a creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some fox-trick.'

'I do not know where he is,' said Frodo. 'He is only a chance companion met upon our road; and I am not answerable for him. If you come on him, spare him. Bring him or send him to us. He is only a wretched gangrel creature, but I have him under my care for a while. But as for us, we are Hobbits of the Shire, far to the North and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo son of Drogo is my name, and with me is Samwise son of Hamfast, a worthy hobbit in my service. We have come by long ways - out of Rivendell, or Imladris as some call it.' Here Faramir started and grew intent. 'Seven companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left at Parth Galen above Rauros: two of my kin; a Dwarf there was also, and an Elf, and two Men. They were Aragorn; and Boromir, who said that he came out of Minas Tirith, a city in the South.'

'Boromir! ' all the four men exclaimed.

'Boromir son of the Lord Denethor?' said Faramir, and a strange stern look came into his face. 'You came with him? That is news indeed, if it be true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir son of Denethor was High Warden of the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are you then, and what had you to do with him? Be swift, for the Sun is climbing!'

'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell? ' Frodo replied.

Seek for the Sword that was Broken.

In Imladris it dwells.

'The words are known indeed,' said Faramir in astonishment. `It is some token of your truth that you also know them.'

`Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,' said Frodo. 'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.'

`That I see,' said Faramir thoughtfully. `Or I see that it might be so. And what is Isildur's Bane? '

`That is hidden,' answered Frodo. `Doubtless it will be made clear in time.'

`We must learn more of this,' said Faramir, `and know what brings you so far east under the shadow of yonder-,' he pointed and said no name. 'But not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril. and you would not have gone far by field or road this day. There will be hard handstrokes nigh at hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will leave two to guard you, for your good and for mine. Wise man trusts not to chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with you.'

'Farewell!' said Frodo, bowing low. `Think what you will, I am a friend of all enemies of the One Enemy. We would go with you, if we halfling folk could hope to serve you, such doughty men and strong as you seem, and if my errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!'

'The Halflings are courteous folk, whatever else they be,' said Faramir. `Farewell!'

The hobbits sat down again, but they said nothing to one another of their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just under the dappling shadow of the dark bay-trees, two men remained on guard. They took off their masks now and again to cool them, as the day-heat grew, and Frodo saw that they were goodly men, pale-skinned, dark of hair, with grey eyes and faces sad and proud. They spoke together in soft voices, at first using the Common Speech, but after the manner of older days, and then changing to another language of their own. To his amazement, as he listened Frodo became aware that it was the Elven-tongue that they spoke, or one but little different; and he looked at them with wonder, for he knew then that they must be Dúnedain of the South, men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse.

After a while he spoke to them; but they were slow and cautious in answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor, and they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they were descended from folk who lived in Ithilien at one time, before it was overrun. From such men the Lord Denethor chose his forayers, who crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where, they would not say) to harry the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between the Ephel Dúath and the River.

`It is close on ten leagues hence to the east-shore of Anduin,' said Mablung, 'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! '

'Aye, curse the Southrons! ' said Damrod. ` 'Tis said that there were dealings of old between Gondor and the kingdoms of the Harad in the Far South; though there was never friendship. In those days our bounds were away south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and Umbar, the nearest of their realms, acknowledged our sway. But that is long since. 'Tis many lives of Men since any passed to or fro between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they were ever ready to His will-as have so many also in the East. I doubt not that the days of Gondor are numbered, and the walls of Minas Tirith are doomed, so great is His strength and malice.'

`But still we will not sit idle and let Him do all as He would,' said Mablung. `These cursed Southrons come now marching up the ancient roads to swell the hosts of the Dark Tower. Yea, up the very roads that craft of Gondor made. And they go ever more heedlessly, we learn, thinking that the power of their new master is great enough, so that the mere shadow of His hills will protect them. We come to teach them another lesson. Great strength of them was reported to us some days ago, marching north. One of their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on the road above, where it passes through the cloven way. The road may pass, but they shall not! Not while Faramir is Captain. He leads now in all perilous ventures. But his life is charmed, or fate spares him for some other end.'

Their talk died down into a listening silence. All seemed still and watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered out. With his keen hobbit-eyes he saw that many more Men were about. He could see them stealing up the slopes, singly or in long files, keeping always to the shade of grove or thicket, or crawling, hardly visible in their brown and green raiment, through grass and brake. All were hooded and masked, and had gauntlets on their hands, and were armed like Faramir and his companions. Before long they had all passed and vanished. The sun rose till it neared the South. The shadows shrank.

`I wonder where that dratted Gollum is? ' thought Sam, as he crawled back into deeper shade. `He stands a fair chance of being spitted for an Orc, or of being roasted by the Yellow Face. But I fancy he'll look after himself.' He lay down beside Frodo and began to doze.

He woke, thinking that he had heard horns blowing. He sat up. It was now high noon. The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow of the trees. Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond mistake from above, over the top of the slope. Sam thought that he heard cries and wild shouting also, but the sound was faint, as if it came out of some distant cave. Then presently the noise of fighting broke out near at hand, just above their hiding-place. He could hear plainly the ringing grate of steel on steel, the clang of sword on iron cap, the dull beat of blade on shield; men were yelling and screaming, and one clear loud voice was calling Gondor! Gondor!

`It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,' said Sam to Frodo. 'They're as near as I want them now.'

But the noise grew closer. `They are coming!' cried Damrod. `See! Some of the Southrons have broken from the trap and are flying from the road. There they go! Our men after them, and the Captain leading.'

Sam, eager to see more, went now and joined the guards. He scrambled a little way up into one of the larger of the bay-trees. For a moment he caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running down the slope some way off with green-clad warriors leaping after them, hewing them down as they fled. Arrows were thick in the air. Then suddenly straight over the rim of their sheltering bank, a man fell, crashing through the slender trees, nearly on top of them. He came to rest in the fern a few feet away, face downward, green arrow-feathers sticking from his neck below a golden collar. His scarlet robes were tattered, his corslet of overlapping brazen plates was rent and hewn, his black plaits of hair braided with gold were drenched with blood. His brown hand still clutched the hilt of a broken sword.

It was Sam's first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not like it much. He was glad that he could not see the dead face. He wondered what the man's name was and where he came from; and if he was really evil of heart, or what lies or threats had led him on the long march from his home; and if he would not really rather have stayed there in peace-all in a flash of thought which was quickly driven from his mind. For just as Mablung stepped towards the fallen body, there was a new noise. Great crying and shouting. Amidst it Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting. And then a great thudding and bumping. like huge rams dinning on the ground.

'Ware! Ware!' cried Damrod to his companion. 'May the Valar turn him aside! Mûmak! Mûmak!'

To his astonishment and terror, and lasting delight, Sam saw a vast shape crash out of the trees and come careering down the slope. Big as a house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad moving hill. Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit's eyes, but the Mûmak of Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and the like of him does not walk now in Middle-earth; his kin that live still in latter days are but memories of his girth and majesty. On he came, straight towards the watchers, and then swerved aside in the nick of time, passing only a few yards away, rocking the ground beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like ears spread out, long snout upraised like a huge serpent about to strike. his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands of gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of scarlet and gold flapped about him in wild tatters. The ruins of what seemed a very war-tower lay upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious passage through the woods; and high upon his neck still desperately clung a tiny figure-the body of a mighty warrior, a giant among the Swertings.

On the great beast thundered, blundering in blind wrath through pool and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about the triple hide of his flanks. Men of both sides fled before him, but many he overtook and crushed to the ground. Soon he was lost to view, still trumpeting and stamping far away. What became of him Sam never heard: whether he escaped to roam the wild for a time, until he perished far from his home or was trapped in some deep pit; or whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River and was swallowed up.

Sam drew a deep breath. 'An Oliphaunt it was!' he said. `So there are Oliphaunts, and I have seen one. What a life! But no one at home will ever believe me. Well, if that's over, I'll have a bit of sleep.'

'Sleep while you may,' said Mablung. `But the Captain will return, if he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall be pursued as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that will not be long.'

`Go quietly when you must!' said Sam. `No need to disturb my sleep. I was walking all night.'

Mablung laughed. `I do not think the Captain will leave you here, Master Samwise,' he said. 'But you shall see.'



Chapter 5
The Window on the West
It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he awoke to find that it was late afternoon and Faramir had come back. He had brought many men with him; indeed all the survivors of the foray were now gathered on the slope nearby, two or three hundred strong. They sat in a wide semicircle, between the arms of which Faramir was seated on the ground, while Frodo stood before him. It looked strangely like the trial of a prisoner.

Sam crept out from the fern, but no one paid any attention to him, and he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he could see and hear all that was going on. He watched and listened intently, ready to dash to his master's aid if needed. He could see Faramir's face, which was now unmasked: it was stern and commanding, and a keen wit lay behind his searching glance. Doubt was in the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo.

Sam soon became aware that the Captain was not satisfied with Frodo's account of himself at several points: what part he had to play in the Company that set out from Rivendell; why he had left Boromir; and where he was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur's Bane. Plainly he saw that Frodo was concealing from him some matter of great importance.

'But it was at the coming of the Halfling that Isildur's Bane should waken, or so one must read the words,' he insisted. `If then you are the Halfling that was named, doubtless you brought this thing, whatever it may be, to the Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it. Do you deny it? '

Frodo made no answer. 'So! ' said Faramir. `I wish then to learn from you more of it; for what concerns Boromir concerns me. An orc-arrow slew Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty, and the sight of one would not be taken as a sign of Doom by Boromir of Gondor. Had you this thing in keeping? It is hidden, you say; but is not that because you choose to hide it? '

'No, not because I choose,' answered Frodo. `It does not belong to me. It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any could claim it, it would be Aragorn son of Arathorn, whom I named, the leader of our Company from Moria to Rauros.'

'Why so, and not Boromir, prince of the City that the sons of Elendil founded? '

'Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father, from Isildur Elendil's son himself. And the sword that he bears was Elendil's sword.'

A murmur of astonishment ran through all the ring of men. Some cried aloud: 'The sword of Elendil! The sword of Elendil comes to Minas Tirith! Great tidings! ' But Faramir's face was unmoved.

`Maybe,' he said. `But so great a claim will need to be established and clear proofs will be required, should this Aragorn ever come to Minas Tirith. He had not come, nor any of your Company, when I set out six days ago.'

'Boromir was satisfied of that claim,' said Frodo. `Indeed, if Boromir were here, he would answer all your questions. And since he was already at Rauros many days back, and intended then to go straight to your city, if you return, you may soon learn the answers there. My part in the Company was known to him, as to all the others. for it was appointed to me by Elrond of Imladris himself before the whole Council. On that errand I came into this country, but it is not mine to reveal to any outside the Company. Yet those who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.'

Frodo's tone was proud, whatever he felt, and Sam approved of it; but it did not appease Faramir.

`So!' he said. `You bid me mind my own affairs, and get me back home, and let you be. Boromir will tell all, when he comes. When he comes, say you! Were you a friend of Boromir?'

Vividly before Frodo's mind came the memory of Boromir's assault upon him, and for a moment he hesitated. Faramir's eyes watching him grew harder. 'Boromir was a valiant member of our Company ' said Frodo at length. 'Yes, I was his friend, for my part.'

Faramir smiled grimly. `Then you would grieve to learn that Boromir is dead? '

'I would grieve indeed,' said Frodo. Then catching the look in Faramir's eyes, he faltered. 'Dead?' he said. `Do you mean that he is dead, and that you knew it? You have been trying to trap me in words, playing with me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?'

`I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,' said Faramir.

`How then did he die, and how do you know of it? Since you say that none of the Company had reached the city when you left.'

'As to the manner of his death, I had hoped that his friend and companion would tell me how it was.'

`But he was alive and strong when we parted. And he lives still for all that I know. Though surely there are many perils in the world.'

`Many indeed,' said Faramir, `and treachery not the least.'

Sam had been getting more and more impatient and angry at this conversation. These last words were more than he could bear, and bursting into the middle of the ring, he strode up to his master's side.

'Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he said, `but this has gone on long enough. He's no right to talk to you so. After all you've gone through, as much for his good and all these great Men as for anyone else.

'See here, Captain! ' He planted himself squarely in front of Faramir his hands on his hips, and a look on his face as if he was addressing a young hobbit who had offered him what he called `sauce' when questioned about visits to the orchard. There was some murmuring, but also some grins on the faces of the men looking on: the sight of their Captain sitting on the ground and eye to eye with a young hobbit, legs well apart, bristling with wrath, was one beyond their experience. `See here! ' he said. `What are you driving at? Let's come to the point before all the Orcs of Mordor come down on us! If you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away, you've got no sense; but say it, and have done! And then let us know what you mean to do about it. But it's a pity that folk as talk about fighting the Enemy can't let others do their bit in their own way without interfering. He'd be mighty pleased, if he could see you now. Think he'd got a new friend, he would.'

`Patience!' said Faramir, but without anger. `Do not speak before your master, whose wit is greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach me of our peril. Even so, I spare a brief time, in order to judge justly in a hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have slain you long ago. For I am commanded to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of the Lord of Gondor. But I do not slay man or beast needlessly, and not gladly even when it is needed. Neither do I talk in vain. So be comforted. Sit by your master, and be silent! '

Sam sat down heavily with a red face. Faramir turned to Frodo again: 'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of death have many wings. Night oft brings news to near kindred, 'tis said. Boromir was my brother.'

A shadow of sorrow passed over his face. `Do you remember aught of special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with him among his gear?'

Frodo thought for a moment, fearing some further trap, and wondering how this debate would turn in the end. He had hardly saved the Ring from the proud grasp of Boromir, and how he would fare now among so many men, warlike and strong, he did not know. Yet he felt in his heart that Faramir, though he was much like his brother in looks, was a man less self-regarding, both sterner and wiser. 'I remember that Boromir bore a horn,' he said at last.

`You remember well, and as one who has in truth seen him,' said Faramir. `Then maybe you can see it in your mind's eye: a great horn of the wild ox of the East, bound with silver, and written with ancient characters. That horn the eldest son of our house has borne for many generations; and it is said that if it be blown at need anywhere within the bounds of Gondor, as the realm was of old, its voice will not pass unheeded.

'Five days ere I set out on this venture, eleven days ago at about this hour of the day, I heard the blowing of that horn: from the northward it seemed, but dim, as if it were but an echo in the mind. A boding of ill we thought it, my father and I, for no tidings had we heard of Boromir since he went away, and no watcher on our borders had seen him pass. And on the third night after another and a stranger thing befell me.

'I sat at night by the waters of Anduin, in the grey dark under the young pale moon, watching the ever-moving stream; and the sad reeds were rustling. So do we ever watch the shores nigh Osgiliath, which our enemies now partly hold, and issue from it to harry our lands. But that night all the world slept at the midnight hour. Then I saw, or it seemed that I saw, a boat floating on the water, glimmering grey, a small boat of a strange fashion with a high prow. and there was none to row or steer it.

`An awe fell on me, for a pale light was round it. But I rose and went to the bank, and began to walk out into the stream, for I was drawn towards it. Then the boat turned towards me, and stayed its pace, and floated slowly by within my hand's reach, yet I durst not handle it. It waded deep, as if it were heavily burdened, and it seemed to me as it passed under my gaze that it was almost filled with clear water, from which came the light; and lapped in the water a warrior lay asleep.

`A broken sword was on his knee. I saw many wounds on him. It was Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his beloved face. One thing only I missed: his horn. One thing only I knew not: a fair belt, as it were of linked golden leaves, about his waist. Boromir! I cried. Where is thy horn? Whither goest thou? O Boromir! But he was gone. The boat turned into the stream and passed glimmering on into the night. Dreamlike it was. and yet no dream, for there was no waking. And I do not doubt that he is dead and has passed down the River to the Sea.'

'Alas!' said Frodo. 'That was indeed Boromir as I knew him. For the golden belt was given to him in Lothlórien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was that clothed us as you see us, in elven-grey. This brooch is of the same workmanship.' He touched the green and silver leaf that fastened his cloak beneath his throat.

Faramir looked closely at it. `It is beautiful,' he said. 'Yes, 'tis work of the same craft. So then you passed through the Land of Lórien? Laurelindórenan it was named of old, but long now it has lain beyond the knowledge of Men,' he added softly, regarding Frodo with a new wonder in his eyes. `Much that was strange about you I begin now to understand. Will you not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight of the land of his home.'

'No more can I say than I have said,' answered Frodo. `Though your tale fills me with foreboding. A vision it was that you saw, I think, and no more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have seen the faces of fair warriors of old laid in sleep beneath the pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so by his foul arts.'

'Nay, it was not so,' said Faramir. 'For his works fill the heart with loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.'

`Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? ' asked Frodo. 'For no boat could have been carried over the stony hills from Tol Brandir; and Boromir purposed to go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan. And yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in the boiling pools, though laden with water? '

'I know not,' said Faramir. 'But whence came the boat? '

`From Lórien,' said Frodo. 'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to the Falls. They also were of elven-work.'

'You passed through the Hidden Land,' said Faramir, `but it seems that you little understood its power. If Men have dealings with the Mistress of Magic who dwells in the Golden Wood, then they may look for strange things to follow. For it is perilous for mortal man to walk out of the world of this Sun, and few of old came thence unchanged, 'tis said.

`Boromir, O Boromir!' he cried. `What did she say to you, the Lady that dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why went you ever to Laurelindórenan, and came not by your own road, upon the horses of Rohan riding home in the morning?'

Then turning again to Frodo, he spoke in a quiet voice once more. 'To those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo son of Drogo. But not here or now. maybe. But lest you still should think my tale a vision, I will tell you this. The horn of Boromir at least returned in truth, and not in seeming. The horn came, but it was cloven in two, as it were by axe or sword. The shards came severally to shore: one was found among the reeds where watchers of Gondor lay, northwards below the infalls of the Entwash; the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an errand in the water. Strange chances, but murder will out, 'tis said.

'And now the horn of the elder son lies in two pieces upon the lap of Denethor, sitting in his high chair, waiting for news. And you can tell me nothing of the cleaving of the horn? '

'No, I did not know of it,' said Frodo. `But the day when you heard it blowing, if your reckoning is true, was the day when we parted, when I and my servant left the Company. And now your tale fills me with dread. For if Boromir was then in peril and was slain, I must fear that all my companions perished too. And they were my kindred and my friends.

`Will you not put aside your doubt of me and let me go? I am weary, and full of grief, and afraid. But I have a deed to do, or to attempt, before I too am slain. And the more need of haste, if we two halflings are all that remain of our fellowship.

'Go back, Faramir, valiant Captain of Gondor, and defend your city while you may, and let me go where my doom takes me.'

`For me there is no comfort in our speech together,' said Faramir; `but you surely draw from it more dread than need be. Unless the people of Lórien themselves came to him, who arrayed Boromir as for a funeral? Not Orcs or servants of the Nameless. Some of your Company, I guess, live still.

`But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no longer. If hard days have made me any judge of Men's words and faces, then I may make a guess at Halflings! Though,' and now he smiled, `there is something strange about you, Frodo, an elvish air, maybe. But more lies upon our words together than I thought at first. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith to answer there to Denethor, and my life will justly be forfeit, if I now choose a course that proves ill for my city. So I will not decide in haste what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.'

He sprang to his feet and issued some orders. At once the men who were gathered round him broke up into small groups, and went off this way and that, vanishing quickly into the shadows of the rocks and trees. Soon only Mablung and Damrod remained.

'Now you, Frodo and Samwise, will come with me and my guards,' said Faramir. `You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was your purpose. It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after this affray than it has been yet. And you cannot, I think, go far today in any case, for you are weary. And so are we. We are going now to a secret place we have, somewhat less than ten miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the Enemy have not found it yet, and if they did, we could hold it long even against many. There we may lie up and rest for a while, and you with us. In the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.'

There was nothing for Frodo to do but to fall in with this request, or order. It seemed in any case a wise course for the moment, since this foray of the men of Gondor had made a journey in Ithilien more dangerous than ever.

They set out at once: Mablung and Damrod a little ahead, and Faramir with Frodo and Sam behind. Skirting the hither side of the pool where the hobbits had bathed, they crossed the stream, climbed a long bank, and passed into green-shadowed woodlands that marched ever downwards and westwards. While they walked, as swiftly as the hobbits could go, they talked in hushed voices.

'I broke off our speech together,' said Faramir, 'not only because time pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because we were drawing near to matters that were better not debated openly before many men. It was for that reason that I turned rather to the matter of my brother and let be Isildur's Bane. You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.'

`I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,' said Frodo.

`I do not blame you,' said Faramir. 'You spoke with skill in a hard place, and wisely, it seemed to me. But I learned or guessed more from you than your words said. You were not friendly with Boromir, or you did not part in friendship. You, and Master Samwise, too, I guess have some grievance. Now I loved him dearly, and would gladly avenge his death, yet I knew him well. Isildur's Bane - I would hazard that Isildur's Bane lay between you and was a cause of contention in your Company. Clearly it is a mighty heirloom of some sort, and such things do not breed peace among confederates, not if aught may be learned from ancient tales. Do I not hit near the mark?'

`Near,' said Frodo, 'but not in the gold. There was no contention in our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we should take from the Emyn Muil. But be that as it may, ancient tales teach us also the peril of rash words concerning such things as - heirlooms.'

'Ah, then it is as I thought: your trouble was with Boromir alone. He wished this thing brought to Minas Tirith. Alas! it is a crooked fate that seals your lips who saw him last, and holds from me that which I long to know: what was in his heart and thought in his latest hours. Whether he erred or no, of this I am sure: he died well, achieving some good thing. His face was more beautiful even than in life.

`But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at first about Isildur's Bane. Forgive me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for thought. We had had a hard fight, and there was more than enough to fill my mind. But even as I spoke with you, I drew nearer to the mark, and so deliberately shot wider. For you must know that much is still preserved of ancient lore among the Rulers of the city that is not spread abroad. We of my house are not of the line of Elendil. though the blood of Númenor is in us. For we reckon back our line to Mardil, the good steward, who ruled in the king's stead when he went away to war. And that was King Eärnur, last of the line of Anárion, and childless, and he came never back. And the stewards have governed the city since that day, though it was many generations of Men ago.

'And this I remember of Boromir as a boy, when we together learned the tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always it displeased him that his father was not king. "How many hundreds of years needs it to make a steward a king, if the king returns not? " he asked. "Few years, maybe, in other places of less royalty," my father answered. "In Gondor ten thousand years would not suffice." Alas! poor Boromir. Does that not tell you something of him? '

'It does,' said Frodo. `Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.'

'I doubt it not,' said Faramir. `If he were satisfied of Aragorn's claim as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch has not yet come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become rivals in her wars.

`But I stray. We in the house of Denethor know much ancient lore by long tradition, and there are moreover in our treasuries many things preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments, yea, and on stone, and on leaves of silver and of gold, in divers characters. Some none can now read; and for the rest, few ever unlock them. I can read a little in them, for I have had teaching. It was these records that brought the Grey Pilgrim to us. I first saw him when I was a child, and he has been twice or thrice since then.'

'The Grey Pilgrim? ' said Frodo. 'Had he a name?'

'Mithrandir we called him in elf-fashion,' said Faramir, 'and he was content. Many are my names in many countries, he said. Mithrandir among the Elves, Tharkûn to the Dwarves; Olórin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten, in the South Incánus, in the North Gandalf; to the East I go not.'

'Gandalf!' said Frodo. 'I thought it was he. Gandalf the Grey dearest of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.'

'Mithrandir was lost! ' said Faramir. 'An evil fate seems to have pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one of so great wisdom, and of power - for many wonderful things he did among us - could perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of this, and that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? '

'Alas! yes,' said Frodo. `I saw him fall into the abyss.'

'I see that there is some great tale of dread in this.' said Faramir `which perhaps you may tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done in our time. Had he been among us to consult concerning the hard words of our dream, he could have made them clear to us without need of messenger. Yet, maybe, he would not have done so, and the journey of Boromir was doomed. Mithrandir never spoke to us of what was to be, nor did he reveal his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I do not know, to look at the secrets of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would teach (and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would question us above all else concerning the Great Battle that was fought upon Dagorlad in the beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not name was overthrown. And he was eager for stories of Isildur, though of him we had less to tell; for nothing certain was ever known among us of his end.'

Now Faramir's voice sank to a whisper. 'But this much I learned or guessed, and I have kept it ever secret in my heart since: that Isildur took somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed, ere he went away from Gondor, never to be seen among mortal men again. Here I thought was the answer to Mithrandir's questioning. But it seemed then a matter that concerned only the seekers after ancient learning. Nor when the riddling words of our dream were debated among us, did I think of Isildur's Bane as being this same thing. For Isildur was ambushed and slain by orc-arrows, according to the only legend that we knew, and Mithrandir had never told me more.

`What in truth this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom of power and peril it must be. A fell weapon, perchance, devised by the Dark Lord. If it were a thing that gave advantage in battle. I can well believe that Boromir, the proud and fearless, often rash, ever anxious for the victory of Minas Tirith (and his own glory therein), might desire such a thing and be allured by it. Alas that ever he went on that errand! I should have been chosen by my father and the elders but he put himself forward. as being the older and the hardier (both true), and he would not be stayed.

'But fear no more! I would not take this thing, if it lay by the highway. Not were Minas Tirith falling in ruin and I alone could save her, so, using the weapon of the Dark Lord for her good and my glory. No. I do not wish for such triumphs, Frodo son of Drogo.'

'Neither did the Council,' said Frodo. 'Nor do I. I would have nothing to do with such matters.'

`For myself,' said Faramir, 'I would see the White Tree in flower again in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, and Minas Tirith in peace: Minas Anor again as of old, full of light, high and fair, beautiful as a queen among other queens: not a mistress of many slaves, nay, not even a kind mistress of willing slaves. War must be, while we defend our lives against a destroyer who would devour all; but I do not love the bright sword for its sharpness, nor the arrow for its swiftness, nor the warrior for his glory. I love only that which they defend: the city of the Men of Númenor; and I would have her loved for her memory, her ancientry, her beauty, and her present wisdom. Not feared, save as men may fear the dignity of a man, old and wise.

'So fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me more. I do not even ask you to tell me whether I now speak nearer the mark. But if you will trust me, it may be that I can advise you in your present quest, whatever that be-yes, and even aid you.'

Frodo made no answer. Almost he yielded to the desire for help and counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words seemed so wise and fair, all that was in his mind. But something held him back. His heart was heavy with fear and sorrow: if he and Sam were indeed, as seemed likely, all that was now left of the Nine Walkers, then he was in sole command of the secret of their errand. Better mistrust undeserved than rash words. And the memory of Boromir, of the dreadful change that the lure of the Ring had worked in him, was very present to his mind, when he looked at Faramir and listened to his voice: unlike they were, and yet also much akin.

They walked on in silence for a while, passing like grey and green shadows under the old trees, their feet making no sound; above them many birds sang, and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark leaves in the evergreen woods of Ithilien.

Sam had taken no part in the conversation, though he had listened; and at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears to all the soft woodland noises about them. One thing he had noted, that in all the talk the name of Gollum had not once come up. He was glad, though he felt that it was too much to hope that he would never hear it again. He soon became aware also that though they walked alone, there were many men close at hand: not only Damrod and Mablung flitting in and out of the shadows ahead, but others on either side, all making their swift secret way to some appointed place.

Once, looking suddenly back, as if some prickle of the skin told him that he was watched from behind, he thought he caught a brief glimpse of a small dark shape slipping behind a tree-trunk. He opened his mouth to speak and shut it again. `I'm not sure of it,' he said to himself, 'and why should I remind them of the old villain, if they choose to forget him? I wish I could!'

So they passed on, until the woodlands grew thinner and the land began to fall more steeply. Then they turned aside again, to the right, and came quickly to a small river in a narrow gorge: it was the same stream that trickled far above out of the round pool, now grown to a swift torrent, leaping down over many stones in a deep-cloven bed, overhung with ilex and dark box-woods. Looking west they could see, below them in a haze of light, lowlands and broad meads, and glinting far off in the westering sun the wide waters of the Anduin.

'Here, alas! I must do you a discourtesy,' said Faramir. "I hope you will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way to courtesy as not to slay you or to bind you. But it is a command that no stranger, not even one of Rohan that fights with us, shall see the path we now go with open eyes. I must blindfold you.'

`As you will,' said Frodo. 'Even the Elves do likewise at need, and blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlórien. Gimli the dwarf took it ill, but the hobbits endured it.'

`It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,' said Faramir. 'But I am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.'

He called softly and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped out of the trees and came back to him. 'Blindfold these guests,' said Faramir. `Securely, but not so as to discomfort them. Do not tie their hands. They will give their word not to try and see. I could trust them to shut their eyes of their own accord, but eyes will blink, if the feet stumble. Lead them so that they do not falter.'

With green scarves the two guards now bound up the hobbits' eyes and drew their hoods down almost to their mouths; then quickly they took each one by the hand and went on their way. All that Frodo and Sam knew of this last mile of the road they learned from guessing in the dark. After a little they found that they were on a path descending steeply; soon it grew so narrow that they went in single file, brushing a stony wall on either side; their guards steered them from behind with hands laid firmly on their shoulders. Now and again they came to rough places and were lifted from their feet for a while, and then set down again. Always the noise of the running water was on their right hand, and it grew nearer and louder. At length they were halted. Quickly Mablung and Damrod turned them about, several times, and they lost all sense of direction. They climbed upwards a little: it seemed cold and the noise of the stream had become faint. Then they were picked up and carried down, down many steps, and round a corner. Suddenly they heard the water again, loud now, rushing and splashing. All round them it seemed, and they felt a fine rain on their hands and cheeks. At last they were set on their feet once more. For a moment they stood so, half fearful, blindfold, not knowing where they were; and no one spoke.

Then came the voice of Faramir close behind. `Let them see! ' he said. The scarves were removed and their hoods drawn back, and they blinked and gasped.

They stood on a wet floor of polished stone, the doorstep, as it were, of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But in front a thin veil of water was hung, so near that Frodo could have put an outstretched arm into it. It faced westward. The level shafts of the setting sun behind beat upon it, and the red light was broken into many flickering beams of ever-changing colour. It was as if they stood at the window of some elven-tower, curtained with threaded jewels of silver and gold, and ruby, sapphire and amethyst, all kindled with an unconsuming fire.

'At least by good chance we came at the right hour to reward you for your patience,' said Faramir. `This is the Window of the Sunset, Henneth Annûn, fairest of all the falls of Ithilien, land of many fountains. Few strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it. Enter now and see! '

Even as he spoke the sun sank, and the fire faded in the flowing water. They turned and passed under the low forbidding arch. At once they found themselves in a rock-chamber, wide and rough, with an uneven stooping roof. A few torches were kindled and cast a dim light on the glistening walls. Many men were already there. Others were still coming in by twos and threes through a dark narrow door on one side. As their eyes grew accustomed to the gloom the hobbits saw that the cave was larger than they had guessed and was filled with great store of arms and victuals.

'Well, here is our refuge,' said Faramir. `Not a place of great ease but here you may pass the night in peace. It is dry at least, and there is food, though no fire. At one time the water flowed down through this cave and out of the arch, but its course was changed further up the gorge, by workmen of old, and the stream sent down in a fall of doubled height over the rocks far above. All the ways into this grot were then sealed against the entry of water or aught else, all save one. There are now but two ways out: that passage yonder by which you entered blindfold, and through the Window-curtain into a deep bowl filled with knives of stone. Now rest a while, until the evening meal is set.'

The hobbits were taken to a corner and given a low bed to lie on, if they wished. Meanwhile men busied themselves about the cave, quietly and in orderly quickness. Light tables were taken from the walls and set up on trestles and laden with gear. This was plain and unadorned for the most part, but all well and fairly, made: round platters, bowls and dishes of glazed brown clay or turned box-wood, smooth and clean. Here and there was a cup or basin of polished bronze; and a goblet of plain silver was set by the Captain's seat in the middle of the inmost table.

Faramir went about among the men, questioning each as he came in, in a soft voice. Some came back from the pursuit of the Southrons; others, left behind as scouts near the road, came in latest. All the Southrons had been accounted for, save only the great mûmak: what happened to him none could say. Of the enemy no movement could be seen; not even an orc-spy was abroad.

'You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?' Faramir asked of the latest comer.

`Well, no, lord,' said the man. `No Orc at least. But I saw, or thought I saw, something a little strange. It was getting deep dusk, when the eyes make things greater than they should be. So perhaps it may have been no more than a squirrel.' Sam pricked up his ears at this. 'Yet if so, it was a black squirrel, and I saw no tail. 'Twas like a shadow on the ground, and it whisked behind a tree-trunk when I drew nigh and went up aloft as swift as any squirrel could. You will not have us slay wild beasts for no purpose, and it seemed no more, so I tried no arrow. It was too dark for sure shooting anyway, and the creature was gone into the gloom of the leaves in a twinkling. But I stayed for a while, for it seemed strange, and then I hastened back. I thought I heard the thing hiss at me from high above as I turned away. A large squirrel, maybe. Perhaps under the shadow of the Unnamed some of the beasts of Mirkwood are wandering hither to our woods. They have black squirrels there, 'tis said.'

`Perhaps,' said Faramir. `But that would be an ill omen, if it were so. We do not want the escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.' Sam fancied that he gave a swift glance towards the hobbits as he spoke; but Sam said nothing. For a while he and Frodo lay back and watched the torchlight, and the men moving to and fro speaking in hushed voices. Then suddenly Frodo fell asleep.

Sam struggled with himself, arguing this way and that. `He may be all right,' he thought, 'and then he may not. Fair speech may hide a foul heart.' He yawned. `I could sleep for a week, and I'd be better for it. And what can I do, if I do keep awake, me all alone, and all these great Men about? Nothing, Sam Gamgee; but you've got to keep awake all the same.' And somehow he managed it. The light faded from the cave door, and the grey veil of falling water grew dim and was lost in gathering shadow. Always the sound of the water went on, never changing its note, morning or evening or night. It murmured and whispered of sleep. Sam stuck his knuckles in his eyes.

Now more torches were being lit. A cask of wine was broached. Storage barrels were being opened. Men were fetching water from the fall. Some were laving their hands in basins. A wide copper bowl and a white cloth were brought to Faramir and he washed.

`Wake our guests,' he said, `and take them water. It is time to eat.'

Frodo sat up and yawned and stretched. Sam, not used to being waited on, looked with some surprise at the tall man who bowed, holding a basin of water before him.

'Put it on the ground, master, if you please! ' he said. 'Easier for me and you.' Then to the astonishment and amusement of the Men he plunged his head into the cold water and splashed his neck and ears.

'Is it the custom in your land to wash the head before supper? ' said the man who waited on the hobbits.

`No, before breakfast,' said Sam. `But if you're short of sleep cold water on the neck's like rain on a wilted lettuce. There! Now I can keep awake long enough to eat a bit.'

They were led then to seats beside Faramir: barrels covered with pelts and high enough above the benches of the Men for their convenience. Before they ate, Faramir and all his men turned and faced west in a moment of silence. Faramir signed to Frodo and Sam that they should do likewise.

'So we always do.' he said, as they sat down: `we look towards Númenor that was, and beyond to Elvenhome that is, and to that which is beyond Elvenhome and will ever be. Have you no such custom at meat? '

`No,' said Frodo, feeling strangely rustic and untutored. `But if we are guests, we bow to our host, and after we have eaten we rise and thank him.'

'That we do also,' said Faramir.

After so long journeying and camping, and days spent ¤n the lonely wild, the evening meal seemed a feast to the hobbits: to drink pale yellow wine, cool and fragrant, and eat bread and butter, and salted meats, and dried fruits, and good red cheese, with clean hands and clean knives and plates. Neither Frodo nor Sam refused anything that was offered, nor a second, nor indeed a third helping. The wine coursed in their veins and tired limbs, and they felt glad and easy of heart as they had not done since they left the land of Lórien.

When all was done Faramir led them to a recess at the back of the cave, partly screened by curtains; and a chair and two stools were brought there. A little earthenware lamp burned in a niche.

`You may soon desire to sleep,' he said, 'and especially good Samwise, who would not close his eyes before he ate - whether for fear of blunting the edge of a noble hunger, or for fear of me, I do not know. But it is not good to sleep too soon after meat, and that following a fast. Let us talk a while. On your journey from Rivendell there must have been many things to tell. And you, too, would perhaps wish to learn something of us and the lands where you now are. Tell me of Boromir my brother, and of old Mithrandir, and of the fair people of Lothlórien.'

Frodo no longer felt sleepy and he was willing to talk. But though the food and wine had put him at his ease, he had not lost all his caution. Sam was beaming and humming to himself, but when Frodo spoke he was at first content to listen, only occasionally venturing to make an exclamation of agreement.

Frodo told many tales, yet always he steered the matter away from the quest of the Company and from the Ring, enlarging rather on the valiant part Boromir had played in all their adventures. with the wolves of the wild, in the snows under Caradhras, and in the mines of Moria where Gandalf fell. Faramir was most moved by the story of the fight on the bridge.

`It must have irked Boromir to run from Orcs,' he said, `or even from the fell thing you name, the Balrog - even though he was the last to leave.'

`He was the last,' said Frodo, 'but Aragorn was forced to lead us. He alone knew the way after Gandalf's fall. But had there not been us lesser folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir would have fled.'

`Maybe, it would have been better had Boromir fallen there with Mithrandir,' said Faramir, `and not gone on to the fate that waited above the falls of Rauros.'

'Maybe. But tell me now of your own fortunes,' said Frodo, turning the matter aside once again. `For I would learn more of Minas Ithil and Osgiliath, and Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What hope have you for that city in your long war? '

'What hope have we? ' said Faramir. 'It is long since we had any hope. The sword of Elendil, if it returns indeed, may rekindle it, but I do not think that it will do more than put off the evil day, unless other help unlooked-for also comes, from Elves or Men. For the Enemy increases and we decrease. We are a failing people, a springless autumn.

`The Men of Númenor were settled far and wide on the shores and seaward regions of the Great Lands, but for the most part they fell into evils and follies. Many became enamoured of the Darkness and the black arts; some were given over wholly to idleness and ease, and some fought among themselves, until they were conquered in their weakness by the wild men.

`It is not said that evil arts were ever practised in Gondor, or that the Nameless One was ever named in honour there; and the old wisdom and beauty brought out of the West remained long in the realm of the sons of Elendil the Fair, and they linger there still. Yet even so it was Gondor that brought about its own decay, falling by degrees into dotage, and thinking that the Enemy was asleep, who was only banished not destroyed.

'Death was ever present, because the Númenoreans still, as they had in their old kingdom, and so lost it, hungered after endless life unchanging. Kings made tombs more splendid than houses of the living. and counted old names in the rolls of their descent dearer than the names of sons. Childless lords sat in aged halls musing on heraldry; in secret chambers withered men compounded strong elixirs, or in high cold towers asked questions of the stars. And the last king of the line of Anárion had no heir.

`But the stewards were wiser and more fortunate. Wiser, for they recruited the strength of our people from the sturdy folk of the sea-coast, and from the hardy mountaineers of Ered Nimrais. And they made a truce with the proud peoples of the North, who often had assailed us, men of fierce valour, but our kin from afar off, unlike the wild Easterlings or the cruel Haradrim.

'So it came to pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward (and my father is the sit and twentieth) that they rode to our aid and at the great Field of Celebrant they destroyed our enemies that had seized our northern provinces. These are the Rohirrim, as we name them, masters of horses, and we ceded to them the fields of Calenardhon that are since called Rohan; for that province had long been sparsely peopled. And they became our allies, and have ever proved true to us, aiding us at need, and guarding our northern marches and the Gap of Rohan.

`Of our lore and manners they have learned what they would, and their lords speak our speech at need; yet for the most part they hold by the ways of their own fathers and to their own memories, and they speak among themselves their own North tongue. And we love them: tall men and fair women, valiant both alike, golden-haired, bright-eyed, and strong; they remind us of the youth of Men, as they were in the Elder Days. Indeed it is said by our lore-masters that they have from of old this affinity with us that they are come from those same Three Houses of Men as were the Númenoreans in their beginning not from Hador the Goldenhaired, the Elf-friend, maybe, yet from such of his sons and people as went not over Sea into the West, refusing the call.

'For so we reckon Men in our lore, calling them the High, or Men of the West, which were Númenoreans; and the Middle Peoples, Men of the Twilight, such as are the Rohirrim and their kin that dwell still far in the North; and the Wild, the Men of Darkness.

`Yet now, if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to us, enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too have become more like to them, and can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle Men, of the Twilight, but with memory of other things. For as the Rohirrim do, we now love war and valour as things good in themselves, both a sport and an end; and though we still hold that a warrior should have more skills and knowledge than only the craft of weapons and slaying, we esteem a warrior, nonetheless, above men of other crafts. Such is the need of our days. So even was my brother, Boromir: a man of prowess, and for that he was accounted the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of Minas Tirith has for long years been so hardy in toil, so onward into battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.' Faramir sighed and fell silent for a while.

`You don't say much in all your tales about the Elves, sir,' said Sam, suddenly plucking up courage. He had noted that Faramir seemed to refer to Elves with reverence, and this even more than his courtesy, and his food and wine, had won Sam's respect and quieted his suspicions.

`No indeed, Master Samwise,' said Faramir, `for I am not learned in Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which we have changed, declining from Númenor to Middle-earth. For as you may know, if Mithrandir was your companion and you have spoken with Elrond, the Edain, the Fathers of the Númenoreans, fought beside the Elves in the first wars, and were rewarded by the gift of the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of Elvenhome. But in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days of darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time in which each kind walked further down their sundered roads. Men now fear and misdoubt the Elves, and yet know little of them. And we of Gondor grow like other Men, like the men of Rohan; for even they, who are the foes of the Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of the Golden Wood with dread.

`Yet there are among us still some who have dealings with the Elves when they may, and ever and anon one will go in secret to Lórien, seldom to return. Not I. For I deem it perilous now for mortal man wilfully to seek out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have spoken with the White Lady.'

`The Lady of Lórien! Galadriel!' cried Sam. `You should see her indeed you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening's my job at home, sir, if you understand me, and I'm not much good at poetry - not at making it: a bit of a comic rhyme, perhaps. now and again, you know, but not real poetry - so I can't tell you what I mean. It ought to be sung. You'd have to get Strider, Aragorn that is, or old Mr. Bilbo, for that. But I wish I could make a song about her. Beautiful she is, sir! Lovely! Sometimes like a great tree in flower, sometimes like a white daffadowndilly, small and slender like. Hard as di'monds, soft as moonlight. Warm as sunlight, cold as frost in the stars. Proud and far-off as a snow-mountain, and as merry as any lass I ever saw with daisies in her hair in springtime. But that's a lot o' nonsense, and all wide of my mark.'

'Then she must be lovely indeed,' said Faramir. `Perilously fair.'

`I don't know about perilous,' said Sam. `It strikes me that folk takes their peril with them into Lórien, and finds it there because they've brought it. But perhaps you could call her perilous, because she's so strong in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on a rock; or drownd yourself, like a hobbit in a river. But neither rock nor river would be to blame. Now Boro - ' He stopped and went red in the face.

`Yes? Now Boromir you would say? ' said Faramir. `What would you say? He took his peril with him? '

`Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a fine man as your brother was if I may say so. But you've been warm on the scent all along. Now I watched Boromir and listened to him, from Rivendell all down the road - looking after my master, as you'll understand, and not meaning any harm to Boromir - and it's my opinion that in Lórien he first saw clearly what I guessed sooner: what he wanted. From the moment he first saw it he wanted the Enemy's Ring! '

`Sam! ' cried Frodo aghast. He had fallen deep into his own thoughts for a while, and came out of them suddenly and too late.

'Save me! ' said Sam turning white, and then flushing scarlet. `There I go again! When ever you open your big mouth you put your foot in it the Gaffer used to say to me, and right enough. O dear, O dear!

`Now look here, sir! ' He turned, facing up to Faramir with all the courage that he could muster. `Don't you go taking advantage of my master because his servant's no better than a fool. You've spoken very handsome all along, put me off my guard, talking of Elves and all. But handsome is as handsome does we say. Now's a chance to show your quality.'

'So it seems,' said Faramir, slowly and very softly, with a strange smile. `So that is the answer to all the riddles! The One Ring that was thought to have perished from the world. And Boromir tried to take it by force? And you escaped? And ran all the way - to me! And here in the wild I have you: two halflings, and a host of men at my call, and the Ring of Rings. A pretty stroke of fortune! A chance for Faramir, Captain of Gondor, to show his quality! Ha!' He stood up, very tall and stern, his grey eyes glinting.

Frodo and Sam sprang from their stools and set themselves side by side with their backs to the wall, fumbling for their sword-hilts. There was a silence. All the men in the cave stopped talking and looked towards them in wonder. But Faramir sat down again in his chair and began to laugh quietly, and then suddenly became grave again.

'Alas for Boromir! It was too sore a trial! ' he said. `How you have increased my sorrow, you two strange wanderers from a far country, bearing the peril of Men! But you are less judges of Men than I of Halflings. We are truth-speakers, we men of Gondor. We boast seldom, and then perform, or die in the attempt. Not if I found it on the highway would I take it I said. Even if I were such a man as to desire this thing, and even though I knew not clearly what this thing was when I spoke, still I should take those words as a vow, and be held by them.

'But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough to know that there are some perils from which a man must flee. Sit at peace! And be comforted, Samwise. If you seem to have stumbled, think that it was fated to be so. Your heart is shrewd as well as faithful, and saw clearer than your eyes. For strange though it may seem, it was safe to declare this to me. It may even help the master that you love. It shall turn to his good, if it is in my power. So be comforted. But do not even name this thing again aloud. Once is enough.'

The hobbits came back to their seats and sat very quiet. Men turned back to their drink and their talk, perceiving that their captain had had some jest or other with the little guests, and that it was over.

'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,' said Faramir. 'If you took this thing on yourself, unwilling, at others' asking, then you have pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep it hid and not to use it. You are a new people and a new world to me. Are all your kin of like sort? Your land must be a realm of peace and content, and there must gardeners be in high honour.'

`Not all is well there,' said Frodo, `but certainly gardeners are honoured.'

`But folk must grow weary there, even in their gardens, as do all things under the Sun of this world. And you are far from home and wayworn. No more tonight. Sleep, both of you - in peace, if you can. Fear not! I do not wish to see it, or touch it, or know more of it than I know (which is enough), lest peril perchance waylay me and I fall lower in the test than Frodo son of Drogo. Go now to rest - but first tell me only, if you will, whither you wish to go, and what to do. For I must watch, and wait, and think. Time passes. In the morning we must each go swiftly on the ways appointed to us.'

Frodo had felt himself trembling as the first shock of fear passed. Now a great weariness came down on him like a cloud. He could dissemble and resist no longer.

'I was going to find a way into Mordor,' he said faintly. `I was going to Gorgoroth. I must find the Mountain of Fire and cast the thing into the gulf of Doom. Gandalf said so. I do not think I shall ever get there.'

Faramir stared at him for a moment in grave astonishment. Then suddenly he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carried him to the bed and laid him there, and covered him warmly. At once he fell into a deep sleep.

Another bed was set beside him for his servant. Sam hesitated for a moment, then bowing very low: `Good night, Captain, my lord,' he said. `You took the chance, sir.'

`Did I so?' said Faramir.

`Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.'

Faramir smiled. 'A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. Yet there was naught in this to praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.'

`Ah well, sir,' said Sam, `you said my master had an elvish air and that was good and true. But I can say this: you have an air too, sir, that reminds me of, of - well, Gandalf, of wizards.

'Maybe,' said Faramir. `Maybe you discern from far away the air of Númenor. Good night!'


'Then let us go to the forest,' said Aragorn.

It was not long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point, near the bank of the Entwash, he came upon footprints: hobbit-prints, but too light for much to be made of them. Then again beneath the bole of a great tree on the very edge of the wood more prints were discovered. The earth was bare and dry, and did not reveal much.

'One hobbit at least stood here for a while and looked back; and then he turned away into the forest,' said Aragorn.

'Then we must go in, too,' said Gimli. 'But I do not like the look of this Fangorn: and we were warned against it. I wish the chase had led anywhere else!'

'I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say,' said Legolas. He stood under the eaves of the forest, stooping forward, as if he were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows. 'No, it is not evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of dark places where the hearts of the trees are black. There is no malice near us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.'

'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,' said Gimli. 'I have done it no harm. '

'That is just as well,' said Legolas. 'But nonetheless it has suffered harm. There is something happening inside, or going to happen. Do you not feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.'

'I feel the air is stuffy,' said the Dwarf. 'This wood is lighter than Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.'

'It is old, very old,' said the Elf. 'So old that almost I feel young again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old and full of memory. I could have been happy here, if I had come in days of peace.'

'I dare say you could,' snorted Gimli. 'You are a Wood-elf, anyway, though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where you go, I will go. But keep your bow ready to hand, and I will keep my axe loose in my belt. Not for use on trees,' he added hastily, looking up at the tree under which they stood. 'I do not wish to meet that old man at unawares without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!'

With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for him to see. The floor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift of leaves; but guessing that the fugitives would stay near the water, he returned often to the banks of the stream. So it was that he came upon the place where Merry and Pippin had drunk and bathed their feet. There plain for all to see were the footprints of two hobbits, one somewhat smaller than the other.

'This is good tidings,' said Aragorn. 'Yet the marks are two days old And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water-side.'

'Then what shall we do now?' said Gimli. 'We cannot pursue them through the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do not find them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and show our friendship by starving together.'

'If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,' said Aragorn. 'Let us go on.'

They came at length to the steep abrupt end of Treebeard's Hill and looked up at the rock-wall with its rough steps leading to the high shelf. Gleams of sun were striking through the hurrying clouds, and the forest now looked less grey and drear.

'Let us go up and look about us!' said Legolas. 'I will feel my breath short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.'

The companions climbed up. Aragorn came last, moving slowly: he was scanning the steps and ledges closely.

'I am almost sure that the hobbits have been up here,' he said. 'But there are other marks, very strange marks, which I do not understand. I wonder if we can see anything from this ledge which will help us to guess which way they went next?'

He stood up and looked about, but he saw nothing that was of any use. The shelf faced southward and eastward; but only on the east was the view open. There he could see the heads of the trees descending in ranks towards the plain from which they had come.

'We have journeyed a long way round,' said Legolas. 'We could have all come here safe together, if we had left the Great River on the second or third day and struck west. Few can foresee whither their road will lead them, till they come to its end.'

'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,' said Gimli.

'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!'

'Look at what?' said Gimli.

'There in the trees.'

'Where? I have not elf-eyes.'

'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!' said Legolas pointing. 'Down in the wood, back in the Way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him, passing from tree to tree?'

'I see, I see now!' hissed Gimli. 'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you? There is the old man. All in dirty grey rags: that is why I could not see him at first.'

Aragorn looked and beheld a bent figure moving slowly. It was not far away. It looked like an old beggar-man, walking wearily, leaning on a rough staff. His head was bowed, and he did not look towards them. In other lands they would have greeted him with kind words; but now they stood silent, each feeling a strange expectancy: something was approaching that held a hidden power-or menace.

Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the figure drew nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he burst out: 'Your bow, Legolas! Bend it! Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or put a spell upon us! Shoot first!'

Legolas took his bow and bent it, slowly and as if some other will resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not fit it to the string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent.

'Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you?' said Gimli in a hissing whisper.

'Legolas is right,' said Aragorn quietly. 'We may not shoot an old man so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and wait!'

At that moment the old man quickened his pace and came with surprising speed to the foot of the rock-wall. Then suddenly he looked up, while they stood motionless looking down. There was no sound.

They could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he wore a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his features were over-shadowed, except for the end of his nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed to Aragorn that he caught the gleam of eyes keen and bright from within the shadow of the hooded brows.

At last the old man broke the silence. 'Well met indeed, my friends,' he said in a soft voice. 'I wish to speak to you. Will you come down or shall I come up?' Without waiting for an answer he began to climb.

'Now!' said Gimli. 'Stop him, Legolas!'

'Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?' said the old man. 'Put away that bow, Master Elf!'

The bow and arrow fell from Legolas' hands, and his arms hung loose at his sides.

'And you, Master Dwarf, pray take your hand from your axe-haft, till I am up! You will not need such arguments.'

Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a goat. All weariness seemed to have left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was a gleam, too brief for certainty, a quick glint of white, as if some garment shrouded by the grey rags had been for an instant revealed The intake of Gimli's breath could be heard as a loud hiss in the silence.

'Well met, I say again!' said the old man, coming towards them. When he was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with his head thrust forward, peering at them from under his hood. 'And what may you be doing in these parts? An Elf, a Man, and a Dwarf. all clad in elvish fashion. No doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind it all. Such things are not often seen here.'

'You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,' said Aragorn. 'Is that so?'

'Not well,' said the old man: 'that would be the study of many lives. But I come here now and again.'

'Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say to us?' said Aragorn. 'The morning passes, and we have an errand that will not wait.'

'As for what I wished to say, I have said it: What may you be doing, and what tale can you tell of yourselves? As for my name!' He broke off, laughing long and softly. Aragorn felt a shudder run through him at the sound, a strange cold thrill; and yet it was not fear or terror that he felt: rather it was like the sudden bite of a keen air, or the slap of a cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper.

'My name!' said the old man again. 'Have you not guessed it already? You have heard it before, I think. Yes, you have heard it before. But come now, what of your tale?'

The three companions stood silent and made no answer.

'There are some who would begin to doubt whether your errand is fit to tell,' said the old man. 'Happily I know something of it. You are tracking the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don't stare, as if you had never heard the strange name before. You have, and so have I. Well, they climbed up here the day before yesterday; and they met someone that they did not expect. Does that comfort you? And now you would like to know where they were taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news about that. But why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.'

The old man turned away and went towards a heap of fallen stones and rock at the foot of the cliff behind. Immediately, as if a spell had been removed, the others relaxed and stirred. Gimli's hand went at once to his axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his bow.

The old man took no notice, but stooped and sat himself on a low flat stone. Then his grey cloak drew apart, and they saw, beyond doubt, that he was clothed beneath all in white.

'Saruman!' cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand. 'speak! Tell us where you have hidden our friends! What have you done with them? Speak, or I will make a dint in your hat that even a wizard will find it hard to deal with!'

The old man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly tall, towering above them. His hood and his grey rags were flung away. His white garments shone. He lifted up his staff, and Gimli's axe leaped from his grasp and fell ringing on the ground. The sword of Aragorn, stiff in his motionless hand, blazed with a sudden fire. Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high into the air: it vanished in a flash of flame.

'Mithrandir!' he cried. 'Mithrandir!'

'Well met, I say to you again. Legolas!' said the old man.

They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in the sunshine; and gleaming white was his robe; the eyes under his deep brows were bright, piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between wonder, joy, and fear they stood and found no words to say.

At last Aragorn stirred. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'Beyond all hope you return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!' Gimli said nothing, hut sank to his knees, shading his eyes.

'Gandalf,' the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory a long disused word. 'Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.'

He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak wrapped it about him: it seemed as if the sun had been shining, but now was hid in cloud again. 'Yes, you may still call me Gandalf,' he said, and the voice was the voice of their old friend and guide. 'Get up, my good Gimli! No blame to you, and no harm done to me. Indeed my friends, none of you have any weapon that could hurt me. Be merry! We meet again. At the turn of the tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.'

He laid his hand on Gimli's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed suddenly. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'But you are all in white!'

'Yes, I am white now,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed I am Saruman, one might almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now, tell me of yourselves! I have passed through fire and deep water, since we parted. I have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had forgotten. I can see many things far off, but many things that are close at hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!'

'What do you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has happened since we parted on the bridge would be a long tale. Will you not first give us news of the hobbits? Did you find them, and are they safe?'

'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf. 'There was a darkness over the valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their captivity, until the eagle told me.'

'The eagle!' said Legolas. 'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.'

'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the River and gather tidings. His sight is keen, but he cannot see all that passes under hill and tree. Some things he has seen, and others I have seen myself. The Ring now has passed beyond my help, or the help of any of the Company that set out from Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to the Enemy, but it escaped. I had some part in that: for I sat in a high place, and I strove with the Dark Tower; and the Shadow passed. Then I was weary, very weary; and I walked long in dark thought.'

'Then you know about Frodo!' said Gimli. 'How do things go with him?'

'I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before him still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is all that I can say.'

'Not alone,' said Legolas. 'We think that Sam went with him.'

'Did he!' said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on his face. 'Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey.'

The companions sat on the ground at his feet, and Aragorn took up the tale. For a long while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no questions. His hands were spread upon his knees, and his eyes were closed. At last when Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of his last journey upon the Great River, the old man sighed.

'You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,' he said quietly. 'Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to him. It was a sore trial for such a man: a warrior, and a lord of men. Galadriel told me that he was in peril. But he escaped in the end. I am glad. It was not in vain that the young hobbits came with us, if only for Boromir's sake. But that is not the only part they have to play. They were brought to Fangorn, and their coming was like the falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains. Even as we talk here, I hear the first rumblings. Saruman had best not be caught away from home when the dam bursts!'

'In one thing you have not changed, dear friend,' said Aragorn: 'you still speak in riddles.'

'What? In riddles?' said Gandalf. 'No! For I was talking aloud to myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to speak to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.' He laughed, but the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam of sunshine.

'I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient Houses,' said Aragorn. 'Will you not open your mind more clearly to me?'

'What then shall I say?' said Gandalf, and paused for a while in thought. 'This in brief is how I see things at the moment, if you wish to have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of course, has long known that the Ring is abroad, and that it is borne by a hobbit. He knows now the number of our Company that set out from Rivendell, and the kind of each of us. But he does not yet perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes that we were all going to Minas Tirith; for that is what he would himself have done in our place. And according to his wisdom it would have been a heavy stroke against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what mighty one may suddenly appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with war, seeking to cast him down and take his place. That we should wish to cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought that occurs to his mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself has not yet entered into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you will see our good fortune and our hope. For imagining war he has let loose war, believing that he has no time to waste; for he that strikes the first blow, if he strikes it hard enough, may need to strike no more. So the forces that he has long been preparing he is now setting in motion, sooner than he intended. Wise fool. For if he had used all his power to guard Mordor, so that none could enter, and bent all his guild to the hunting of the Ring, then indeed hope would have faded: neither Ring nor Bearer could long have eluded him. But now his eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he looks towards Minas Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon it like a storm.

'For already he knows that the messengers that he sent to waylay the Company have failed again. They have not found the Ring. Neither have they brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they done even so much as that, it would have been a heavy blow to us, and it might have been fatal. But let us not darken our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the Dark Tower. For the Enemy has failed-so far. Thanks to Saruman:'

'Then is not Saruman a traitor?' said Gimli.

'Indeed yes,' said Gandalf. 'Doubly. And is not that strange? Nothing that we have endured of late has seemed so grievous as the treason of Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown very strong. He threatens the Men of Rohan and draws off their help from Minas Tirith, even as the main blow is approaching from the East. Yet a treacherous weapon is ever a danger to the hand. Saruman also had a mind to capture the Ring, for himself, or at least to snare some hobbits for his evil purposes. So between them our enemies have contrived only to bring Merry and Pippin with marvellous speed, and in the nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they would never have come at all!

'Also they have filled themselves with new doubts that disturb their plans. No tidings of the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to the horsemen of Rohan; but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were taken in the Emyn Muil and borne away towards Isengard against the will of his own servants. He now has Isengard to fear as well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls, it will go ill with Saruman.'

'It is a pity that our friends lie in between,' said Gimli. 'If no land divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could fight while we watched and waited.'

'The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from doubt,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard cannot fight Mordor, unless Saruman first obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril. There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on his messengers. But he came too late, for once, and the battle was over and beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not remain here long. I look into his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the field of battle; but he does not know whether the Orcs were bringing any prisoners or not. And he does not know of the quarrel between his servants and the Orcs of Mordor; nor does he know of the Winged Messenger.'

'The Winged Messenger!' cried Legolas. 'I shot at him with the bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky. He filled us all with fear. What new terror is this?'

'One that you cannot slay with arrows,' said Gandalf. 'You only slew his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again. For he was a Nazgûl, one of the Nine, who ride now upon winged steeds. Soon their terror will overshadow the last armies of our friends, cutting off the sun. But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and Saruman does not know of this new shape in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought is ever on the Ring. Was it present in the battle? Was it found? What if Théoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is the danger that he sees, and he has fled back to Isengard to double and treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close at hand, which he does not see, busy with his fiery thoughts. He has forgotten Treebeard.'

'Now you speak to yourself again,' said Aragorn with a smile. 'Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of Saruman's double treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn has served, save to give us a long and fruitless chase.'

'Wait a minute!' cried Gimli. 'There is another thing that I should like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?'

'You certainly did not see me,' answered Gandalf, 'therefore I must guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.'

'Good, good!' said Gimli. 'I am glad that it was not you.'

Gandalf laughed again. 'Yes, my good Dwarf,' he said, 'it is a comfort not to be mistaken at all points. Do I not know it only too well! But, of course, I never blamed you for your welcome of me. How could I do so, who have so often counselled my friends to suspect even their own hands when dealing with the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Glóin! Maybe you will see us both together one day and judge between us!'

'But the hobbits!' Legolas broke in. 'We have come far to seek them, and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?'

'With Treebeard and the Ents,' said Gandalf.

'The Ents!' exclaimed Aragorn. 'Then there is truth in the old legends about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the trees? Are there still Ents in the world? I thought they were only a memory of ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than a legend of Rohan.'

'A legend of Rohan!' cried Legolas. 'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us they are only a memory. If I were to meet one still walking in this world, then indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem to speak of a person. Who is this Treebeard?'

'Ah! now you are asking much,' said Gandalf. 'The little that I know of his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no time now. Treebeard is Fangorn, the guardian of the forest; he is the oldest of the Ents, the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the Sun upon this Middle-earth. I hope indeed, Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and Pippin have been fortunate: they met him here, even where we sit. For he came here two days ago and bore them away to his dwelling far off by the roots of the mountains. He often comes here, especially when his mind is uneasy, and rumours of the world outside trouble him. I saw him four days ago striding among the trees, and I think he saw me, for he paused; but I did not speak, for I was heavy with thought, and weary after my struggle with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.'

'Perhaps he also thought that you were Saruman,' said Gimli. 'But you speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.'

'Dangerous!' cried Gandalf. 'And so am I, very dangerous: more dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought alive before the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas is dangerous. You are beset with dangers, Gimli son of Glóin; for you are dangerous yourself, in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is perilous-not least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn himself, he is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled with it. The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: it will soon be running like a flood; but its tide is turned against Saruman and the axes of Isengard. A thing is about to happen which has not happened since the Elder Days: the Ents are going to wake up and find that they are strong.'

'What will they do?' asked Legolas in astonishment.

'I do not know,' said Gandalf. 'I do not think they know themselves. I wonder.' He fell silent, his head bowed in thought.

The others looked at him. A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell on his hands, which lay now upturned on his lap: they seemed to be filled with light as a cup is with water. At last he looked up and gazed straight at the sun.

'The morning is wearing away,' he said. 'Soon we must go.'

'Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard?' asked Aragorn.

'No,' said Gandalf. 'That is not the road that you must take. I have spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is upon us and all our friends, a war in which only the use of the Ring could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.'

He rose and gazed out eastward, shading his eyes, as if he saw things far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head. 'No,' he said in a soft voice, 'it has gone beyond our reach. Of that at least let us be glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring. We must go down to face a peril near despair, yet that deadly peril is removed.'

He turned. 'Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn!' he said. 'Do not regret your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil, nor call it a vain pursuit. You chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the choice was just, and it has been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who otherwise might have met too late. But the quest of your companions is over. Your next journey is marked by your given word. You must go to Edoras and seek out Théoden in his hall. For you are needed. The light of Andúril must now be uncovered in the battle for which it has so long waited. There is war in Rohan, and worse evil: it goes ill with Théoden.'

'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?' said Legolas.

'I did not say so,' said Gandalf. 'Who knows? Have patience. Go where you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.'

'It is a long way for a man to walk, young or old,' said Aragorn. 'I fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.'

'We shall see, we shall see,' said Gandalf. 'Will you come now with me?'

'Yes, we will set out together,' said Aragorn. 'But I do not doubt that you will come there before me, if you wish.' He rose and looked long at Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood there facing one another. The grey figure of the Man, Aragorn son of Arathorn, was tall, and stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of his sword; he looked as if some king out of the mists of the sea had stepped upon the shores of lesser men. Before him stooped the old figure, white; shining now as if with some light kindled within, bent, laden with years, but holding a power beyond the strength of kings.

'Do I not say truly, Gandalf,' said Aragorn at last, 'that you could go whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say: you are our captain and our banner. The Dark Lord has Nine. But we have One, mightier than they: the White Rider. He has passed through the fire and the abyss, and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.'

'Yes, together we will follow you,' said Legolas. 'But first, it would ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will you not tell us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?'

'I have stayed already too long,' answered Gandalf. 'Time is short. But if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.'

'Then tell us what you will, and time allows!' said Gimli. 'Come, Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!'

'Name him not!' said Gandalf, and for a moment it seemed that a cloud of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as death. 'Long time I fell,' he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back with difficulty. 'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then we plunged into the deep water and all was dark. Cold it was as the tide of death: almost it froze my heart.'

'Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin's Bridge, and none has measured it,' said Gimli.

'Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge,' said Gandalf. 'Thither I came at last, to the uttermost foundations of stone. He was with me still. His fire was quenched, but now he was a thing of slime, stronger than a strangling snake.

'We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted. Ever he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he fled into dark tunnels. They were not made by Durin's folk, Gimli son of Glóin. Far, far below the deepest delving of the Dwarves, the world is gnawed by nameless things. Even Sauron knows them not. They are older than he. Now I have walked there, but I will bring no report to darken the light of day. In that despair my enemy was my only hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel. Thus he brought me back at last to the secret ways of Khazad-dûm: too well he knew them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.'

'Long has that been lost,' said Gimli. 'Many have said that it was never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.'

'It was made, and it had not been destroyed,' said Gandalf. 'From the lowest dungeon to the highest peak it climbed. ascending in unbroken spiral in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in Durin's Tower carved in the living rock of Zirak-zigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine.

'There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay a narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world. The sun shone fiercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud. Out he sprang, and even as I came behind, he burst into new flame. There was none to see, or perhaps in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak.' Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'But what would they say in song? Those that looked up from afar thought that the mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard, and lightning, they said, smote upon Celebdil, and leaped back broken into tongues of fire. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about us, vapour and steam. Ice fell like rain. I threw down my enemy, and he fell from the high place and broke the mountain-side where he smote it in his ruin. Then darkness took me; and I strayed out of thought and time, and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell.

'Naked I was sent back - for a brief time, until my task is done. And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. The tower behind was crumbled into dust, the window gone; the ruined stair was choked with burned and broken stone. I was alone, forgotten, without escape upon the hard horn of the world. There I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long as a life-age of the earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all lands: the springing and the dying, the song and the weeping, and the slow everlasting groan of overburdened stone. And so at the last Gwaihir the Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away.

' 'Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,' I said.

' 'A burden you have been,' he answered, 'but not so now. Light as a swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines through you. Indeed I do not think you need me any more: were I to let you fall you would float upon the wind.'

' 'Do not let me fall!' I gasped, for I felt life in me again. 'Bear me to Lothlórien!'

' 'That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look for you,' he answered.

'Thus it was that I came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately gone. I tarried there in the ageless time of that land where days bring healing not decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed in white. Counsel I gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came, and messages I bring to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to say this:

Where now are the Dúnedain, Elessar, Elessar?

Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?

Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth,

And the Grey Company ride from the North.

But dark is the path appointed for thee:

The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.

To Legolas she sent this word:

Legolas Greenleaf long under tree

In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!

If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore,

Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.'

Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.

'Then she sent me no message?' said Gimli and bent his head.

'Dark are her words,' said Legolas, 'and little do they mean to those that receive them.'

'That is no comfort,' said Gimli.

'What then?' said Legolas. 'Would you have her speak openly to you of your death?'

'Yes. if she had nought else to say.'

'What is that?' said Gandalf, opening his eyes. 'Yes, I think I can guess what her words may mean. Your pardon, Gimli! I was pondering the messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you, and neither dark nor sad.

' "To Gimli son of Glóin," she said, "give his Lady's greeting. Lock-bearer, wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee. But have a care to lay thine axe to the right tree!" '

'In happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf,' cried the Dwarf, capering as he sang loudly in the strange dwarf-tongue. 'Come, come!' he shouted, swinging his axe. 'Since Gandalf's head is now sacred, let us find one that it is right to cleave!'

'That will not be far to seek,' said Gandalf, rising from his seat. 'Come! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of parted friends. Now there is need of haste.'

He wrapped himself again in his old tattered cloak, and led the way. Following him they descended quickly from the high shelf and made their way back through the forest, down the bank of the Entwash. They spoke no more words, until they stood again upon the grass beyond the eaves of Fangorn. There was no sign of their horses to be seen.

'They have not returned,' said Legolas. 'It will be a weary walk!'

'I shall not walk. Time presses,' said Gandalf. Then lifting up his head he gave a long whistle. So clear and piercing was the note that the others stood amazed to hear such a sound come from those old bearded lips. Three times he whistled; and then faint and far off it seemed to them that they heard the whinny of a horse borne up from the plains upon the eastern wind. They waited wondering. Before long there came the sound of hoofs, at first hardly more than a tremor of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as he lay upon the grass, then growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick beat.

'There is more than one horse coming,' said Aragorn.

'Certainly,' said Gandalf. 'We are too great a burden for one.'

'There are three,' said Legolas, gazing out over the plain. 'See how they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside him! But there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his like before.'

'Nor will you again,' said Gandalf. 'That is Shadowfax. He is the chief of the Mearas, lords of horses, and not even Théoden, King of Rohan, has ever looked on a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White Rider. We are going to battle together.'

Even as the old wizard spoke, the great horse came striding up the slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane flowing in the wind of his speed. The two others followed, now far behind. As soon as Shadowfax saw Gandalf, he checked his pace and whinnied loudly; then trotting gently forward he stooped his proud head and nuzzled his great nostrils against the old man's neck.

Gandalf caressed him. 'It is a long way from Rivendell, my friend,' he said; 'but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us ride now together, and part not in this world again!'

Soon the other horses came up and stood quietly by, as if awaiting orders. 'We go at once to Meduseld, the hall of your master, Théoden,' said Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their heads. 'Time presses, so with your leave, my friends, we will ride. We beg you to use all the speed that you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli before me, and by his leave Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now only to drink a little.'

'Now I understand a part of last night's riddle,' said Legolas as he sprang lightly upon Arod's back. 'Whether they fled at first in fear, or not, our horses met Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with joy. Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?'

'Yes, I knew,' said the wizard. 'I bent my thought upon him, bidding him to make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south of this land. Swiftly may he bear me back again!'

Gandalf spoke now to Shadowfax, and the horse set off at a good pace, yet not beyond the measure of the others. After a little while he turned suddenly, and choosing a place where the banks were lower, he waded the river, and then led them away due south into a flat land, treeless and wide. The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of grass. There was no sign of road or track, but Shadowfax did not stay or falter.

'He is steering a straight course now for the halls of Théoden under the slopes of the White Mountains,' said Gandalf. 'It will be quicker so. The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies, across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.'

For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the grass was so high that it reached above the knees of the riders, and their steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea. They came upon many hidden pools, and broad acres of sedge waving above wet and treacherous bogs; but Shadowfax found the way, and the other horses followed in his swath. Slowly the sun fell from the sky down into the West. Looking out over the great plain, far away the riders saw it for a moment like a red fire sinking into the grass. Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun's disc to the hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed down under the rim of earth.

'There lies the Gap of Rohan,' said Gandalf. 'It is now almost due west of us. That way lies Isengard.'

'I see a great smoke,' said Legolas. 'What may that be?'

'Battle and war!' said Gandalf. 'Ride on!'



Chapter 6
The King of the Golden Hall
They rode on through sunset, and slow dusk, and gathering night. When at last they halted and dismounted, even Aragorn was stiff and weary. Gandalf only allowed them a few hours' rest. Legolas and Gimli slept and Aragorn lay flat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his staff, gazing into the darkness, east and west. All was silent, and there was no sign or sound of living thing. The night was barred with long clouds, fleeting on a chill wind, when they arose again. Under the cold moon they went on once more, as swift as by the light of day.

Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him. Hasufel and Arod, weary but proud, followed their tireless leader, a grey shadow before them hardly to he seen. The miles went by. The waxing moon sank into the cloudy West.

A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark faded to a cold grey. Red shafts of light leapt above the black walls of the Emyn Muil far away upon their left. Dawn came clear and bright; a wind swept across their path, rushing through the bent grasses. Suddenly Shadowfax stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead.

'Look!' he cried, and they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood the mountains of the South: white-tipped and streaked with black. The grass-lands rolled against the hills that clustered at their feet, and flowed up into many valleys still dim and dark, untouched by the light of dawn, winding their way into the heart of the great mountains. Immediately before the travellers the widest of these glens opened like a long gulf among the hills. Far inward they glimpsed a tumbled mountain-mass with one tall peak; at the mouth of the vale there stood like sentinel a lonely height. About its feet there flowed, as a thread of silver, the stream that issued from the dale; upon its brow they caught, still far away, a glint in the rising sun, a glimmer of gold. 'Speak, Legolas!' said Gandalf. 'Tell us what you see there before us!'

Legolas gazed ahead, shading his eyes from the level shafts of the new-risen sun. 'I see a white stream that comes down from the snows,' he said. 'Where it issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill rises upon the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle it. Within there rise the roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there stands aloft a great hall of Men. And it seems to my eyes that it is thatched with gold. The light of it shines far over the land. Golden, too, are the posts of its doors. There men in bright mail stand; but all else within the courts are yet asleep.'

'Edoras those courts are called,' said Gandalf, 'and Meduseld is that golden hall. There dwells Théoden son of Thengel, King of the Mark of Rohan. We are come with the rising of the day. Now the road lies plain to see before us. But we must ride more warily; for war is abroad, and the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even if it seem so from afar. Draw no weapon, speak no haughty word, I counsel you all, until we are come before Théoden's seat.'

The morning was bright and clear about them, and birds were singing, when the travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly into the plain, and beyond the feet of the hills turned across their path in a wide bend, flowing away east to feed the Entwash far off in its reed-choked beds. The land was green: in the wet meads and along the grassy borders of the stream grew many willow-trees. Already in this southern land they were blushing red at their fingertips. Feeling the approach of spring. Over the stream there was a ford between low banks much trampled by the passage of horses. The travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading towards the uplands.

At the foot of the walled hill the way ran under the shadow of many mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass was white as with a drifted snow: small flowers sprang there like countless stars amid the turf.

'Look!' said Gandalf. 'How fair are the bright eyes in the grass! Evermind they are called, simbelmynë in this land of Men, for they blossom in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men rest. Behold! we are come to the great barrows where the sires of Théoden sleep.' 'Seven mounds upon the left, and nine upon the right,' said Aragorn. 'Many long lives of men it is since the golden hall was built.'

'Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home since then,' said Legolas, 'and but a little while does that seem to us.'

'But to the Riders of the Mark it seems so long ago,' said Aragorn, 'that the raising of this house is but a memory of song, and the years before are lost in the mist of time. Now they call this land their home, their own, and their speech is sundered from their northern kin.' Then he began to chant softly in a slow tongue unknown to the Elf and Dwarf; yet they listened, for there was a strong music in it.

'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,' said Legolas; 'for it is like to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and else hard and stern as the mountains. But I cannot guess what it means, save that it is laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.'

'It runs thus in the Common Speech,' said Aragorn, 'as near as I can make it.

Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?

Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing?

Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing?

Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?

They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow;

The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.

Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning,

Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning?

Thus spoke a forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall and fair was Eorl the Young, who rode down out of the North; and there were wings upon the feet of his steed, Felaróf, father of horses. So men still sing in the evening.'

With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the winding way up the green shoulders of the hills, they came at last to the wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.

There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and barred the way with spears. 'Stay, strangers here unknown!' they cried in the tongue of the Riddermark, demanding the names and errand of the strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked darkly upon Gandalf.

'Well do I understand your speech,' he answered in the same language; 'yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue, as is the custom in the West, if you wish to be answered?'

'It is the will of Théoden King that none should enter his gates, save those who know our tongue and are our friends,' replied one of the guards. 'None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk, and those that come from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over the plain thus strangely clad, riding horses like to our own horses? Long have we kept guard here, and we have watched you from afar. Never have we seen other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is one of these that bear you. He is One of the Mearas, unless our eyes are cheated by some spell. Say, are you not a wizard, some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his craft? Speak now and be swift!'

'We are no phantoms,' said Aragorn, 'nor do your eyes cheat you. For indeed these are your own horses that we ride, as you knew well are you asked, I guess. But seldom does thief ride home to the stable. Here are Hasufel and Arod, that Éomer, the Third Marshal of the Mark, lent to us, only two days ago. We bring them back now, even as we promised him. Has not Éomer then returned and given warning of our coming?'

A troubled look came into the guard's eyes. 'Of Éomer I have naught to say,' he answered. 'If what you tell me is truth, then doubtless Théoden will have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and said that by the will of Théoden no stranger should pass these gates.'

'Wormtongue?' said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. 'Say no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in haste. Will you not go or send to say that we are come?' His eyes glinted under his deep brows as he bent his gaze upon the man.

'Yes, I will go,' he answered slowly. 'But what names shall I report? And what shall I say of you? Old and weary you seem now, and yet you are fell and grim beneath, I deem'

'Well do you see and speak,' said the wizard. 'For I am Gandalf. I have returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is Shadowfax the Great, whom no other hand can tame. And here beside me is Aragorn son of Arathorn, the heir of Kings, and it is to Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas the Elf and Gimli the Dwarf, our comrades. Go now and say to your master that we are at his gates and would have speech with him, if he will permit us to come into his hall.' 'Strange names you give indeed! But I will report them as you bid and learn my master's will,' said the guard. 'Wait here a little while, and f will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do not hope too much! These are dark days.' He went swiftly away, leaving the strangers in the watchful keeping of his comrades. After some time he returned. 'Follow me!' he said. 'Théoden gives you leave to enter; but any weapon that you bear; be it only a staff, you must leave on the threshold. The doorwardens will keep them.'

The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking in file behind their guide. They found a broad path, paved with hewn stones, now winding upward, now climbing in short flights of well-laid steps. Many houses built of wood and many dark doors they passed. Beside the way in a stone channel a stream of clear water flowed, sparkling and chattering. At length they came to the crown of the hill. There stood a high platform above a green terrace, at the foot of which a bright spring gushed from a stone carved in the likeness of a horse's head; beneath was a wide basin from which the water. spilled and fed the falling stream. Up the green terrace went a stair of stone, high and broad, and on either side of the topmost step were stone-hewn sea, There sat other guards, with drawn swords laid upon their knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders the sun was blazoned upon their green shields, their long corslets were burnished bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than mortal men.

'There are the doors before you,' said the guide. 'I must return now to my duty at the gate. Farewell! And may the Lord of the Mark be gracious to you!'

He turned and went swiftly back down the road. The others climbed the long stair under the eyes of the tall watchmen. Silent they stood now above and spoke no word, until Gandalf stepped out upon the paved terrace at the stairs head. Then suddenly with clear voices they spoke a courteous greeting in their own tongue.

Hail, corners from afar!' they said, and they turned the hilts of their swords towards the travellers in token of peace. Green gems flashed in the sunlight. Then one of the guards stepped forward and spoke in the Common Speech.

'I am the Doorward of Théoden,' he said. 'Háma is my name. Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.'

Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver-hafted knife, his quiver and his bow. 'Keep these well,' he said, 'for they come from the Golden Wood and the Lady of Lothlórien gave them to me.'

Wonder came into the man's eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the wall, as if he feared to handle them. 'No man will touch them I promise you,' he said.

Aragorn stood a while hesitating. 'It is not my will,' he said, 'to put aside my sword or to deliver Andúril to the hand of any other man.'

'It is the will of Théoden,' said Háma.

'It is not clear to me that the will of Théoden son of Thengel even though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elendil's heir of Gondor.'

'This is the house of Théoden, not of Aragorn, even were he King of Gondor in the seat of Denethor,' said Háma, stepping swiftly before the doors and barring the way. His sword was now in his hand and the point towards the strangers.

'This is idle talk,' said Gandalf. 'Needless is Théoden's demand, but it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own hall, be it folly or wisdom.'

'Truly,' said Aragorn. 'And I would do as the master of the house bade me, were this only a woodman's cot, if I bore now any sword but Andúril.'

'Whatever its name may be,' said Háma, 'here you shall lay it, if you would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.'

'Not alone!' said Gimli, fingering the blade of his axe, and looking darkly up at the guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a mind to fell. 'Not alone!'

'Come, come!' said Gandalf. 'We are all friends here. Or should be; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. My errand is pressing. Here at least is my sword, goodman Háma. Keep it well. Glamdring it is called, for the Elves made it long ago. Now let me pass. Come, Aragorn!'

Slowly Aragorn unbuckled his belt and himself set his sword upright against the wall. 'Here I set it,' he said; 'but I command you not to touch it, nor to permit any other to lay hand on it. In this elvish heath dwells the Blade that was Broken and has been made again. Telchar first wrought it in the deeps of time. Death shall come to any man that draws Elendil's sword save Elendil's heir.'

The guard stepped back and looked with amazement on Aragorn. 'It seems that you are come on the wings of song out of the forgotten days he said. It shall be, lord, as you command.

'Well,' said Gimli, 'if it has Andúril to keep it company, my axe may stay here, too, without shame'; and he laid it on the floor. 'Now then, if all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.'

The guard still hesitated. 'Your staff,' he said to Gandalf. 'Forgive me, but that too must be left at the doors.'

'Foolishness!' said Gandalf. 'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, then I will sit out here, until it pleases Théoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.'

Aragorn laughed. 'Every man has something too dear to trust to another. But would you part an old man from his support? Come, will you not let us enter?'

'The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for age' said Háma. He looked hard at the ash-staff on which Gandalf leaned. 'Yet in doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom. I believe you are friends and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.'

The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung them slowly inwards grumbling on their great hinges. The travellers entered. Inside it seemed dark and warm after the clear air upon the hill. The hall was long and wide and filled with shadows and half lights; mighty pillars upheld its lofty roof. But here and there bright sunbeams fell in glimmering shafts from the eastern windows, high under the deep eaves. Through the louver in the roof, above the thin wisps of issuing smoke, the sky showed pale and blue. As their eyes changed, the travellers perceived that the floor was paved with stones of many hues; branching runes and strange devices intertwined beneath their feet. They saw now that the pillars were richly carved, gleaming dully with gold and half-seen colours. Many woven cloths were hung upon the walls, and over their wide spaces marched figures of ancient legend, some dim with years, some darkling in the shade. But upon one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse. He was blowing a great horn, and his yellow hair was flying in the wind. The horse's head was lifted, and its nostrils were wide and red as it neighed, smelling battle afar. Foaming water, green and white, rushed and curled about its knees.

'Behold Eorl the Young!' said Aragorn. 'Thus he rode out of the North to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.'

Now the four companions went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning upon the long hearth in the midst of the hall. Then they halted. At the far end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing north towards the doors, was a dais with three steps; and in the middle of the dais was a great gilded chair. Upon it sat a man so bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but his white hair was long and thick and fell in great braids from beneath a thin golden circle set upon his brow. In the centre upon his forehead shone a single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees; but his eyes still burned with a bright light, glinting as he gazed at the strangers. Behind his chair stood a woman clad in white. At his feet upon the steps sat a wizened figure of a man, with a pale wise face and heavy-lidded eyes.

There was a silence. The old man did not move in his chair. At length Gandalf spoke. 'Hail, Théoden son of Thengel! I have returned. For behold! the storm comes, and now all friends should gather together, lest each singly be destroyed.'

Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short black staff with a handle of white bone; and now the strangers saw that, bent though he was, he was still tall and must in youth have been high and proud indeed.

'I greet you,' he said, 'and maybe you look for welcome. But truth to tell your welcome is doubtful here, Master Gandalf. You have ever been a herald of woe. Troubles follow you like crows, and ever the oftener the worse. I will not deceive you: when I heard that Shadowfax had come back riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but still more at the lack of the rider; and when Éomer brought the tidings that you had gone at last to your long home, I did not mourn. But news from afar is seldom sooth. Here you come again! And with you come evils worse than before, as might be expected. Why should I welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.' Slowly he sat down again in his chair.

'You speak justly, lord,' said the pale man sitting upon the steps of the dais. 'It is not yet five days since the bitter tidings came that Théodred your son was slain upon the West Marches: your right hand, Second Marshal Of the Mark. In Éomer there is little trust. Few men would be left to guard your walls, if he had been allowed to rule. And even now we learn from Gondor that the Dark Lord is stirring in the East. Such is the hour in which this wanderer chooses to return. Why indeed should we welcome you, Master Stormcrow? Láthspell I name you, Ill-news; and ill news is an ill guest they say.' He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment and gazed on the strangers with dark eyes.

'You are held wise, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a great support to your master,' answered Gandalf in a soft voice. 'Yet in two ways may a man come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.'

'That is so,' said Wormtongue; 'but there is a third kind: pickers of bones, meddlers in other men's sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow fat on war. What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now? It was aid from us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord bade you Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and to the wonder of all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not too great. I guess that it is likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid rather than render it. Do you bring men? Do you bring horses, swords, spears? That I would call aid; that is our present need. But who are these that follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey, and you yourself the most beggar-like of the four!'

'The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Théoden son of Thengel,' said Gandalf. 'Has not the messenger from your gate reported the names of my companions? Seldom has any lord of Rohan received three such guests. Weapons they have laid at your doors that are worth many a mortal man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.'

'Then it is true, as Éomer reported, that you are in league with the Sorceress of the Golden Wood?' said Wormtongue. 'It is not to be wondered at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.'

Gimli strode a pace forward, but felt suddenly the hand of Gandalf clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone.

In Dwimordene, in Lórien

Seldom have walked the feet of Men,

Few mortal eyes have seen the light

That lies there ever, long and bright.

Galadriel! Galadriel!

Clear is the water of your well;

White is the star in your white hand;

Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land

In Dwimordene, in Lórien

More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men.

Thus Gandalf softly sang, and then suddenly he changed. Casting his tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned no longer on his staff; and he spoke in a clear cold voice. 'The wise speak only of what they know, Gríma son of Gálmód. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through fire and death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning falls.' He raised his staff. There was a roll of thunder. The sunlight was blotted out from the eastern windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night. The fire faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf could be seen, standing white and tall before the blackened hearth.

In the gloom they heard the hiss of Wormtongue's voice: 'Did I not counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff? That fool, Háma, has betrayed us!' There was a flash as if lightning had cloven the roof. Then all was silent. Wormtongue sprawled on his face.

'Now Théoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?' said Gandalf. 'Do you ask for help?' He lifted his staff and pointed to a high window. There the darkness seemed to clear, and through the opening could be seen, high and far, a patch of shining sky. 'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the Mark; for better help you will not find. No counsel have I to give to those that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will you hear them? They are not for all ears. I bid you come out before your doors and look abroad. Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to twisted tales and crooked promptings.'

Slowly Théoden left his chair. A faint light grew in the hall again. The woman hastened to the king's side, taking his arm, and with faltering steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly through the hall. Wormtongue remained lying on the floor. They came to the doors and Gandalf knocked.

'Open!' he cried. 'The Lord of the Mark comes forth!'

The doors rolled back and a keen air came whistling in. A wind was blowing on the hill. 'Send your guards down to the stairs foot,' said Gandalf. 'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.'

'Go, Éowyn sister-daughter!' said the old king. 'The time for fear is past.'

The woman turned and went slowly into the house. As she passed the doors she turned and looked back. Grave and thoughtful was her glance, as she looked on the king with cool pity in her eyes. Very fair was her face, and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and tall she was in her white robe girt with silver; but strong she seemed and stern as steel, a daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the first time in the full light of day beheld Éowyn, Lady of Rohan, and thought her fair, fair and cold, like a morning of pale spring that is not yet come to womanhood. And she now was suddenly aware of him: tall heir of kings, wise with many winters, greycloaked. Hiding a power that yet she felt. For a moment still as stone she stood, then turning swiftly she was gone.

'Now, lord,' said Gandalf, 'look out upon your land! Breathe the free air again!'

From the porch upon the top of the high terrace they could see beyond the stream the green fields of Rohan fading into distant grey. Curtains of wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and to the west was still dark with thunder, and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden hills. But the wind had shifted to the north, and already the storm that had come out of the East was receding, rolling away southward to the sea. Suddenly through a rent in the clouds behind them a shaft of sun stabbed down. The falling showers gleamed like silver, and far away the river glittered like a shimmering glass.

'It is not so dark here,' said Théoden.

'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders as some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!'

From the king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He drew himself up, slowly, as a man that is stiff from long bending over some dull toil. Now tall and straight he stood, and his eyes were blue as he looked into the opening sky.

'Dark have been my dreams of late,' he said, 'but I feel as one new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I fear that already you have come too late, only to see the last days of my house. Not long now shall stand the high hall which Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall devour the high seat. What is to be done?'

'Much,' said Gandalf. 'But first send for Éomer. Do I not guess rightly that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Gríma, of him that all save you name the Wormtongue?'

'It is true,' said Théoden. 'He had rebelled against my commands, and threatened death to Gríma in my hall.'

'A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels' said Gandalf.

'That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Háma to me. Since he proved untrusty as a doorward, let him become an errand-runner. The guilty shall bring the guilty to judgement,' said Théoden, and his voice was grim, yet he looked at Gandalf and smiled and as he did so many lines of care were smoothed away and did not return.

When Háma had been summoned and had gone, Gandalf led Théoden to a stone seat, and then sat himself before the king upon the topmost stair. Aragorn and his companions stood nearby.

'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,' said Gandalf. 'Yet if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I can speak more fully. Behold! you are come into a peril greater even than the wit of Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see! you dream no longer. You live. Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning, yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed.'

Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice was low and secret, and none save the king heard what he said. But ever as he spoke the light shone brighter in Théoden's eye, and at the last he rose from his seat to his full height, and Gandalf beside him, and together they looked out from the high place towards the East.

'Verily,' said Gandalf, now in a loud voice, keen and clear, 'that way lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still on a thread. Yet hope there is still, if we can but stand unconquered for a little while.'

The others too now turned their eyes eastward. Over the sundering leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope and fear bore their thoughts still on, beyond dark mountains to the Land of Shadow. Where now was the Ring-bearer? How thin indeed was the thread upon which doom still hung! It seemed to Legolas, as he strained his farseeing eyes, that he caught a glint of white: far away perchance the sun twinkled on a pinnacle of the Tower of Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet a present threat, there was a tiny tongue of flame.

Slowly Théoden sat down again, as if weariness still struggled to master him against the will of Gandalf. He turned and looked at his great house. 'Alas!' he said, 'that these evil days should be mine, and should come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned. Alas for Boromir the brave! The young perish and the old linger, withering.' He clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands.

'Your fingers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped a sword-hilt,' said Gandalf.

Théoden rose and put his hand to his side; but no sword hung at his belt. 'Where has Gríma stowed it?' he muttered under his breath.

'Take this, dear lord!' said a clear voice. 'It was ever at your service.' Two men had come softly up the stair and stood now a few steps from the top. Éomer was there. No helm was on his head, no mail was on his breast, but in his hand he held a drawn sword; and as he knelt he offered the hilt to his master.

'How comes this?' said Théoden sternly. He turned towards Éomer and the men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and erect. Where was the old man whom they had left crouching in his chair or leaning on his stick?

'It is my doing, lord,' said Háma, trembling. I understood that Éomer was to be set free. Such joy was in my heart that maybe I have erred. Yet, since he was free again, and he a Marshal of the Mark,! brought him his sword as he bade me.'

'To lay at your feet, my lord,' said Éomer.

For a moment of silence Théoden stood looking down at Éomer as he knelt still before him. Neither moved.

'Will you not take the sword?' said Gandalf.

Slowly Théoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers took the hilt, it seemed to the watchers that firmness and strength returned to his thin arm. Suddenly he lifted the blade and swung it shimmering and whistling in the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang clear as he chanted in the tongue of Rohan a call to arms.

Arise now, arise, Riders of Théoden!

Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.

Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded!

Forth Eorlingas!

The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stair. They looked at their lord in amazement, and then as one man they drew their swords and laid them at his feet. 'Command us!' they said.

'Westu Théoden hál!' cried Éomer. 'It is a joy to us to see you return into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only with grief!'

'Take back your sword, Éomer, sister-son!' said the king. 'Go, Háma, and seek my own sword! Gríma has it in his keeping. Bring him to me also. Now, Gandalf, you said that you had counsel to give, if I would hear it. What is your counsel?'

'You have yourself already taken it,' answered Gandalf. 'To put your trust in Éomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast aside regret and fear. To do the deed at hand. Every man that can ride should be sent west at once, as Éomer counselled you: we must first destroy the threat of Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we fall. If we succeed - then we will face the next task. Meanwhile your people that are left, the women and the children and the old, should stay to the refuges that you have in the mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let them take provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves with treasures, great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.'

'This counsel seems good to me now,' said Théoden. 'Let all my folk get ready! But you my guests-truly you said, Gandalf, that the courtesy of my hall is lessened. You have ridden through the night, and the morning wears away. You have had neither sleep nor food. A guest-house shall be made ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.'

'Nay, lord,' said Aragorn. 'There is no rest yet for the weary. The men of Rohan must ride forth today, and we will ride with them, axe, sword, and bow. We did not bring them to rest against your wall, Lord of the Mark. And I promised Éomer that my sword and his should be drawn together.'

'Now indeed there is hope of victory!' said Éomer.

'Hope, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard is strong. And other perils draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Théoden, when we are gone. Lead your people swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!'

'Nay, Gandalf!' said the king. 'You do not know your own skill in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in the front of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.'

'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,' said Aragorn. The armed men that stood near clashed their weapons, crying: 'The Lord of the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!'

'But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless' said Gandalf. 'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?'

'I will take thought for that ere I go,' answered Théoden. 'Here comes my counsellor.'

At that moment Háma came again from the hall. Behind him cringing between two other men, came Gríma the Wormtongue. His face was very white. His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Háma knelt and presented to Théoden a long sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and set with green gems. 'Here, lord, is Herugrim, your ancient blade,' he said. 'It was found in his chest. Loth was he to render up the keys. Many other things are there which men have missed.'

'You lie,' said Wormtongue. 'And this sword your master himself gave into my keeping.'

'And he now requires it of you again,' said Théoden. 'Does that displease you?'

'Assuredly not. lord,' said Wormtongue. 'I care for you and yours as best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let others deal with these irksome guests. Your meat is about to be set on the board. Will you not go to it?'

'I will,' said Théoden. 'And let food for my guests be set on the board beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all who dwell nigh! Every man and strong lad able to bear arms, all who have horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from noon!'

'Dear lord!' cried Wormtongue. 'It is as I feared. This wizard has bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of your fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?'

'If this is bewitchment,' said Théoden, 'it seems to me more wholesome than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on all fours like a beast. No, not one shall be left, not even Gríma. Gríma shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean the rust from your sword.'

'Mercy, lord!' whined Wormtongue, grovelling on the ground. 'Have pity on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will stand by you when all others have gone. Do not send your faithful Gríma away!'

'You have my pity,' said Théoden. 'And I do not send you from my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me and prove your faith.'

Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted look of a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked his lips with a long pale tongue. 'Such a resolve might be expected from a lord of the House of Eorl, old though he be,' he said. 'But those who truly love him would spare his failing years. Yet I see that I come too late. Others, whom the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded him. If I cannot undo their work, hear me at least in this, lord! One who knows your mind and honours your commands should be left in Edoras. Appoint a faithful steward. Let your counsellor Gríma keep all things till your return-and I pray that we may see it, though no wise man will deem it hopeful.'

Éomer laughed. 'And if that plea does not excuse you from war, most noble Wormtongue,' he said, what office of less honour would you accept? To carry a sack of meal up into the mountains-if any man would trust you with it?'

'Nay, Éomer, you do not fully understand the mind of Master Wormtongue,' said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him. 'He is bold and cunning. Even now he plays a game with peril and wins a throw. Hours of my precious time he has wasted already. 'Down snake!' he said suddenly in a terrible voice. 'Down on your belly! How long is it since Saruman bought you? What was the promised price? When all the men were dead, you were to pick your share of the treasure, and take the woman you desire? Too long have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.'

Éomer grasped his sword. 'That I knew already,' he muttered. 'For that reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of the hall. But there are other reasons.' He stepped forward, but Gandalf stayed him with his hand.

'Éowyn is safe now,' he said. 'But you, Wormtongue, you have done what you could for your true master. Some reward you have earned at least. Yet Saruman is apt to overlook his bargains. I should advise you to go quickly and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.'

'You lie,' said Wormtongue.

'That word comes too oft and easy from your lips,' said Gandalf. 'I do not lie. See, Théoden, here is a snake! With safety you cannot take it with you, nor can you leave it behind. To slay it would be just. But it was not always as it now is. Once it was a man, and did you service in its fashion. Give him a horse and let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice you shall judge him.'

'Do you hear this, Wormtongue?' said Théoden. 'This is your choice: to ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go now, whither you will. But then, if ever we meet again, I shall not be merciful.'

Slowly Wormtongue rose. He looked at them with half-closed eyes. Last of all he scanned Théoden's face and opened his mouth as if to speak. Then suddenly he drew himself up. His hands worked. His eyes glittered. Such malice was in them that men stepped back from him. He bared his teeth; and then with a hissing breath he spat before the king's feet, and darting to one side, he fled down the stair.

'After him!' said Théoden. 'See that he does no harm to any, but do not hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.'

'And if any will bear him,' said Éomer.

One of the guards ran down the stair. Another went to the well at the foot of the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he washed clean the stones that Wormtongue had defiled.

'Now my guests, come!' said Théoden. 'Come and take such refreshment as haste allows.'

They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below them in the town the heralds crying and the war-horns blowing. For the king was to ride forth as soon as the men of the town and those dwelling near could be armed and assembled.

At the king's board sat Éomer and the four guests, and there also waiting upon the king was the lady Éowyn. They ate and drank swiftly. The others were silent while Théoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman.

'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?' said Gandalf. 'He was not always evil. Once I do not doubt that he was the friend of Rohan; and even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful still. But for long now he has plotted your ruin, wearing the mask of Friendship, until he was ready. In those years Wormtongue's task was easy, and all that you did was swiftly known in Isengard; for your land was open, and strangers came and went. And ever Wormtongue's whispering was in your ears, poisoning your thought, chilling your heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and could do nothing, for your will was in his keeping.

'But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for those who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously, always seeking to delay you, to prevent your full strength being gathered. He was crafty: dulling men's wariness, or working on their fears, as served the occasion. Do you not remember how eagerly he urged that no man should be spared on a wildgoose chase northward, when the immediate peril was westward? He persuaded you to forbid Éomer to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Éomer had not defied Wormtongue's voice speaking with your mouth, those Orcs would have reached Isengard by now, bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which Saruman desires above all else, but at the least two members of my Company, sharers of a secret hope, of which even to you, lord, I cannot yet speak openly. Dare you think of what they might now be suffering, or what Saruman might now have learned to our destruction?'

'I owe much to Éomer,' said Théoden. 'Faithful heart may have forward tongue.' 'Say also,' said Gandalf, 'that to crooked eyes truth may wear a wry face.'

'Indeed my eyes were almost blind,' said Théoden. 'Most of all I owe to you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give you a gift ere we go, at your own choosing. You have only to name aught that is mine. I reserve now only my sword!'

'Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen,' said Gandalf. 'But as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will fit my need: swift and sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was only lent before, if loan we may call it. But now shall ride him into great hazard, setting silver against black: I would not risk anything that is not my own. And already there is a bond of love between us.'

'You choose well,' said Théoden; 'and I give him now gladly. Yet it is a great gift. There is none like to Shadowfax. In him one of the mighty steeds of old has returned. None such shall return again. And to you my other guests I will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords you do not need, but there are helms and coats of mail of cunning work, gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they serve you well!'

Now men came bearing raiment of war from the king's hoard and they arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they chose, and round shields: their bosses were overlaid with gold and set with gems, green and red and white. Gandalf took no armour; and Gimli needed no coat of rings, even if one had been found to match his stature, for there was no hauberk in the hoards of Edoras of better make than his short corslet forged beneath the Mountain in the North. But he chose a cap of iron and leather that fitted well upon his round head; and a small shield he also took. It bore the running horse, white upon green, that was the emblem of the House of Eorl.

'May it keep you well!' said Théoden. 'It was made for me in Thengel's day, while still I was a boy.'

Gimli bowed. 'I am proud, Lord of the Mark, to bear your device,' he said. 'Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one. I love my feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.'

'It may well be so,' said Théoden.

The king now rose, and at once Éowyn came forward bearing wine. 'Ferthu Théoden hál!' she said. 'Receive now this cup and drink in happy hour. Health be with thee at thy going and coming!'

Théoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the guests. As she stood before Aragorn she paused suddenly and looked upon him, and her eyes were shining. And he looked down upon her fair face and smiled; but as he took the cup, his hand met hers, and he knew that she trembled at the touch. 'Hail Aragorn son of Arathorn!' she said. 'Hail Lady of Rohan!' he answered, but his face now was troubled and he did not smile.

When they had all drunk, the king went down the hall to the doors. There the guards awaited him, and heralds stood, and all the lords and chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt nearby.

'Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding,' said Théoden. 'I have no child. Théodred my son is slain. I name Éomer my sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I leave behind, to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?'

No man spoke.

'Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust?'

'In the House of Eorl,' answered Háma.

'But Éomer I cannot spare, nor would he stay,' said the king; 'and he is the last of that House.'

'I said not Éomer,' answered Háma. 'And he is not the last. There is Éowyn, daughter of Éomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.'

'It shall be so,' said Théoden. 'Let the heralds announce to the folk that the Lady Éowyn will lead them!'

Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and Éowyn knelt before him and received from him a sword and a fair corslet. 'Farewell sister-daughter!' he said. 'Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall return to the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend themselves, and if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.' 'Speak not so!' she answered. 'A year shall I endure for every day that passes until your return.' But as she spoke her eyes went to Aragorn who stood nearby.

'The king shall come again,' he said. 'Fear not! Not West but East does our doom await us.'

The king now went down the stair with Gandalf beside him. The others followed. Aragorn looked back as they passed towards the gate. Alone Éowyn stood before the doors of the house at the stair's head; the sword was set upright before her, and her hands were laid upon the hilt. She was clad now in mail and shone like silver in the sun.

Gimli walked with Legolas. his axe on his shoulder. 'Well, at last we set off!' he said. 'Men need many words before deeds. My axe is restless in my hands. Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are fell-handed when they come to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare that suits me. How shall I come to the battle? I wish I could walk and not bump like a sack at Gandalf's saddlebow.'

'A safer seat than many, I guess,' said Legolas. 'Yet doubtless Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or Shadowfax himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.'

'And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not shave the scalps of Men,' said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe.

At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all ready in the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered. Their spears were like a springing wood. Loudly and joyously they shouted as Théoden came forth. Some held in readiness the king's horse, Snowmane, and others held the horses of Aragorn and Legolas. Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, but Éomer came up to him, leading his horse.

'Hail, Gimli Glóin's son!' he cried. 'I have not had time to learn gentle speech under your rod, as you promised. But shall we not put aside our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.'

'I will forget my wrath for a while, Éomer son of Éomund,' said Gimli; 'but if ever you chance to see the Lady Galadriel with your eyes, then you shall acknowledge her the fairest of ladies, or our friendship will end.' 'So be it!' said Éomer. 'But until that time pardon me, and in token of pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.'

'I thank you indeed,' said Gimli greatly pleased. 'I will gladly go with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.'

'It shall he so,' said Éomer. 'Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn upon my right, and none will dare to stand before us!'

'Where is Shadowfax?' said Gandalf.

'Running wild over the grass,' they answered. 'He will let no man handle him. There he goes, away down by the ford, like a shadow among the willows.'

Gandalf whistled and called aloud the horse's name, and far away he tossed his head and neighed, and turning sped towards the host like an arrow.

'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would it appear,' said Éomer, as the great horse ran up, until he stood before the wizard.

'The gift seems already to be given,' said Théoden. 'But hearken all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsellors; most welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.'

'I thank you, Théoden King,' said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw back his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseback. He wore no helm nor mail. His snowy hair flew free in the wind, his white robes shone dazzling in the sun.

'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.

'Our King and the White Rider!' they shouted. 'Forth Eorlingas!'

The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed. Spear clashed on shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush like the sudden onset of a great wind the last host of Rohan rode thundering into the West. Far over the plain Éowyn saw the glitter of their spears, as she stood still, alone before the doors of the silent house.



Chapter 7
Helm's Deep
The sun was already westering as they rode from Edoras, and the light of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden haze. There was a beaten way, north-westward along the foot-hills of the White Mountains, and this they followed, up and down in a green country, crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the Misty Mountains loomed; ever darker and taller they grew as the miles went by. The sun went slowly down before them. Evening came behind.

The host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode with all the speed they could, pausing seldom. Swift and enduring were the steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty leagues and more it was, as a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of the Isen, where they hoped to find the king's men that held back the hosts of Saruman.

Night closed about them. At last they halted to make their camp. They had ridden for some five hours and were far out upon the western plain, yet more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under the starry sky and the waxing moon, they now made their bivouac. They lit no fires, for they were uncertain of events; but they set a ring of mounted guards about them, and scouts rode out far ahead, passing like shadows in the folds of the land. The slow night passed without tidings or alarm. At dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again.

There were no clouds overhead yet, but a heaviness was in the air; it was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was hazy, and behind it, following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a great storm moving out of the East. And away in the North-west there seemed to be another darkness brooding about the feet of the Misty Mountains, a shadow that crept down slowly from the Wizard's Vale.

Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Éomer. 'You have the keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,' he said; 'and they can tell a sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder towards Isengard?'

'Many miles lie between,' said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his eyes with his long hand. 'I can see a darkness. There are shapes moving in it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but what they are I cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my eyes: there is a veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land, and it marches slowly down stream. It is as if the twilight under endless trees were flowing downwards from the hills.'

'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'It will be a black night.'

As the second day of their riding drew on, the heaviness in the air increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them: a sombre canopy with great billowing edges flecked with dazzling light. The sun went down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears of the Riders were tipped with fire as the last shafts of light kindled the steep faces of the peaks of Thrihyrne: now very near they stood on the northernmost arm of the White Mountains, three jagged horns staring at the sunset. In the last red glow men in the vanguard saw a black speck, a horseman riding back towards them. They halted awaiting him.

He came, a weary man with dinted helm and cloven shield. Slowly he climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At length he spoke. 'Is Éomer here?' he asked. 'You come at last, but too late, and with too little strength. Things have gone evilly since Théodred fell. We were driven back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing. Then at night fresh forces came over the river against our camp. All Isengard must be emptied; and Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We were overmastered. The shield-wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm's Deep. The rest are scattered.

'Where is Éomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.' Théoden had sat silent, hidden from the man's sight behind his guards; now he urged his horse forward. 'Come, stand before me, Ceorl!' he said. 'I am here. The last host of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.'

The man's face lightened with joy and wonder. He drew himself up. Then he knelt, offering his notched sword to the king. 'Command me, lord!' he cried. 'And pardon me! I thought-'

'You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has shaken the boughs,' said Théoden. 'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help of Erkenbrand!'

While Théoden was speaking, Gandalf rode a short way ahead, and he sat there alone, gazing north to Isengard and west to the setting sun. Now he came back.

'Ride, Théoden!' he said. 'Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax must bear me now on a swift errand.' Turning to Aragorn and Éomer and the men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till I return. Await me at Helm's Gate! Farewell!'

He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow from the bow the great horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the sunset, a wind over the grass, a shadow that fled and passed from sight. Snowmane snorted and reared, eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the wing could have overtaken him.

'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Háma.

'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,' answered Háma. 'Ever he goes and comes unlooked-for:'

'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain 'Said the other.

'True enough,' said Háma; 'but for myself, I will wait until I see Gandalf again.'

'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other.

The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and bent their course southward. Night fell, and still they rode on. The hills drew near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening sky. Still some miles away, on the far side of the Westfold Vale, lay a green coomb, a great bay in the mountains, out of which a gorge opened in the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's Deep, after a hero of old wars who had made his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound inward from the north under the shadow of the Thrihyrne, till the crow-haunted cliffs rose like mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light.

At Helm's Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur stood high walls of ancient stone, and within them was a lofty tower. Men said that in the far-off days of the glory of Gondor the sea-kings had built here this fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet sounded upon the tower echoed in the Deep behind, as if armies long-forgotten were issuing to war from caves beneath the hills. A wall, too, the men of old had made from the Hornburg to the southern cliff, barring the entrance to the gorge. Beneath it by a wide culvert the Deeping-stream passed out. About the feet of the Hornrock it wound, and flowed then in a gully through the midst of a wide green gore, sloping gently down from Helm's Gate to Helm's Dike. Thence it fell into the Deeping-coomb and out into the Westfold Vale. There in the Hornburg at Helm's Gate Erkenbrand, master of Westfold on the borders of the Mark, now dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being wise, he had repaired the wall and made the fastness strong.

The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the Coomb, when cries and hornblasts were heard from their scouts that went in front. Out of the darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout rode back and reported that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley, and that a host of Orcs and wild men were hurrying southward from the Fords of Isen and seemed to be making for Helm's Deep.

'We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither,' said the scout. 'And we have met scattered companies, going this way and that, leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand none seem to know. It is likely that he will be overtaken ere he can reach Helm's Gate, if he has not already perished.'

'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?' asked Théoden.

'Yes, lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse, passing hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass. Some thought he was Saruman. It is said that he went away ere nightfall towards Isengard. Some say also that Wormtongue was seen earlier, going northward with a company of Orcs.'

'It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him said Théoden. 'Nonetheless I miss now both my counsellors, the old and the new. But in this need we have no better choice than to go on, as Gandalf said, to Helm's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the host that comes from the North?'

'It is very great,' said the scout. 'He that flies counts every foeman twice, yet I have spoken to stouthearted men, and I do not doubt that the main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that we have here.'

'Then let us be swift,' said Éomer. 'Let us drive through such foes as are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm's Deep where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills.

'Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. 'Saruman has long spied out this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!'

Aragorn and Legolas went now with Éomer in the van. On through the dark night they rode, ever slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed southward, higher and higher into the dim folds about the mountains' feet. They found few of the enemy before them. Here and there they came upon roving bands of Orcs; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them.

'It will not be long I fear,' said Éomer, 'ere the coming of the king's host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain he has sent forth.'

The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the dark, the sound of harsh singing. They had climbed far up into the Deeping-coomb when they looked back. Then they saw torches countless points of fiery light upon the black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or winding up from the lowlands in long flickering lines. Here and there a larger blaze leapt up.

'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn.

'They bring fire,' said Théoden, 'and they are burning as they come, rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for my folk!'

'Would that day was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm out of the mountains!' said Aragorn. 'It grieves me to fly before them.'

'We need not fly much further,' said Éomer. 'Not far ahead now lies Helm's Dike, an ancient trench and rampart scored across the coomb, two furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give battle.'

'Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike,' said Théoden. 'It is a mile long or more, and the breach in it is wide.'

'At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed,' said Éomer.

There was neither star nor moon when the Riders came to the breach in the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran down from the Hornburg. The rampart loomed suddenly before them, a high shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them.

'The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm's Gate,' Éomer answered. 'I, Éomer son of Éomund, speak.'

'This is good tidings beyond hope,' said the sentinel. 'Hasten! The enemy is on your heels.'

The host passed through the breach and halted on the sloping sward above. They now learned to their joy that Erkenbrand had left many men to hold Helm's Gate, and more had since escaped thither.

'Maybe, we have a thousand fit to fight on foot,' said Gamling, an old man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. 'But most of them have seen too many winters, as I have, or too few, as my son's son here. What news of Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all that is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.'

'I fear that he will not come now,' said Éomer. 'Our scouts have gained no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.'

'I would that he had escaped,' said Théoden. 'He was a mighty man. In him lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand. But we cannot await him here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored? We bring little provision, for we rode forth to open battle, not to a siege.'

'Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of Westfold, old and young, children and women,' said Gamling. 'But great store of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.'

'That is well,' said Éomer. 'They are burning or despoiling all that is left in the vale.'

'If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a high price,' said Gamling.

The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their horses up the ramp and passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they were welcomed again with joy and renewed hope; for now there were men enough to man both the burg and the barrier wall.

Quickly Éomer set his men in readiness. The king and the men of his household were in the Hornburg, and there also were many of the Westfold-men. But on the Deeping Wall and its tower, and behind it, Éomer arrayed most of the strength that he had, for here the defence seemed more doubtful, if the assault were determined and in great force. The horses were led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared.

The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet over which only a tall man could look. Here and there were clefts in the stone through which men could shoot. This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led also up on to the wall from the Deep behind; but in front it was smooth, and the great stones of it were set with such skill that no foothold could be found at their joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea-delved cliff.

Gimli stood leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom.

'This is more to my liking,' said the dwarf, stamping on the stones. 'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here. This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as we came up from the dike. Give me a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place that armies would break upon like water.'

'I do not doubt it,' said Legolas. 'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it no more by the light of day. But you comfort me, Gimli, and I am glad to have you standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more of your kin among us. But even more would I give for a hundred good archers of Mirkwood. We shall need them. The Rohirrim have good bowmen after their fashion, but there are too few here, too few.'

'It is dark for archery,' said Gimli. 'Indeed it is time for sleep. Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never I thought any dwarf could. Riding is tiring work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give me a row of orc-necks and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!'

A slow time passed. Far down in the valley scattered fires still burned. The hosts of Isengard were advancing in silence now. Their torches could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.

Suddenly from the Dike yells and screams, and the fierce battle-cries of men broke out. Flaming brands appeared over the brink and clustered thickly at the breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping back over the field and up the ramp to the gate of the Hornburg. The rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in.

'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow that we had, and filled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long. Already they are scaling the bank at many points, thick as marching ants. But we have taught them not to carry torches.'

It was now past midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness of the heavy air foreboded storm. Suddenly the clouds were seared by a blinding flash. Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills. For a staring moment the watchers on the walls saw all the space between them and the Dike lit with white light: it was boiling and crawling with black shapes. some squat and broad, some tall and grim, with high helms and sable shields. Hundreds and hundreds more were pouring over the Dike and through the breach. The dark tide flowed up to the walls from cliff to cliff. Thunder rolled in the valley. Rain came lashing down.

Arrows thick as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell clinking and glancing on the stones. Some found a mark. The assault on Helm's Deep had begun, but no sound or challenge was heard within; no answering arrows came.

The assailing hosts halted, foiled by the silent menace of rock and wall. Ever and again the lightning tore aside the darkness. Then the Orcs screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that stood revealed upon the battlements; and the men of the Mark amazed looked out, as it seemed to them, upon a great field of dark corn, tossed by a tempest of war, and every ear glinted with barbed light.

Brazen trumpets sounded. The enemy surged forward, some against the Deeping Wall, other towards the causeway and the ramp that led up to the Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Orcs were mustered, and the wild men of the Dunland fells. A moment they hesitated and then on they came. The lightning flashed, and blazoned upon every helm and shield the ghastly hand of Isengard was seen: They reached the summit of the rock; they drove towards the gates.

Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them, and a hail of stones. They wavered, broke, and fled back; and then charged again, broke and charged again; and each time, like the incoming sea, they halted at a higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press of roaring men leaped forth. They held their great shields above them like a roof, while in their midst they bore two trunks of mighty trees. Behind them orc-archers crowded, sending a hail of darts against the bowmen on the walls. They gained the gates. The trees, swung by strong arms, smote the timbers with a rending boom. If any man fell, crushed by a stone hurtling from above, two others sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed.

Éomer and Aragorn stood together on the Deeping Wall. They heard the roar of voices and the thudding of the rams; and then in a sudden flash of light they beheld the peril of the gates.

'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!'

Running like fire, they sped along the wall, and up the steps, and passed into the outer court upon the Rock. As they ran they gathered a handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that opened in an angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff stretched out to meet it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate, between the wall and the sheer brink of the Rock. Together Éomer and Aragorn sprang through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath as one.

'Gúthwinë!' cried Éomer. 'Gúthwinë for the Mark!'

'Andúril!' cried Aragorn. 'Andúril for the Dúnedain!'

Charging from the side, they hurled themselves upon the wild men. Andúril rose and fell, gleaming with white fire. A shout went up from wall and tower: 'Andúril! Andúril goes to war. The Blade that was Broken shines again!'

Dismayed the rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight; but the wall of their shields was broken as by a lightning-stroke, and they were swept away, hewn down, or cast over the Rock into the stony stream below. The orc-archers shot wildly and then fled.

For a moment Éomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was rumbling in the distance now. The lightning flickered still, far off among the mountains in the South. A keen wind was blowing from the North again. The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills of the Coomb-side the westering moon rode, glimmering yellow in the storm-wrack.

'We did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking at the gates. Their great hinges and iron bars were wrenched and bent; many of their timbers were cracked.

'Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them,' said Éomer. 'Look!' He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Orcs and Men were gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and skipped on the stones about them. 'Come! We must get back and see what we can do to pile stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!'

They turned and ran. At that moment some dozen Orcs that had lain motionless among the slain leaped to their feet, and came silently and swiftly behind. Two flung themselves to the ground at Éomer's heels, tripped him, and in a moment they were on top of him. But a small dark figure that none had observed sprang out of the shadows and gave a hoarse shout: Baruk Khazâd! Khazâd ai-mênu! An axe swung and swept back. Two Orcs fell headless. The rest fled.

Éomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid.

The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside with stones. When all were safe within, Éomer turned: 'I thank you, Gimli son of Glóin!' he said. 'I did not know that you were with us in the sortie. But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?'

'I followed you to shake off sleep,' said Gimli; 'but I looked on the hillmen and they seemed over large for me, so I sat beside a stone to see your sword-play.'

'I shall not find it easy to repay you,' said Éomer.

'There may be many a chance ere the night is over,' laughed the Dwarf. 'But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria.'

'Two!' said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the wall.

'Two?' said Legolas. 'I have done better, though now I must grope for spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But that is only a few leaves in a forest.'

The sky now was quickly clearing and the sinking moon was shining brightly. But the light brought little hope to the Riders of the Mark. The enemy before them seemed to have grown rather than diminished, still more were pressing up from the valley through the breach. The sortie upon the Rock gained only a brief respite. The assault on the gates was redoubled. Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a sea. Orcs and hillmen swarmed about its feet from end to end. Ropes with grappling hooks were hurled over the parapet faster than men could cut them or fling them back. Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down in ruin, but many more replaced them, and Orcs sprang up them like apes in the dark forests of the South. Before the wall's foot the dead and broken were piled like shingle in a storm; ever higher rose the hideous mounds, and still the enemy came on.

The men of Rohan grew weary. All their arrows were spent, and every shaft was shot; their swords were notched, and their shields were riven. Three times Aragorn and Éomer rallied them, and three times Andúril flamed in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall.

Then a clamour arose in the Deep behind. Orcs had crept like rats through the culvert through which the stream flowed out. There they had gathered in the shadow of the cliffs, until the assault above was hottest and nearly all the men of the defence had rushed to the wall's top. Then they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of the Deep and were among the horses, fighting with the guards.

Down from the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce cry that echoed in the cliffs. 'Khazâd! Khazâd!' He soon had work enough.

'Ai-oi!' he shouted. 'The Orcs are behind the wall. Ai-oi! Come, Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazâd ai-mênu!'

Gamling the Old looked down from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice of the dwarf above all the tumult. 'The Orcs are in the Deep!' he cried. 'Helm! Helm! Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped down the stair from the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back.

Their onset was fierce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before them. Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the guardians of the hidden caves.

'Twenty-one!' cried Gimli. He hewed a two-handed stroke and laid the last Orc before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.'

'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling. 'Dwarves are said to be cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!'

'We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our finger-nails,' said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.'

They gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find to hand, and under Gimli's direction the Westfold-men blocked up the inner end of the culvert, until only a narrow outlet remained. Then the Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path, and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff.

'It will be drier above,' said Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see how things go on the wall!'

He climbed up and found Legolas beside Aragorn and Éomer. The elf was whetting his long knife. There was for a while a lull in the assault, since the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled.

'Twenty-one!' said Gimli.

'Good!' said Legolas. 'But my count is now two dozen. It has been knife-work up here.'

Éomer and Aragorn leant wearily on their swords. Away on the left the crash and clamour of the battle on the Rock rose loud again. But the Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea. Its gates lay in ruin; but over the barricade of beams and stones within no enemy as yet had passed.

Aragorn looked at the pale stars, and at the moon, now sloping behind the western hills that enclosed the valley. 'This is a night as long as years,' he said. 'How long will the day tarry?'

'Dawn is not far off,' said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him. 'But dawn will not help us, I fear.'

'Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,' said Aragorn.

'But these creatures of Isengard, these half-orcs and goblin-men that the foul craft of Saruman has bred, they will not quail at the sun,' said Gamling. 'And neither will the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their voices?'

'I hear them,' said Éomer; 'but they are only the scream of birds and the bellowing of beasts to my ears.'

'Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,' said Gamling. 'I know that tongue. It is an ancient speech of men, and once was spoken in many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us, and they are glad; for our doom seems certain to them. 'The king the king!' they cry. 'We will take their king. Death to the Forgoil! Death to the Strawheads! Death to the robbers of the North!' Such names they have for us. Not in half a thousand years have they forgotten their grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the Mark to Eorl the Young and made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman has inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They will not give way now for dusk or dawn, until Théoden is taken, or they themselves are slain.'

'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,' said Aragorn. 'Is it not said that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?'

'So the minstrels say,' said Éomer.

'Then let us defend it, and hope!' said Aragorn.

Even as they spoke there came a blare of trumpets. Then there was a crash and a flash of flame and smoke. The waters of the Deeping-stream poured out hissing and foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping hole was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in.

'Devilry of Saruman!' cried Aragorn. 'They have crept in the culvert again, while we talked, and they have lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our feet. Elendil, Elendil!' he shouted, as he leaped down into the breach; but even as he did so a hundred ladders were raised against the battlements. Over the wall and under the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark wave upon a hill of sand. The defence was swept away. Some of the Riders were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting as they gave way, step by step, towards the caves. Others cut their way back towards the citadel.

A broad stairway, climbed from the Deep up to the Rock and the rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood Aragorn. In his hand still Andúril gleamed, and the terror of the sword for a while held back the enemy, as one by one all who could gain the stair passed up towards the gate. Behind on the upper steps knelt Legolas. His bow was bent, but one gleaned arrow was all that he had left, and he peered out now, ready to shoot the first Orc that should dare to approach the stair.

'All who can have now got safe within, Aragorn,' he called. 'Come back!'

Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as he ran he stumbled in his weariness. At once his enemies leapt forward. Up came the Orcs, yelling, with their long arms stretched out to seize him. The foremost fell with Legolas' last arrow in his throat. but the rest sprang over him. Then a great boulder, cast from the outer wall above, crashed down upon the stair, and hurled them back into the Deep. Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it clanged to behind him.

'Things go ill, my friends,' he said, wiping the sweat from his brow with his arm.

'Ill enough,' said Legolas, 'but not yet hopeless, while we have you with us. Where is Gimli?'

'I do not know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw him fighting on the ground behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.'

'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas.

'He is stout and strong,' said Aragorn. 'Let us hope that he will escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we. Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.'

'That must be my hope'' said Legolas. 'But I wish that he had come this way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.'

'If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your count again,' laughed Aragorn. 'Never did I see an axe so wielded.'

'I must go and seek some arrows,' said Legolas. 'Would that this night would end, and I could have better light for shooting.'

Aragorn now passed into the citadel. There to his dismay he learned that Éomer had not reached the Hornburg.

'Nay, he did not come to the Rock,' said one of the Westfold-men, 'I last saw him gathering men about him and fighting in the mouth of the Deep. Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not come to them.'

Aragorn strode on through the inner court, and mounted to a high chamber in the tower. There stood the king, dark against a narrow window, looking out upon the vale.

'What is the news, Aragorn?' he said.

'The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and all the defence swept away; but many have escaped hither to the Rock.'

'Is Éomer here?'

'No, lord. But many of your men retreated into the Deep; and some say that Éomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back the enemy and come within the caves. What hope they may have then I do not know.'

'More than we. Good provision, it is said. And the air is wholesome there because of the outlets through fissures in the rock far above. None can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold out long.'

'But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc,' said Aragorn. 'They have a blasting fire, and with it they took the Wall. If they cannot come in the caves, they may seal up those that are inside. But now we must turn all our thoughts to our own defence.'

'I fret in this prison,' said Théoden. 'If I could have set a spear in rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.'

'Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the Mark,' said Aragorn. 'More hope we have to defend you in the Hornburg than in Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.'

'It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,' said Théoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers and such reckless hate? Had I known that the strength of Isengard was grown so great, maybe l should not so rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all the arts of Gandalf. His counsel seems not now so good as it did under the morning sun.'

'Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said Aragorn.

'The end will not be long,' said the king. 'But I will not end here, taken like an old badger in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel and the horses of my guard are in the inner court. When dawn comes, I will bid men sound Helm's horn, and I will ride forth. Will you ride with me then, son of Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.'

'I will ride with you,' said Aragorn.

Taking his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot. Legolas went with him. Blasts of fire leaped up from below shaking the stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the Orcs gained the summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them down.

At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless of the darts of the enemy. As he looked forth he saw the eastern sky grow pale. Then he raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley.

The Orcs yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you wish to speak to us, come down! Bring out your king! We are the fighting Uruk-hai. We will fetch him from his hole, if he does not come. Bring out your skulking king!'

'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn.

'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fighting Uruk-hai.'

'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn.

'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai: we do not stop the fight for night or day, for fair weather or for storm. We come to kill, by sun or moon. What of the dawn?'

'None knows what the new day shall bring him,' said Aragorn. 'Get you gone, ere it turn to your evil.'

'Get down or we will shoot you from the wall,' they cried. 'This is no parley. You have nothing to say.'

'I have still this to say,' answered Aragorn. 'No enemy has yet taken the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one will be left alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not know your peril.'

So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there alone above the ruined gates before the host of his enemies, that many of the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to the valley, and some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs laughed with loud voices; and a hail of darts and arrows whistled over the wall, as Aragorn leaped down.

There was a roar and a blast of fire. The archway of the gate above which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smoke and dust. The barricade was scattered as if by a thunderbolt. Aragorn ran to the king's tower.

But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs about it yelled, preparing to charge, a murmur arose behind them. like a wind in the distance, and it grew to a clamour of many voices crying strange news in the dawn. The Orcs upon the Rock, hearing the rumour of dismay, wavered and looked back. And then, sudden and terrible, from the tower above, the sound of the great horn of Helm rang out.

All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs cast themselves on their faces and covered their ears with their claws. Back from the Deep the echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff and hill a mighty herald stood. But on the walls men looked up, listening with wonder; for the echoes did not die. Ever the horn-blasts wound on among the hills; nearer now and louder they answered one to another, blowing fierce and free.

'Helm! Helm!' the Riders shouted. 'Helm is arisen and comes back to war. Helm for Théoden King!'

And with that shout the king came. His horse was white as snow, golden was his shield, and his spear was long. At his right hand was Aragorn, Elendil's heir, behind him rode the lords of the House of Eorl the Young. Light sprang in the sky. Night departed.

'Forth Eorlingas!' With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they drove through the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind them from the Deep came the stern cries of' men issuing from the caves, driving forth the enemy. Out poured all the men that were left upon the Rock. And ever the sound of blowing horns echoed in the hills.

On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains and champions fell or fled before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them. Their backs were to the swords and spears of the Riders and their faces to the valley. They cried and wailed, for fear and great wonder had come upon them with the rising of the day.

So King Théoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to the great Dike. There the company halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the sun flared above the eastern hills and glimmered on their spears. But they sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb.

The land had changed. Where before the green dale had lain, its grassy slopes lapping the ever-mounting hills, there now a forest loomed. Great trees, bare and silent, stood, rank on rank, with tangled bough and hoary head; their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was under them. Between the Dike and the eaves of that nameless wood only two open furlongs lay. There now cowered the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror of the king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate until all above the Dike was empty of them, but below it they were packed like swarming flies. Vainly they crawled and clambered about the walls of the coomb. seeking to escape. Upon the east too sheer and stony was the valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached.

There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in the rising sun. Over the low hills the horns were sounding. Behind him, hastening down the long slopes, were a thousand men on foot; their swords were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong. His shield was red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn and blew a ringing blast.

'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!'

'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn. 'Gandalf is come again!'

'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!' said Legolas. 'This is wizardry indeed! Come! I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.'

The hosts of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach of the Dike charged the king's company. Down from the hills leaped Erkenbrand, lord of Westfold. Down leaped Shadowfax, like a deer that runs surefooted in the mountains. The White Rider was upon them, and the terror of his coming filled the enemy with madness. The wild men fell on their faces before him. The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and spear. Like a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they fled. Wailing they passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that shadow none ever came again.



Chapter 8
The Road to Isengard
So it was that in the light of a fair morning King Théoden and Gandalf the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the Deeping-stream. There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas the Elf, and Erkenbrand of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden House. About them were gathered the Rohirrim, the Riders of the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and their eyes were turned towards the wood.

Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who had been driven back into the Deep. There came Gamling the Old, and Éomer son of Éomund, and beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. He had no helm, and about his head was a linen band stained with blood; but his voice was loud and strong.

'Forty-two, Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My axe is notched: the forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?'

'You have passed my score by one,' answered Legolas. 'But I do not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!'

'Welcome, Éomer, sister-son!' said Théoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I am glad indeed.'

'Hail, Lord of the Mark!' said Éomer. 'The dark night has passed and day has come again. But the day has brought strange tidings.' He turned and gazed in wonder, first at the wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said.

'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and meet you here.'

'But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming. Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf the White!'

'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good counsel in peril, and made use of the speed of Shadowfax. Your own valour has done more, and the stout legs of the Westfold-men marching through the night.'

Then they all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced darkly at the wood, and passed their hands over their brows, as if they thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.

Gandalf laughed long and merrily. 'The trees?' he said. 'Nay, I see the wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope the event has proved.'

'Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?' said Théoden. 'Not Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we have yet to learn?'

'It is not wizardry, but a power far older,' said Gandalf: 'a power that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang.

Ere iron was found or tree was hewn,

When young was mountain under moon;

Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe,

It walked the forests long ago.'

'And what may be the answer to your riddle?' said Théoden.

'If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard ' answered Gandalf.

'To Isengard?' they cried.

'Yes,' said Gandalf. 'I shall return to Isengard, and those who will may come with me. There we may see strange things.'

'But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault the stronghold of Saruman,' said Théoden.

'Nevertheless to Isengard I go,' said Gandalf. 'I shall not stay there long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the moon!'

'Nay!' said Théoden. 'In the dark hour before dawn I doubted, but we will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.'

'I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,' said Gandalf, 'and since he has done you great injury, it would be fitting if you were there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?'

'My men are weary with battle,' said the King; 'and I am weary also. For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My old age is not feigned nor due only to the whisperings of Wormtongue. It is an ill that no leech can wholly cure, not even Gandalf.'

'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,' said Gandalf. 'We will journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my counsel that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may be, henceforth. But do not command many men to go with you, Théoden. We go to a parley not to a fight.'

The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses, and he sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young and old, to come in haste to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark would hold an assembly of all that could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To ride with him to Isengard the King chose Éomer and twenty men of his household. With Gandalf would go Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite of his hurt the dwarf would not stay behind.

'It was only a feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.'

'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn.

The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quiet as he had not known for many years, and the remainder of his chosen company rested also. But the others, all that were not hurt or wounded, began a great labour; for many had fallen in the battle and lay dead upon the field or in the Deep.

No Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But a great many of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid, and cried for mercy.

The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work.

'Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined,' said Erkenbrand; 'and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march with the enemies of Men; and then you shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded by Saruman. Many of you have got death as the reward of your trust in him; but had you conquered, little better would your wages have been.'

The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told them that the men of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.

In the midst of the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised, and beneath them were laid all the Riders of the Mark who fell in the defence, those of the East Dales upon one side, and those of Westfold upon the other. In a_ grave alone under the shadow of the Hornburg lay Háma, captain of the King's guard. He fell before the Gate.

The Orcs were piled in great heaps, away from the mounds of Men, not far from the eaves of the forest. And the people were troubled in their minds; for the heaps of carrion were too great for burial or for burning. They had little wood for firing, and none would have dared to take an axe to the strange trees, even if Gandalf had not warned them to hurt neither bark nor bough at their great peril.

'Let the Orcs lie,' said Gandalf. 'The morning may bring new counsel.'

In the afternoon the King's company prepared to depart. The work of burial was then but beginning; and Théoden mourned for the loss of Háma, his captain, and cast the first earth upon his grave. 'Great injury indeed has Saruman done to me and all this land,' he said; 'and I will remember it, when we meet.'

The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the Coomb, when at last Théoden and Gandalf and their companions rode down from the Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host, both of the Riders and of the people of Westfold, old and young, women and children, who had come out from the caves. A song of victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell silent, wondering what would chance, for their eyes were on the trees and they feared them.

The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and man, they were unwilling to pass in. The trees were grey and menacing, and a shadow or a mist was about them. The ends of their long sweeping boughs hung down like searching fingers, their roots stood up from the ground like the limbs of strange monsters, and dark caverns opened beneath them. But Gandalf went forward, leading the company, and where the road from the Hornburg met the trees they saw now an opening like an arched gate under mighty boughs; and through it Gandalf passed, and they followed him. Then to their amazement they found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream beside it; and the sky was open above and full of golden light. But on either side the great aisles of the wood were already wrapped in dusk, stretching away into impenetrable shadows; and there they heard the creaking and groaning of boughs, and far cries, and a rumour of wordless voices, murmuring angrily. No Orc or other living creature could be seen.

Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse; and they kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood.

'It is hot in here,' said Legolas to Gandalf. 'I feel a great wrath about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?'

'Yes,' said Gandalf.

'What has become of the miserable Orcs?' said Legolas.

'That, I think, no one will ever know,' said Gandalf.

They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas was ever glancing from side to side, and would often have halted to listen to the sounds of the wood, if Gimli had allowed it.

'These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,' he said; 'and I have seen many an oak grow from acorn to ruinous age. I wish that there were leisure now to walk among them: they have voices, and in time I might come to understand their thought.'

'No, no!' said Gimli. 'Let us leave them! I guess their thought already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of crushing and strangling.'

'Not of all that go on two legs,' said Legolas. 'There I think you are wrong. It is Orcs that they hate. For they do not belong here and know little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they sprang. From the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.'

'Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,' said Gimli. 'I should be grateful for the part they have played, but I do not love them. You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land, more beautiful than any grove or glade that ever grew: my heart is still full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the marvels of the Northern World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say! Caves! Holes to fly to in time of war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas, do you know that the caverns of Helm's Deep are vast and beautiful? There would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such things were known to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold for a brief glance!'

'And I would give gold to be excused,' said Legolas; 'and double to be let out, if I strayed in!'

'You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,' said Gimli. 'But you speak like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long ago? They are but hovels compared with the caverns I have seen here: immeasurable halls, filled with an everlasting music of water that tinkles into pools, as fair as Kheled-zâram in the starlight.

'And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the sandy floors under the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas, gems and crystals and veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls; and the light glows through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen Galadriel. There are columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose, Legolas, fluted and twisted into dreamlike forms; they spring up from many-coloured floors to meet the glistening pendants of the roof: wings, ropes, curtains fine as frozen clouds; spears, banners, pinnacles of suspended palaces! Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered with clear glass; cities. such as the mind of Durin could scarce have imagined in his sleep, stretch on through avenues and pillared courts, on into the dark recesses where no light can come. And plink! a silver drop falls, and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they fade and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another chamber and another dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas; hall opening out of hall, dome after dome, stair beyond stair; and still the winding paths lead on into the mountains' heart. Caves! The Caverns of Helm's Deep! Happy was the chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.'

'Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort, Gimli,' said the Elf, 'that you may come safe from war and return to see them again. But do not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your account. Maybe the men of this land are wise to say little: one family of busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.'

'No, you do not understand,' said Gimli. 'No dwarf could be unmoved by such loveliness. None of Durin's race would mine those caves for stones or ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there. Do you cut down groves of blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades of flowering stone, not quarry them. With cautious skill, tap by tap - a small chip of rock and no more, perhaps, in a whole anxious day - so we could work, and as the years went by, we should open up new ways, and display far chambers that are still dark, glimpsed only as a void beyond fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps as once shone in Khazad-dûm; and when we wished we would drive away the night that has lain there since the hills were made; and when we desired rest, we would let the night return.'

'You move me, Gimli,' said Legolas. 'I have never heard you speak like this before. Almost you make me regret that I have not seen these caves. Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.'

'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli. 'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves and share their wonder with me.'

'You have my promise,' said Legolas. 'But alas! Now we must leave behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We are coming to the end of the trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?'

'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf: 'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords: and ten more from there to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.'

'And when we come there, what shall we see?' asked Gimli. 'You may know, but I cannot guess.'

'I do not know myself for certain,' answered the wizard. 'I was there at nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet I think that you will not say that the journey was in vain - not though the Glittering Caves of Aglarond be left behind.'

At last the company passed through the trees, and found that they had come to the bottom of the Coomb, where the road from Helm's Deep branched, going one way east to Edoras, and the other north to the Fords of Isen. As they rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas halted and looked back with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry.

'There are eyes!' he said. 'Eyes looking out from the shadows of the boughs! I never saw such eyes before.'

The others, surprised by his cry, halted and turned; but Legolas started to ride back.

'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do as you please in your madness, but let me first get down from this horse! I wish to see no eyes!' 'Stay, Legolas Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not your time.'

Even as he spoke, there came forward out of the trees three strange shapes. As tall as trolls they were, twelve feet or more in height; their strong bodies, stout as young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with hide of close-fitting grey and brown. Their limbs were long, and their hands had many fingers; their hair was stiff, and their beards grey-green as moss. They gazed out with solemn eyes, but they were not looking at the riders: their eyes were bent northwards. Suddenly they lifted their long hands to their mouths, and sent forth ringing calls, clear as notes of a horn, but more musical and various. The calls were answered; and turning again, the riders saw other creatures of the same kind approaching, striding through the grass. They came swiftly from the North, walking like wading herons in their gait, but not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat quicker than the heron's wings. The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some set their hands upon their sword-hilts.

'You need no weapons,' said Gandalf. 'These are but herdsmen. They are not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.'

So it seemed to be; for as he spoke the tall creatures, without a glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished.

'Herdsmen!' said Théoden. 'Where are their flocks? What are they, Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.'

'They are the shepherds of the trees,' answered Gandalf. 'Is it so long since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the answer to your question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of Fangorn Forest, which in your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only in idle fancy? Nay, Théoden, it is otherwise: to them you are but the passing tale; all the years from Eorl the Young to Théoden the Old are of little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.'

The king was silent. 'Ents!' he said at length. 'Out of the shadows of legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the trees, I think. I have lived to see strange days. Long we have tended our beasts and our fields, built our houses, wrought our tools, or ridden away to help in the wars of Minas Tirith. And that we called the life of Men, the way of the world. We cared little for what lay beyond the borders of our land. Songs we have that tell of these things, but we are forgetting them, teaching them only to children, as a careless custom. And now the songs have come down among us out of strange places, and walk visible under the Sun.'

'You should be glad, Théoden King,' said Gandalf. 'For not only the little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those things which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even if you know them not.'

'Yet also I should be sad,' said Théoden. 'For however the fortune of war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle-earth?'

'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on with the journey we have begun!'

The company turned then away from the Coomb and from the wood and took the road towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set, already it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but as they rode out from the shadow of the hills and looked west to the Gap of Rohan the sky was still red, and a burning light was under the floating clouds. Dark against it there wheeled and flew many black-winged birds. Some passed overhead with mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks.

'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Éomer.

They rode now at an easy pace and dark came down upon the plains about them. The slow moon mounted, now waxing towards the full, and in its cold silver light the swelling grass-lands rose and fell like a wide grey sea. They had ridden for some four hours from the branching of the roads when they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river spread in stony shoals between high grassy terraces. Borne upon the wind they heard the howling of wolves. Their hearts were heavy, remembering the many men that had fallen in battle in this place.

The road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were three lines of flat stepping-stones across the stream, and between them fords for horses, that went from either brink to a bare eyot in the midst. The riders looked down upon the crossings, and it seemed strange to them; for the Fords had ever been a place full of the rush and chatter of water upon stones; but now they were silent. The beds of the stream were almost dry, a bare waste of shingles and grey sand.

'This is become a dreary place,' said Éomer. 'What sickness has befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has destroyed: has he devoured the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf.

'Alas!' said Théoden. 'Must we pass this way, where the carrion-beasts devour so many good Riders of the Mark?'

'This is our way,' said Gandalf. 'Grievous is the fall of your men; but you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not devour them. It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their feast: such indeed is the friendship of their kind. Come!'

They rode down to the river, and as they came the wolves ceased their howling and slunk away. Fear fell on them seeing Gandalf in the moon, and Shadowfax his horse shining like silver. The riders passed over to the islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from the shadows of the banks.

'Look!' said Gandalf. 'Friends have laboured here.'

And they saw that in the midst of the eyot a mound was piled, ringed with stones, and set about with many spears.

'Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place,' said Gandalf.

'Here let them rest!' said Éomer. 'And when their spears have rotted and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!'

'Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend?' said Théoden. 'You accomplished much in an evening and a night!'

'With the help of Shadowfax - and others,' said Gandalf. 'I rode fast and far. But here beside the mound I will say this for your comfort: many fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour made them. More were scattered than were slain; I gathered together all that I could find. Some men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold to join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make this burial. They have now followed your marshal, Elfhelm. I sent him with many Riders to Edoras. Saruman I knew had despatched his full strength against you, and his servants had turned aside from all other errands and gone to Helm's Deep: the lands seemed empty of enemies; yet I feared that wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless to Meduseld, while it was undefended. But now I think you need not fear: you will find your house to welcome your return.'

'And glad shall I be to see it again,' said Théoden, 'though brief now, I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.'

With that the company said farewell to the island and the mound, and passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they rode on, glad to have left the mournful Fords. As they went the howling of the wolves broke out anew.

There was an ancient highway that ran down from Isengard to the crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bending with it east and then north; but at the last it turned away and went straight towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the west of the valley, sixteen miles or more from its mouth. This road they followed but they did not ride upon it; for the ground beside it was firm and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind. Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They were come to the feet of the Misty Mountains, and the long arms of Nan Curunír stretched down to meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the moon had passed into the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and spread in shimmering billows, black and silver, over the starry sky.

'What do you think of that, Gandalf?' asked Aragorn. 'One would say that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.'

'There is ever a fume above that valley in these days,' said Éomer: 'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are steams rather than smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.'

'Maybe he is,' said Gandalf. 'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing. Now let us rest for a while, if we can.'

They camped beside the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the watchmen cried out, and all awoke. The moon was gone. Stars were shining above; but over the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night. On both sides of the river it rolled towards them, going northward.

'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will pass you by!'

A mist gathered about them. Above them a few stars still glimmered faintly; but on either side there arose walls of impenetrable gloom; they were in a narrow lane between moving towers of shadow. Voices they heard, whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling sigh; the earth shook under them. Long it seemed to them that they sat and were afraid; but at last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's arms.

Away south upon the Hornburg, in the middle night men heard a great noise, as a wind in the valley, and the ground trembled; and all were afraid and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning they went out and were amazed; for the slain Orcs were gone, and the trees also. Far down into the valley of the Deep the grass was crushed and trampled brown, as if giant herdsmen had pastured great droves of cattle there; but a mile below the Dike a huge pit had been delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled into a hill. Men believed that the Orcs whom they had slain were buried there; but whether those who had fled into the wood were with them, none could say, for no man ever set foot upon that hill. The Death Down it was afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the strange trees were never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had returned at night, and had gone far away to the dark dales of Fangorn. Thus they were revenged upon the Orcs.

The king and his company slept no more that night; but they saw and heard no other strange thing, save one: the voice of the river beside them suddenly awoke. There was a rush of water hurrying down among the stones; and when it had passed, the Isen flowed and bubbled in its bed again, as it had ever done.

At dawn they made ready to go on. The light came grey and pale, and they did not see the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy with fog, and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly, riding now upon the highway. It was broad and hard, and well-tended. Dimly through the mists they could descry the long arm of the mountains rising on their left. They had passed into Nan Curunír, the Wizard's Vale. That was a sheltered valley, open only to the South. Once it had been fair and green, and through it the Isen flowed, already deep and strong before it found the plains; for it was fed by many springs and lesser streams among the rain-washed hills. and all about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land.

It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres tilled by the slaves of Saruman; but most of the valley had become a wilderness of weeds and thorns. Brambles trailed upon the ground, or clambering over bush and bank, made shaggy caves where small beasts housed. No trees grew there; but among the rank grasses could still be seen the burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves. It was a sad country, silent now but for the stony noise of quick waters. Smokes and steams drifted in sullen clouds and lurked in the hollows. The riders did not speak. Many doubted in their hearts, wondering to what dismal end their journey led.

After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street, paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of grass was seen in any joint. Deep gutters, filled with trickling water. ran down on either side. Suddenly a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black; and set upon it was a great stone, carved and painted in the likeness of a long White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew that the gates of Isengard must stand, and their hearts were heavy; but their eyes could not pierce the mists ahead.

Beneath the mountain's arm within the Wizard's Vale through years uncounted had stood that ancient place that Men called Isengard. Partly it was shaped in the making of the mountains, but mighty works the Men of Westernesse had wrought there of old; and Saruman had dwelt there long and had not been idle.

This was its fashion, while Saruman was at his height, accounted by many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs, stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which it ran and then returned again. One entrance only was there made in it, a great arch delved in the southern wall. Here through the black rock a long tunnel had been hewn, closed at either end with mighty doors of iron. They were so wrought and poised upon their huge hinges, posts of steel driven into the living stone, that when unbarred they could be moved with a light thrust of the arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of the echoing tunnel, beheld a plain, a great circle, somewhat hollowed like a vast shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and filled with avenues, and groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that flowed from the mountains to a lake. But no green thing grew there in the latter days of Saruman. The roads were paved with stone-flags, dark and hard; and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron. joined by heavy chains.

Many houses there were, chambers, halls, and passages, cut and tunnelled back into the walls upon their inner side, so that all the open circle was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands could dwell there, workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with great store of arms; wolves were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was bored and delved. Shafts were driven deep into the ground; their upper ends were covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the Ring of Isengard looked like a graveyard of unquiet dead. For the ground trembled. The shafts ran down by many slopes and spiral stairs to caverns far under; there Saruman had treasuries, store-houses, armouries, smithies, and great furnaces. Iron wheels revolved there endlessly, and hammers thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents, lit from beneath with red light, or blue, or venomous green.

To the centre all the roads ran between their chains. There stood a tower of marvellous shape. It was fashioned by the builders of old, who smoothed the Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed a thing not made by the craft of Men, but riven from the bones of the earth in the ancient torment of the hills. A peak and isle of rock it was. black and gleaming hard: four mighty piers of many-sided stone were welded into one, but near the summit they opened into gaping horns. their pinnacles sharp as the points of spears, keen-edged as knives. Between them was a narrow space, and there upon a floor of polished stone, written with strange signs, a man might stand five hundred feet above the plain. This was Orthanc, the citadel of Saruman, the name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for in the Elvish speech orthanc signifies Mount Fang, but in the language of the Mark of old the Cunning Mind.

A strong place and wonderful was Isengard, and long it had been beautiful; and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of Gondor upon the West, and wise men that watched the stars. But Saruman had slowly shaped it to his shifting purposes, and made it better. as he thought, being deceived-for all those arts and subtle devices, for which he forsook his former wisdom, and which fondly he imagined were his own. came but from Mordor; so that what he made was naught, only a little copy, a child's model or a slave's flattery, of that vast fortress. armoury, prison, furnace of great power, Barad-dûr, the Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed at flattery, biding its time, secure in its pride and its immeasurable strength.

This was the stronghold of Saruman, as fame reported it; for within living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save perhaps a few, such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and told no man what they saw.

Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as he did so the Riders saw to their wonder that the Hand appeared no longer white. It was stained as with dried blood; and looking closer they perceived that its nails were red. Unheeding Gandalf rode on into the mist, and reluctantly they followed him. All about them now, as if there had been a sudden flood. wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows. and rills went trickling down among the stones.

At last Gandalf halted and beckoned to them; and they came, and saw that beyond him the mists had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone. The hour of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard.

But the doors lay hurled and twisted on the ground. And all about, stone, cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards, was scattered far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch still stood, but it opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare. and through the cliff-like walls on either side great rents and breaches had been torn; their towers were beaten into dust. If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and fallen on the hills with storm. it could have worked no greater ruin.

The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in which there heaved and floated a wreckage of beams and spars, chests and casks and broken gear. Twisted and leaning pillars reared their splintered stems above the flood. but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it seemed, half veiled in winding cloud, there loomed the island rock. Still dark and tall, unbroken by the storm, the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped about its feet.

The king and all his company sat silent on their horses, marvelling, perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not guess. And now they turned their eyes towards the archway and the ruined gates. There they saw close beside them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly they were aware of two small figures lying on it at their ease, grey-clad, hardly to be seen among the stones. There were bottles and bowls and platters laid beside them, as if they had just eaten well, and now rested from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs and arms behind his head, leaned back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke.

For a moment Théoden and Éomer and all his men stared at them in wonder. Amid all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to them the strangest sight. But before the king could speak, the small smoke-breathing figure became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent on the edge of the mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though not much more than half a man in height; his head of brown curling hair was uncovered, but he was clad in a travel-stained cloak of the same hue and shape as the companions of Gandalf had worn when they rode to Edoras. He bowed very low. putting his hand upon his breast. Then, seeming not to observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Éomer and the king.

'Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!' he said. 'We are the doorwardens. Meriadoc, son of Saradoc is my name; and my companion, who, alas! is overcome with weariness' - here he gave the other a dig with his foot - 'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North is our home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one Wormtongue, or doubtless he would be here to welcome such honourable guests.'

'Doubtless he would!' laughed Gandalf. 'And was it Saruman that ordered you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?'

'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,' answered Merry gravely 'He has been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who has taken over the management of Isengard. He commanded me to welcome the Lord of Rohan with fitting words. I have done my best.'

'And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?' cried Gimli, unable to contain himself longer. 'You rascals, you woolly-footed and wool-pated truants! A fine hunt you have led us! Two hundred leagues, through fen and forest, battle and death, to rescue you! And here we find you feasting and idling-and smoking! Smoking! Where did you come by the weed, you villains? Hammer and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy, that if I do not burst. it will be a marvel!'

'You speak for me, Gimli,' laughed Legolas. 'Though I would sooner learn how they came by the wine.'

'One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that's brighter wits,' said Pippin, opening an eye. 'Here you find us sitting on a field of victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came by a few well-earned comforts!'

'Well-earned?' said Gimli. 'I cannot believe that!'

The Riders laughed. 'It cannot be doubted that we witness the meeting of dear friends,' said Théoden. 'So these are the lost ones of your company, Gandalf? The days are fated to be filled with marvels. Already I have seen many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the Holbytlan?'

'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin.

'Hobbits?' said Théoden. 'Your tongue is strangely changed; but the name sounds not unfitting so. Hobbits! No report that I have heard does justice to the truth.'

Merry bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord; or I hope that I may so take your words,' he said. 'And here is another marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left my home, and never till now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.'

'My people came out of the North long ago,' said Théoden. 'But I will not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is said among us is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the halfling folk that dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their deeds. for it is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of men, being able to vanish in a twinkling: and they can change their voices to resemble the piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.'

'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry.

'For one thing,' said Théoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke from their mouths.'

'That is not surprising,' answered Merry; 'for it is an art which we have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who first grew the true pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our reckoning. How old Toby came by the plant…'

'You do not know your danger, Théoden,' interrupted Gandalf. 'These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table, or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers, and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you encourage them with undue patience. Some other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking. Where is Treebeard, Merry?'

'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink-of clean water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work - over there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as they looked, they heard a distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was falling from the mountain-side. Far away came a hoom-hom, as of horns blowing triumphantly.

'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?' asked Gandalf.

'There is the water,' said Merry. 'But Quickbeam and some others are watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of Saruman's planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.'

'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,' said Legolas, 'but his arms are at his sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.'

'It is past noon,' said Gandalf, 'and we at any rate have not eaten since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?'

'He left a message,' said Merry, 'and I was coming to it, but I have been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they will find Treebeard there, and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of the best there, it was discovered and selected by your humble servants.' He bowed.

Gandalf laughed. 'That is better!' he said. 'Well, Théoden. will you ride with me to find Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not far. When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is Fangorn, and the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear the speech of the oldest of all living things.'

'I will come with you,' said Théoden. 'Farewell, my hobbits! May we meet again in my house! There you shall sit beside me and tell me all that your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as you can reckon them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!'

The hobbits bowed low. 'So that is the King of Rohan!' said Pippin in an undertone. 'A fine old fellow. Very polite.'



Chapter 9
Flotsam and Jetsam
Gandalf and the King's company rode away, turning eastward to make the circuit of the ruined walls of Isengard. But Aragorn, Gimli, and Legolas remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to stray in search of grass, they came and sat beside the hobbits.

'Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where none of us ever thought to come,' said Aragorn.

'And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters,' said Legolas, 'the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their own small riddles. We tracked you as far as the forest, but there are still many things that I should like to know the truth of.'

'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you ' said Merry. 'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that is not nearly enough.'

'All in good time,' said Legolas. 'We were the hunters, and you should give an account of yourselves to us first.'

'Or second,' said Gimli. 'It would go better after a meal. t have a sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends by finding us some of the plunder that you spoke of. Food and drink would pay off some of my score against you.'

'Then you shall have it,' said Pippin. 'Will you have it here, or in more comfort in what's left of Saruman's guard-house--over there under the arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.'

'Less than an eye!' said Gimli. 'But I will not go into any orc-house nor touch Orcs' meat or anything that they have mauled.'

'We wouldn't ask you to,' said Merry. 'We have had enough of Orcs ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in Isengard. Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his gates: some of his most faithful servants, I suppose. Anyway they were favoured and got good provisions.'

'And pipe-weed?' asked Gimli.

'No, I don't think so,' Merry laughed. 'But that is another story, which can wait until after lunch.'

'Well let us go and have lunch then!' said the Dwarf.

The hobbits led the way; and they passed under the arch and came to a wide door upon the left, at the top of a stair. It opened direct into a large chamber, with other smaller doors at the far end, and a hearth and chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the stone; and it must once have been dark, for its windows looked out only into the tunnel. But light came in now through the broken roof. On the hearth wood was burning.

'I lit a bit of fire,' said Pippin. 'It cheered us up in the fogs. There were few faggots about, and most of the wood we could find was wet. But there is a great draught in the chimney: it seems to wind away up through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire is handy. I will make you some toast. The bread is three or four days old, I am afraid.'

Aragorn and his companions sat themselves down at one end of a long table, and the hobbits disappeared through one of the inner doors. 'Store-room in there, and above the woods, luckily,' said Pippin, as they came back laden with dishes, bowls, cups, knives, and food of various sorts.

'And you need not turn up your nose at the provender, Master Gimli,' said Merry. 'This is not orc-stuff, but man-food, as Treebeard calls it. Will you have wine or beer? There's a barrel inside there - very passable. And this is first-rate salted pork. Or I can cut you some rashers of bacon and broil them, if you like. I am sorry there is no green stuff: the deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer you anything to follow but butter and honey for your bread. Are you content?'

'Indeed yes,' said Gimli. 'The score is much reduced.'

The three were soon busy with their meal; and the two hobbits, unabashed, set to a second time. 'We must keep our guests company,' they said.

'You are full of courtesy this morning,' laughed Legolas. 'But maybe. if we had not arrived, you would already have been keeping one another company again.'

'Maybe; and why not?' said Pippin. 'We had foul fare with the Orcs, and little enough for days before that. It seems a long while since we could eat to heart's content.'

'It does not seem to have done you any harm,' said Aragorn. 'Indeed you look in the bloom of health.'

'Aye, you do indeed,' said Gimli, looking them up and down over the top of his cup. 'Why, your hair is twice as thick and curly as when we parted; and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.'

'He has not,' said Merry. 'But Ents only drink, and drink is not enough for content. Treebeard's draughts may be nourishing, but one feels the need of something solid. And even lembas is none the worse for a change.'

'You have drunk of the waters of the Ents, have you?' said Legolas. 'Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive him. Strange songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.'

'Many strange tales have been told about that land,' said Aragorn. 'I have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the Ents!'

'Ents,' said Pippin, 'Ents are - well Ents are all different for on thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.' He tried a few fumbling words that trailed off into silence. 'Oh, well,' he went on, 'you have seen some at a distance, already-they saw you at any rate, and reported that you were on the way-and you will see many others, I expect, before you leave here. You must form your own ideas.'

'Now, now!' said Gimli. 'We are beginning the story in the middle. I should like a tale in the right order, starting with that strange day when our fellowship was broken.'

'You shall have it, if there is time,' said Merry. 'But first-if you have finished eating-you shall fill your pipes and light up. And then for a little while we can pretend that we are all back safe at Bree again, or in Rivendell.'

He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. 'We have heaps of it,' he said; 'and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we go. We did some salvage-work this morning, Pippin and I. There are lots of things floating about. It was Pippin who found two small barrels, washed up out of some cellar or store-house, I suppose. When we opened them, we found they were filled with this: as fine a pipe-weed as you could wish for, and quite unspoilt.'

Gimli took some and rubbed it in his palms and sniffed it. 'It feels good, and it smells good,' he said.

'It is good!' said Merry. 'My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf! There were the Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as plain as plain. How it came here, I can't imagine. For Saruman's private use. I fancy. I never knew that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?'

'It would,' said Gimli, 'if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?'

'No, I am afraid not,' said Merry. 'We have not found any, not even here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself. it seems. And I don't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of Orthanc to beg a pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes. as good friends must at a pinch.'

'Half a moment!' said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast of his jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. 'I keep a treasure or two near my skin, as precious as Rings to me. Here's one: my old wooden pipe. And here's another: an unused one. I have carried it a long way,, though I don't know why. I never really expected to find any pipe-weed on the journey, when my own ran out. But now it comes in useful after all.' He held up a small pipe with a wide flattened bowl, and handed it to Gimli. 'Does that settle the score between us?' he said. 'Settle it!' cried Gimli. 'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.'

'Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind and sky are doing!' said Legolas.

'We will come with you,' said Aragorn.

They went out and seated themselves upon the piled stones before the gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists were lifting and floating away upon the breeze.

'Now let us take our ease here for a little!' said Aragorn. 'We will sit on the edge of ruin and talk, as Gandalf says, while he is busy elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.' He wrapped his grey cloak about him, hiding his mail-shirt, and stretched out his long legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin stream of smoke.

'Look!' said Pippin. 'Strider the Ranger has come back!'

'He has never been away,' said Aragorn. 'I am Strider and Dúnadan too, and I belong both to Gondor and the North.'

They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them; slanting into the valley from among white clouds high in the West. Legolas lay still, looking up at the sun and sky with steady eyes, and singing softly to himself. At last he sat up. 'Come now!' he said. 'Time wears on, and the mists are blowing away, or would if you strange folk did not wreathe yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?'

'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all strung-up in an orc-camp,' said Pippin. 'Let me see, what is today?'

'The fifth of March in the Shire-reckoning,' said Aragorn. Pippin made some calculations on his fingers. 'Only nine days ago!' he said.1 'It seems a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was like a bad dream, I reckon that three very horrible days followed. Merry will correct me, if I forget anything important: I am not going into details: the whips and the filth and stench and all that; it does not bear remembering.' With that he plunged into an account of Boromir's last fight and the orc-march from Emyn Muil to the Forest. The others nodded as the various points were fitted in with their guesses.

'Here are some treasures that you let fall,' said Aragorn. 'You will be glad to have them back.' He loosened his belt from under his cloak and took from it the two sheathed knives.

'Well!' said Merry. 'I never expected to see those again! I marked a few orcs with mine; but Uglúk took them from us. How he glared! At first I thought he was going to stab me, but he threw the things away as if they burned him.'

'And here also is your brooch, Pippin,' said Aragorn. 'I have kept it safe, for it is a very precious thing.'

'I know,' said Pippin. 'It was a wrench to let it go; but what else could I do?'

'Nothing else,' answered Aragorn. 'One who cannot cast away a treasure at need is in fetters. You did rightly.'

'The cutting of the bands on your wrists, that was smart work!' said Gimli. 'Luck served you there; but you seized your chance with both hands, one might say.'

'And set us a pretty riddle,' said Legolas. 'I wondered if you had grown wings!'

'Unfortunately not,' said Pippin. 'But you did not know about Grishnákh.' He shuddered and said no more, leaving Merry to tell of those last horrible moments: the pawing hands, the hot breath, and the dreadful strength of Grishnákh's hairy arms.

'All this about the Orcs of Barad-dûr, Lugbúrz as they call it, makes me uneasy,' said Aragorn. 'The Dark Lord already knew too much and his servants also; and Grishnákh evidently sent some message across the River after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman at any rate is in a cleft stick of his own cutting.'

'Yes, whichever side wins, his outlook is poor,' said Merry. 'Things began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in Rohan.'

'We caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so Gandalf hints,' said Gimli. 'On the edge of the Forest.'

'When was that?' asked Pippin.

'Five nights ago,' said Aragorn.

'Let me see,' said Merry: 'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the story you know nothing about. We met Treebeard that morning after the battle; and that night we were at Wellinghall, one of his ent-houses. The next morning we went to Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is, and the queerest thing I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that day and the next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in the afternoon in the third day of their moot, the Ents suddenly blew up. It was amazing. The Forest had felt as tense as if a thunderstorm was brewing inside it: then all at once it exploded. I wish you could have heard their song as they marched.'

'If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even if he had had to run on his own legs,' said Pippin.

'Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone,

We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door!

There was very much more. A great deal of the song had no words, and was like a music of horns and drums. It was very exciting. But I thought it was only marching music and no more, just a song - until I got here. I know better now.'

'We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunír, after night had fallen,' Merry continued. 'It was then that I first had the feeling that the Forest itself was moving behind us. I thought I was dreaming an entish dream, but Pippin had noticed it too. We were both frightened; but we did not find out more about it until later.

'It was the Huorns, or so the Ents call them in "short language". Treebeard won't say much about them, but I think they are Ents that have become almost like trees, at least to look at. They stand here and there in the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching endlessly over the trees; but deep in the darkest dales there are hundreds and hundreds of them, I believe.

'There is a great power in them, and they seem able to wrap themselves in shadow: it is difficult to see them moving. But they do. They can move very quickly, if they are angry. You stand still looking at the weather, maybe, or listening to the rustling of the wind, and then suddenly you find that you are in the middle of a wood with great groping trees all around you. They still have voices, and can speak with the Ents - that is why they are called Huorns, Treebeard says - but they have become queer and wild. Dangerous. I should be terrified of meeting them, if there were no true Ents about to look after them.

'Well, in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the upper end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns behind. We could not see them, of course, but the whole air was full of creaking. It was very dark, a cloudy night. They moved at a great speed as soon as they had left the hills, and made a noise like a rushing wind. The Moon did not appear through the clouds, and not long after midnight there was a tall wood all round the north side of Isengard. There was no sign of enemies nor of any challenge. There was a light gleaming from a high window in the tower, that was all.

'Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on, right round to within sight of the great gates. Pippin and I were with him. We were sitting on Treebeard's shoulders, and I could feel the quivering tenseness in him. But even when they are roused, Ents can be very cautious and patient. They stood still as carved stones, breathing and listening.

'Then all at once there was a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the walls of Isengard echoed. We thought that we had been discovered, and that battle was going to begin. But nothing of the sort. All Saruman's people were marching away. I don't know much about this war, or about the Horsemen of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I saw the enemy go: endless lines of marching Orcs; and troops of them mounted on great wolves. And there were battalions of Men, too. Many of them carried torches, and in the flare I could see their faces. Most of them were ordinary men, rather tall and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly evil-looking. But there were some others that were horrible: man-high, but with goblin-faces, sallow, leering, squint-eyed. Do you know, they reminded me at once of that Southerner at Bree: only he was not so obviously orc-like as most of these were.'

'I thought of him too,' said Aragorn. 'We had many of these half-orcs to deal with at Helm's Deep. It seems plain now that that Southerner was a spy of Saruman's; but whether he was working with the Black Riders, or for Saruman alone, I do not know. It is difficult with these evil folk to know when they are in league, and when they are cheating one another.'

'Well, of all sorts together, there must have been ten thousand at the very least,' said Merry. 'They took an hour to pass out of the gates. Some went off down the highway to the Fords, and some turned away µ and went eastward. A bridge has been built down there, about a mile away, where the river runs in a very deep channel. You could see it now, if you stood up. They were all singing with harsh voices, and laughing, making a hideous din. I thought things looked very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He said: 'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.'

'But, though I could not see what was happening in the dark, I believe that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were shut again. Their business was with Orcs I think. They were far down the valley in the morning; or any rate there was a shadow there that one couldn't see through.

'As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came. Treebeard put us down, and went up to the gates, and began hammering on the doors, and calling for Saruman. There was no answer, except arrows and stones from the walls. But arrows are no use against Ents. They hurt them, of course, and infuriate them: like stinging flies. But an Ent can be stuck as full of orc-arrows as a pin-cushion, and take no serious harm. They cannot be poisoned, for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher than bark. It takes a very heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They don't like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe-men to one Ent: a man that hacks once at an Ent never gets a chance of a second blow. A punch from an Ent-fist crumples up iron like thin tin.

'When Treebeard had got a few arrows in him, he began to warm up, to get positively "hasty", as he would say. He let out a great hoom-hom, and a dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent is terrifying. Their fingers, and their toes, just freeze on to rock; and they tear it up like bread-crust. It was like watching the work of great tree-roots in a hundred years, all packed into a few moments.

'They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and clang-bang, crash-crack, in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in ruin; and some were already beginning to eat into the walls, like rabbits in a sand-pit. I don't know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he did not know how to deal with it. His wizardry may have been falling off lately, of course; but anyway I think he has not much grit, not much plain courage alone in a tight place without a lot of slaves and machines and things, if you know what I mean. Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame was not all along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.'

'No,' said Aragorn. 'Once he was as great as his fame made him. His knowledge was deep, his thought was subtle, and his hands marvellously skilled; and he had a power over the minds of others. The wise he could persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That power he certainly still keeps. There are not many in Middle-earth that I should say were safe, if they were left alone to talk with him, even now when he has suffered a defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has been laid bare, but very few others.'

'The Ents are safe,' said Pippin. 'He seems at one time to have got round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand them; and he made the great mistake of leaving them out of his calculations. He had no plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work. As soon as our attack began, the few remaining rats in Isengard started bolting through every hole that the Ents made. The Ents let the Men go, after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down at this end. I don't think many orc-folk, of any size, escaped. Not from the Huorns: there was a wood full of them all round Isengard by that time, as well as those that had gone down the valley.

'When the Ents had reduced a large part of the southern walls to rubbish, and what was left of his people had bolted and deserted him, Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived: I expect he came to watch his splendid army march out. When the Ents broke their way in, he left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for Ents to see by, and suddenly Quickbeam gave a cry "The tree-killer, the tree-killer!" Quickbeam is a gentle creature, but he hates Saruman all the more fiercely for that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He leapt down the path from the inner gate, and he can move like a wind when he is roused. There was a pale figure hurrying away in and out of the shadows of the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs to the tower-door. But it was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after him, that he was within a step or two of being caught and strangled when he slipped in through the door.

'When Saruman was safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before he set some of his precious machinery to work. By that time there were many Ents inside Isengard: some had followed Quickbeam, and others had burst in from the north and east; they were roaming about and doing a great deal of damage. Suddenly up came fires and foul fumes: the vents and shafts all over the plain began to spout and belch. Several of the Ents got scorched and blistered. One of them, Beechbone I think he was called, a very tall handsome Ent, got caught in a spray of some liquid fire and burned like a torch: a horrible sight.

'That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused before; but I was wrong. I saw what it was like at last. It was staggering. They roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to crack and fall at the mere noise of them. Merry and I lay on the ground and stuffed our cloaks into our ears. Round and round the rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding and storming like a howling gale, breaking pillars, hurling avalanches of boulders down the shafts, tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air like leaves. The tower was in the middle of a spinning whirlwind. I saw iron posts and blocks of masonry go rocketing up hundreds of feet, and smash against the windows of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. He had not had any burns, luckily. He did not want his folk to hurt themselves in their fury, and he did not want Saruman to escape out of some hole in the confusion. Many of the Ents were hurling themselves against the Orthanc-rock; but that defeated them. It is very smooth and hard. Some wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than Saruman's. Anyway they could not get a grip on it, or make a crack in it; and they were bruising and wounding themselves against it. 'So Treebeard went out into the ring and shouted. His enormous voice rose above all the din. There was a dead silence, suddenly. In it we heard a shrill laugh from a high window in the tower. That had a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now they became cold, grim as ice, and quiet. They left the plain and gathered round Treebeard, standing quite still. He spoke to them for a little in their own language; I think he was telling them of a plan he had made in his old head long before. Then they just faded silently away in the grey light. Day was dawning by that time.

'They set a watch on the tower, I believe, but the watchers were so well hidden in shadows and kept so still, that I could not see them. The others went away north. All that day they were busy, out of sight. Most of the time we were left alone. It was a dreary day; and we wandered about a bit, though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc, as much as we could: they stared at us so threateningly. A good deal of the time we spent looking for something to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was happening away south in Rohan, and what had become of all the rest of our Company. Every now and then we could hear in the distance the rattle and fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.

'In the afternoon we walked round the circle, and went to have a look at what was going on. There was a great shadowy wood of Huorns at the head of the valley, and another round the northern wall. We did not dare to go in. But there was a rending, tearing noise of work going on inside. Ents and Huorns were digging great pits and trenches, and making great pools and dams, gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream that they could find. We left them to it.

'At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming and booming to himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched his great arms and legs and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired.

' "Tired?" he said, "tired? Well no, not tired, but stiff. I need a good draught of Entwash. We have worked hard; we have done more stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many a long year before. But it is nearly finished. When night falls do not linger near this gate or in the old tunnel! Water may come through-and it will be foul water for a while, until all the filth of Saruman is washed away. Then Isen can run clean again." He began to pull down a bit more of the walls, in a leisurely sort of way, just to amuse himself.

'We were just wondering where it would be safe to lie and get some sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was the sound of a rider coming swiftly up the road. Merry and I lay quiet, and Treebeard hid himself in the shadows under the arch. Suddenly a great horse came striding up, like a flash of silver. It was already dark. but I could see the rider's face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn't.

'There was no need. He halted just by us and looked down at us. 'Gandalf!' I said at last. but my voice was only a whisper. Did he say: "Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!"? No, indeed! He said: "Get up, you tom-fool of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in all this ruin is Treebeard? I want him. Quick!"

'Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once; and there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed surprised at all. Gandalf obviously expected to find Treebeard here; and Treebeard might almost have been loitering about near the gates on purpose to meet him. Yet we had told the old Ent all about Moria. But then I remembered a queer look he gave us at the time. I can only suppose that he had seen Gandalf or had some news of him, but would not say anything in a hurry. "Don't be hasty" is his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say much about Gandalf's movements when he is not there.

'"Hoom! Gandalf!" said Treebeard. "I am glad you have come. Wood and water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to manage here."

'"Treebeard," said Gandalf. "I need your help. You have done much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage."

'Then those two went off and had a council together in some corner. It must have seemed very hasty to Treebeard, for Gandalf was in a tremendous hurry, and was already talking at a great pace, before they passed out of hearing. They were only away a matter of minutes, perhaps a quarter of an hour. Then Gandalf came back to us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He did say he was glad to see us, then.

'"But Gandalf," I cried, "where have you been? And have you seen the others?"

'"Wherever I have been, I am back," he answered in the genuine Gandalf manner. "Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must wait. This is a perilous night, and I must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if so, we shall meet again. Take care of yourselves, and keep away from Orthanc! Good-bye!"

'Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had evidently learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked at us and said: "Hm, well, I find you are not such hasty folk as I thought. You said much less than you might, and not more than you should. Hm, this is a bundle of news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again."

'Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it did not cheer us up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you three than about Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we gathered that there was a great battle going on, or soon would be, and that you were in it, and might never come out of it.

'"Huorns will help," said Treebeard. Then he went away and we did not see him again until this morning.

'It was deep night. We lay on top of a pile of stone, and could see nothing beyond it. Mist or shadows blotted out everything like a great blanket all round us. The air seemed hot and heavy; and it was full of rustlings, creakings, and a murmur like voices passing. I think that hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle. Later there was a great rumble of thunder away south, and flashes of lightning far away across Rohan. Every now and then we could see mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab out suddenly, black and white, and then vanish. And behind us there were noises like thunder in hills, but different. At times the whole valley echoed.

'It must have been about midnight when the Ents broke the dams and poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall, down into Isengard. The Huorn-dark had passed, and the thunder had rolled away. The Moon was sinking behind the western mountains.

'Isengard began to fill up with black creeping streams and pools. They glittered in the last light of the Moon, as they spread over the plain. Every now and then the waters found their way down into some shaft or spouthole. Great white steams hissed up. Smoke rose in billows. There were explosions and gusts of fire. One great coil of vapour went whirling up, twisting round and round Orthanc, until it looked like a tall peak of cloud, fiery underneath and moonlit above. And still more water poured in, until at last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.'

'We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night when we came to the mouth of Nan Curunír,' said Aragorn. 'We feared that Saruman was brewing some new devilry for us.'

'Not he!' said Pippin. 'He was probably choking and not laughing any more. By the morning, yesterday morning, the water had sunk down into all the holes, and there was a dense fog. We took refuge in that guardroom over there; and we had rather a fright. The lake began to overflow and pour out through the old tunnel, and the water was rapidly rising up the steps. We thought we were going to get caught like Orcs in a hole; but we found a winding stair at the back of the store-room that brought us out on top of the arch. It was a squeeze to get out, as the passages had been cracked and half blocked with fallen stone near the top. There we sat high up above the floods and watched the drowning of Isengard. The Ents kept on pouring in more water, till all the fires were quenched and every cave filled. The fogs slowly gathered together and steamed up into a huge umbrella of cloud: it must have been a mile high. In the evening there was a great rainbow over the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted out by a thick drizzle on the mountain-sides. It all went very quiet. A few wolves howled mournfully, far away. The Ents stopped the inflow in the night, and sent the Isen back into its old course. And that was the end of it all.

'Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of his windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We felt very lonely. Not even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin; and no news. We spent the night up on top there above the arch, and it was cold and damp and we did not sleep. We had a feeling that anything might happen at any minute. Saruman is still in his tower. There was a noise in the night like a wind coming up the valley. I think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came back then; but where they have all gone to now, I don't know. It was a misty, moisty morning when we climbed down and looked round again, and nobody was about. And that is about all there is to tell. It seems almost peaceful now after all the turmoil. And safer too, somehow, since Gandalf came back. I could sleep!'

They all fell silent for a while. Gimli re-filled his pipe. 'There is one thing I wonder about,' he said as he lit it with his flint and tinder: 'Wormtongue. You told Théoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?'

'Oh yes, I forgot about him,' said Pippin. 'He did not get here till this morning. We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast when Treebeard appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our names outside.

'"I have just come round to see how you are faring, my lads,' he said; 'and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All's well; aye very well indeed!" he laughed, and slapped his thighs. "No more Orcs in Isengard, no more axes! And there will be folk coming up from the South before the day is old; some that you may be glad to see."

'He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road. We rushed out before the gates, and I stood and stared, half expecting to see Strider and Gandalf come riding up at the head of an army. But out of the mist there rode a man on an old tired horse; and he looked a queer twisted sort of creature himself. There was no one else. When he came. out of the mist and suddenly saw all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he sat and gaped, and his face went almost green. He was so bewildered that he did not seem to notice us at first. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to turn his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides, put out a long arm, and lifted him out of the saddle. His horse bolted in terror, and he grovelled on the ground. He said he was Gríma, friend and counsellor of the king, and had been sent with important messages from Théoden to Saruman.

'"No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul Orcs," he said, "so I was sent. And I have had a perilous journey, and I am hungry and weary. I fled far north out of my way, pursued by wolves."

'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself "liar". Treebeard looked at him in his long slow way for several minutes, till the wretched man was squirming on the floor. Then at last he said: "Ha, hm, I was expecting you, Master Wormtongue." The man started at that name. "Gandalf got here first. So I know as much about you as I need, and I know what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of."

'"Let me go, let me go!" said Wormtongue. "I know the way."

'"You knew the way, I don't doubt," said Treebeard. "But things have changed here a little. Go and see!"

'He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch with us close behind, until he came inside the ring and could see all the floods that lay between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us.

'"Let me go away!" he whined. "Let me go away! My messages are useless now."

'"They are indeed," said Treebeard. "But you have only two choices: to stay with me until Gandalf and your master arrive; or to cross the water. Which will you have?"

'The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the water; but he drew back. "I cannot swim," he said.

'"The water is not deep," said Treebeard. "It is dirty, but that will not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!"

'With that the wretch floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly to his neck before he got too far away for me to see him. The last I saw of him was clinging to some old barrel or piece of wood. But Treebeard waded after him, and watched his progress.

'"Well, he has gone in," he said when he returned. "I saw him crawling up the steps like a draggled rat. There is someone in the tower still: a hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and I hope the welcome is to his liking. Now I must go and wash myself clean of the slime. I'll be away up on the north side, if anyone wants to see me. There is no clean water down here fit for an Ent to drink. or to bathe in. So I will ask you two lads to keep a watch at the gate for the folk that are coming. There'll be the Lord of the Fields of Rohan, mark you! You must welcome him as well as you know how: his men have fought a great fight with the Orcs. Maybe, you know the right fashion of Men's words for such a lord, better than Ents. There have been many lords in the green fields in my time, and I have never learned their speech or their names. They will be wanting man-food, and you know all about that, I guess. So find what you think is fit for a king to eat, if you can." And that is the end of the story. Though I should like to know who this Wormtongue is. Was he really the king's counsellor?'

'He was,' said Aragorn; 'and also Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan. Fate has not been kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of the ruin of all that he thought so strong and magnificent must have been almost punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits him.'

'Yes, I don't suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of kindness,' said Merry. 'He seemed rather grimly delighted with the business and was laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe and drink. We spent a busy time after that, searching the flotsam, and rummaging about. We found two or three store-rooms in different places nearby, above the flood-level. But Treebeard sent some Ents down, and they carried off a great deal of the stuff.

'"We want man-food for twenty-five," the Ents said, so you can see that somebody had counted your company carefully before you arrived. You three were evidently meant to go with the great people. But you would not have fared any better. We kept as good as we sent, I promise you. Better, because we sent no drink.

'"What about drink?" I said to the Ents.

'"There is water of Isen," they said, "and that is good enough for Ents and Men." But I hope that the Ents may have found time to brew some of their draughts from the mountain-springs, and we shall see Gandalf's beard curling when he returns. After the Ents had gone, we felt tired, and hungry. But we did not grumble - our labours had been well rewarded. It was through our search for man-food that Pippin discovered the prize of all the flotsam, those Hornblower barrels. "Pipe-weed is better after food," said Pippin; that is how the situation arose.'

'We understand it all perfectly now,' said Gimli.

'All except one thing,' said Aragorn: 'leaf from the Southfarthing in Isengard. The more I consider it, the more curious I find it. I have never been in Isengard, but I have journeyed in this land, and I know well the empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire. Neither goods nor folk have passed that way for many a long year, not openly. Saruman had secret dealings with someone in the Shire, I guess. Wormtongues may be found in other houses than King Théoden's. Was there a date on the barrels?'

'Yes,' said Pippin. 'It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the year before, of course, now: a good year.'

'Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is beyond our reach at present,' said Aragorn. 'Yet I think I shall mention it to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great affairs.'

'I wonder what he is doing,' said Merry. 'The afternoon is getting on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any rate, Strider, if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.'



Chapter 10
The Voice of Saruman
They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of stones, gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows, a menace still in the desolation that lay all about it. The waters had now nearly all subsided. Here and there gloomy pools remained, covered with scum and wreckage; but most of the wide circle was bare again, a wilderness of slime and tumbled rock, pitted with blackened holes, and dotted with posts and pillars leaning drunkenly this way and that. At the rim of the shattered bowl there lay vast mounds and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great storm; and beyond them the green and tangled valley ran up into the long ravine between the dark arms of the mountains. Across the waste they saw riders picking their way; they were coming from the north side, and already they were drawing near to Orthanc.

'There is Gandalf, and Théoden and his men!' said Legolas. 'Let us go and meet them!'

'Walk warily!' said Merry. 'There are loose slabs that may tilt up and throw you down into a pit, if you don't take care.'

They followed what was left of the road from the gates to Orthanc, going slowly, for the flag-stones were cracked and slimed. The riders, seeing them approach, halted under the shadow of the rock and waited for them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them.

'Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting discussions, and made a few plans,' he said; 'and we have all had some much-needed rest. Now we must be going on again. I hope you companions have all rested, too, and refreshed yourselves?'

'We have,' said Merry. 'But our discussions began and ended in smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.'

'Do you indeed?' said Gandalf. 'Well, I do not. I have now a last task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangerous, and probably useless; but it must be done. Those of you who wish may come with me - but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.'

'I will come,' said Gimli. 'I wish to see him and learn if he really looks like you.'

'And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf?' said Gandalf. 'Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect all his counterfeits? Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be shy of showing himself before many different eyes together. But I have ordered all the Ents to remove themselves from sight, so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.'

'What's the danger?' asked Pippin. 'Will he shoot at us, and pour fire out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?'

'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do not guess. Beware of his voice!'

They came now to the foot of Orthanc. It was black, and the rock gleamed as if it were wet. The many faces of the stone had sharp edges as though they had been newly chiselled. A few scorings. and small flake-like splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury of the Ents.

On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door, high above the ground; and over it was a shuttered window, opening upon a balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold of the door there mounted a flight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn by some unknown art of the same black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower; but many tall windows were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns.

At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 'I will go up,' said Gandalf. 'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.'

'And I too will go up,' said the king. 'I am old, and fear no peril any more. I wish to speak with the enemy who has done me so much wrong. Éomer shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not falter.'

'As you will,' said Gandalf. 'Aragorn shall come with me. Let the others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if there is anything to hear or see.'

'Nay!' said Gimli. 'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here represent our kindred. We also will come behind.'

'Come then!' said Gandalf, and with that he climbed the steps, and Théoden went beside him.

The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon their horses, on either side of the stair, and looked up darkly at the great tower, fearing what might befall their lord. Merry and Pippin sat on the bottom step, feeling both unimportant and unsafe.

'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!' muttered Pippin. 'I wish I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are not wanted.'

Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his staff. It rang with a hollow sound. 'Saruman, Saruman!' he cried in a loud commanding voice. 'Saruman come forth!'

For some time there was no answer. At last the window above the door was unbarred, hut no figure could be seen at its dark opening.

'Who is it?' said a voice. 'What do you wish?'

Théoden started. 'I know that voice,' he said, 'and I curse the day when I first listened to it.'

'Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his footman, Gríma Wormtongue!' said Gandalf. 'And do not waste our time!'

The window closed. They waited. Suddenly another voice spoke, low and melodious, its very sound an enchantment. Those who listened unwarily to that voice could seldom report the words that they heard; and if they did, they wondered, for little power remained in them. Mostly they remembered only that it was a delight to hear the voice speaking, all that it said seemed wise and reasonable, and desire awoke in them by swift agreement to seem wise themselves. When others spoke they seemed harsh and uncouth by contrast; and if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of those under the spell. Fur some the spell lasted only while the voice spoke to them, and when it spake to another they smiled, as men do who see through a juggler's trick while others gape at it. For many the sound of the voice alone was enough to hold them enthralled; but for those whom it conquered the spell endured when they were far away. and ever they heard that soft voice whispering and urging them. But none were unmoved; none rejected its pleas and its commands without an effort of mind and will, so long as its master had control of it.

'Well?' it said now with gentle question. 'Why must you disturb my rest? Will you give me no peace at all by night or day?' Its tone was that of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved.

They looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his coming; and they saw a figure standing at the rail, looking down upon them: an old man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for it changed if they moved their eyes or if he stirred. His face was long, with a high forehead, he had deep darkling eyes, hard to fathom, though the look that they now bore was grave and benevolent, and a little weary. His hair and beard were white, but strands of black still showed about his lips and ears.

'Like, and yet unlike,' muttered Gimli.

'But come now,' said the soft voice. 'Two at least of you I know by name. Gandalf I know too well to have much hope that he seeks help or counsel here. But you, Théoden Lord of the Mark of Rohan are declared by your noble devices, and still more by the fair countenance of the House of Eorl. O worthy son of Thengel the Thrice-renowned! Why have you not come before, and as a friend? Much have I desired to see you, mightiest king of western lands, and especially in these latter years, to save you from the unwise and evil counsels that beset you! Is it yet too late? Despite the injuries that have been done to me, in which the men of Rohan, alas! have had some part, still I would save you, and deliver you from the ruin that draws nigh inevitably, if you ride upon this road which you have taken. Indeed I alone can aid you now.'

Théoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked up at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent down upon him, and then to Gandalf at his side; and he seemed to hesitate. Gandalf made no sign; but stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call that has not yet come. The Riders stirred at first, murmuring with approval of the words of Saruman; and then they too were silent, as men spell-bound. It seemed to them that Gandalf had never spoken so fair and fittingly to their lord. Rough and proud now seemed all his dealings with Théoden. And over their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end of the Mark in a darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while Saruman stood beside a door of escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came through. There was a heavy silence.

It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. 'The words of this wizard stand on their heads,' he growled, gripping the handle of his axe. 'In the language of Orthanc help means ruin, and saving means slaying, that is plain. But we do not come here to beg.'

'Peace!' said Saruman, and for a fleeting moment his voice was less suave, and a light flickered in his eyes and was gone. 'I do not speak to you yet, Gimli Glóin's son,' he said. 'Far away is your home and small concern of yours are the troubles of this land. But it was not by design of your own that you became embroiled in them, and so I will not blame such part as you have played-a valiant one, I doubt not. But I pray you, allow me first to speak with the King of Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend.

'What have you to say, Théoden King? Will you have peace with me, and all the aid that my knowledge, founded in long years, can bring? Shall we make our counsels together against evil days, and repair our injuries with such good will that our estates shall both come to fairer flower than ever before?'

Still Théoden did not answer. Whether he strove with anger or doubt none could say. Éomer spoke.

'Lord, hear me!' he said. 'Now we feel the peril that we were warned of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last amazed by an old liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would the trapped wolf speak to the hounds, if he could. What aid can he give to you, forsooth? All he desires is to escape from his plight. But will you parley with this dealer in treachery and murder? Remember Théodred at the Fords, and the grave of Háma in Helm's Deep!'

'If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours, young serpent?' said Saruman, and the flash of his anger was now plain to see. 'But come, Éomer, Éomund's son!' he went on in his soft voice again. To every man h part. Valour in arms is yours, and you win high honour thereby. Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and be content. Meddle not in policies which you do not understand. But maybe. if you become a king, you Will find that he must choose his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the power of Orthanc cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real or fancied, may lie behind. You have won a battle but not a war and that with help on which you cannot count again. You may find the Shadow of the Wood at your own door next: it is wayward, and senseless, and has no love for Men.

'But my lord of Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because valiant men have fallen in battle? If you go to war, needlessly, for I did not desire it, then men will be slain. But if I am a murderer on that account, then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many wars, and assailed many who defied them. Yet with some they have afterwards made peace, none the worse for being politic. I say, Théoden King: shall we have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command '

'We will have peace,' said Théoden at last thickly and with an effort. Several of the Riders cried out gladly. Théoden held up his hand. 'Yes, we will have peace,' he said, now in a clear voice, 'we will have peace, when you and all your works have perished - and the works of your dark master to whom you would deliver us. You are a liar. Saruman, and a corrupter of men's hearts. You hold out your hand to me, and I perceive only a finger of the claw of Mordor. Cruel and cold! Even if your war on me was just as it was not, for were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule me and mine for your own profit as you desired - even so, what will you say of your torches in Westfold and the children that lie dead there? And they hewed Háma's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he was dead. When you hang from a gibbet at your window for the sport of your own crows, I will have peace with you and Orthanc. So much for the House of Eorl. A lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.'

The Riders gazed up at Théoden like men startled out of a dream. Harsh as an old raven's their master's voice sounded in their ears after the music of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside himself with wrath. He leaned over the rail as if he would smite the King with his staff. To some suddenly it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike.

'Gibbets and crows!' he hissed, and they shuddered at the hideous change. 'Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands drink in the reek, and their brats roll on the floor among the dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes, slow in the drawing, tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!' Now his voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself. 'I know not why I have had the patience to speak to you. For I need you not, nor your little band of gallopers, as swift to fly as to advance, Théoden Horsemaster. Long ago I offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it again, so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give me brag and abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!

'But you, Gandalf! For you at least I am grieved, feeling for your shame. How comes it that you can endure such company? For you are proud, Gandalf-and not without reason, having a noble mind and eyes that look both deep and far. Even now will you not listen to my counsel?'

Gandalf stirred, and looked up. 'What have you to say that you did not say at our last meeting?' he asked. 'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?'

Saruman paused. 'Unsay?' he mused, as if puzzled. 'Unsay? I endeavoured to advise you for your own good, but you scarcely listened. You are proud and do not love advice, having indeed a store of your own wisdom. But on that occasion you erred, I think, misconstruing my intentions wilfully. I fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I lost patience. And indeed I regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; and even now I bear none, though you return to me in the company of the violent and the ignorant. How should I? Are we not both members of a high and ancient order, most excellent in Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us both alike. Much we could still accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the world. Let us understand one another, and dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let them wait on our decisions! For the common good I am willing to redress the past, and to receive you. Will you not consult with me? Will you not come up?'

So great was the power that Saruman exerted in this last effort that none that stood within hearing were unmoved. But now the spell was wholly different. They heard the gentle remonstrance of a kindly king with an erring but much-loved minister. But they were shut out, listening at a door to words not meant for them: ill-mannered children or stupid servants overhearing the elusive discourse of their elders, and wondering how it would affect their lot. Of loftier mould these two were made: reverend and wise. It was inevitable that they should make alliance. Gandalf would ascend into the tower, to discuss deep things beyond their comprehension in the high chambers of Orthanc. The door would be closed, and they would be left outside, dismissed to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of Théoden the thought took shape, like a shadow of doubt: 'He will betray us; he will go - we shall be lost.'

Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke.

'Saruman, Saruman!' said Gandalf still laughing. 'Saruman, you missed your path in life. You should have been the king's jester and earned your bread, and stripes too, by mimicking his counsellors. Ah me!' he paused, getting the better of his mirth. 'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand now too well. I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, the guest who has escaped from the roof, will think twice before he comes back in by the door. Nay, I do not think I will come up. But listen, Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less strong than your hope and fancy made it. So may other things in which you still have trust. Would it not be well to leave it for a while? To turn to new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?'

A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before he could conceal it, they saw through the mask the anguish of a mind in doubt, loathing to stay and dreading to leave its refuge. For a second he hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke, and his voice was shrill and cold. Pride and hate were conquering him.

'Will I come down?' he mocked. 'Does an unarmed man come down to speak with robbers out of doors? I can hear you well enough here. I am no fool, and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They do not stand openly on my stairs, but I know where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.'

'The treacherous are ever distrustful,' answered Gandalf wearily. 'But you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect you. I am giving you a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free - if you choose.'

'That sounds well,' sneered Saruman. 'Very much in the manner of Gandalf the Grey: so condescending, and so very kind. I do not doubt that you would find Orthanc commodious, and my departure convenient. But why should I wish to leave? And what do you mean by 'free'? There are conditions, I presume?'

'Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows.' answered Gandalf. 'Others will occur to your thought. Your servants are destroyed and scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you have cheated your new master. or tried to do so. When his eye turns hither, it will be the red eye of wrath. But when I say 'free', I mean 'free': free from bond, of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if you desire. But you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you merit them.'

Saruman's face grew livid, twisted with rage, and a red light was kindled in his eyes. He laughed wildly. 'Later!' he cried, and his voice rose to a scream. 'Later! Yes, when you also have the Keys of Barad-dûr itself, I suppose; and the crowns of seven kings. and the rods of the Five Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair of boots many sizes larger than those that you wear now. A modest plan. Hardly one in which my help is needed! I have other things to do. Do not be a fool. If you wish to treat with me, while you have a chance, go away, and come back when you are sober! And leave behind these cut-throats and small rag-tag that dangle at your tail! Good day!' He turned and left the balcony.

'Come back, Saruman!' said Gandalf in a commanding voice. To the amazement of the others, Saruman turned again. and as if dragged against his will, he came slowly back to the iron rail, leaning on it, breathing hard. His face was lined and shrunken. His hand clutched his heavy black staff like a claw.

'I did not give you leave to go,' said Gandalf sternly. 'I have not finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You might still have turned away from folly and evil, and have been of service. But you choose to stay and gnaw the ends of your old plots. Stay then! But I warn you. you will not easily come out again. Not unless the dark hands of the East stretch out to take you. Saruman!' he cried, and his voice grew in power and authority. 'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey, whom you betrayed. I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour now, and I cast you from the order and from the Council.'

He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in a clear cold voice. 'Saruman, your staff is broken.' There was a crack, and the staff split asunder in Saruman's hand, and the head of it fell down at Gandalf's feet. 'Go!' said Gandalf. With a cry Saruman fell back and crawled away. At that moment a heavy shining thing came hurtling down from above. It glanced off the iron rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf's head, it smote the stair on which he stood. The rail rang and snapped. The stair cracked and splintered in glittering sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on down the steps, a globe of crystal, dark, but glowing with a heart of fire. As it bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up.

'The murderous rogue!' cried Éomer. But Gandalf was unmoved. No, that was not thrown b Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I think. It came from a window far above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy, but ill aimed.'

'The aim was poor, maybe, because he could not make up his mind which he hated more, you or Saruman,' said Aragorn.

'That may be so,' said Gandalf. 'Small comfort will those two have in their companionship: they will gnaw one another with words. But the punishment is just. If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive, it will be more than he deserves.

'Here, my lad, I'll take that! I did not ask you to handle it,' he cried, turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly, as if he were bearing a great weight. He went down to meet him and hastily took the dark globe from the hobbit, wrapping it in the folds of his cloak. 'I will take care of this,' he said. 'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman would have chosen to cast away.'

'But he may have other things to cast,' said Gimli. 'If that is the end of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!'

'It is the end,' said Gandalf. 'Let us go.'

They turned their backs on the doors of Orthanc, and went down. The riders hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The spell of Saruman was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed.

'Well, that is done,' said Gandalf. 'Now I must find Treebeard and tell him how things have gone.'

'He will have guessed, surely?' said Merry. 'Were they likely to end any other way?'

'Not likely,' answered Gandalf, 'though they came to the balance of a hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful and some less so. First Saruman was shown that the power of his voice was waning. He cannot be both tyrant and counsellor. When the plot is ripe it remains no longer secret. Yet he fell into the trap, and tried to deal with his victims piece-meal, while others listened. Then I gave him a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need. He knows our need, none better. Great service he could have rendered. But he has chosen to withhold it, and keep the power of Orthanc. He will not serve, only command. He lives now in terror of the shadow of Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding the storm. Unhappy fool! He will be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron - who knows what he can do?'

'And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him?' asked Pippin.

'I? Nothing!' said Gandalf. 'I will do nothing to him. I do not wish for mastery. What w ill become of him? I cannot say. I grieve that so much that was good now festers in the tower. Still for us things have not gone badly. Strange are the turns of fortune! Often does hatred hurt itself! I guess that, even if we had entered in, we could have found few treasures in Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.'

A shrill shriek; suddenly cut off, came from an open window high above.

'It seems that Saruman thinks so too,' said Gandalf. 'Let us leave them!'

They returned now to the ruins of the gate. Hardly had they passed out under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled stones where they had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came striding up. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas gazed at them in wonder.

'Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,' said Gandalf. 'I have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.' He named them one by one.

The Old Ent looked at them long and searchingly, and spoke to them in turn. Last he turned to Legolas. 'So you have come all the way from Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!'

'And still is,' said Legolas. 'But not so great that we who dwell there ever tire of seeing new trees. I should dearly love to journey in Fangorn's Wood. I scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and I did not wish to turn back.'

Treebeard's eyes gleamed with pleasure. 'I hope you may have your wish, ere the hills be much older,' he said.

'I will come, if I have the fortune,' said Legolas. 'I have made a bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fangorn together - by your leave.'

'Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,' said Treebeard.

'The friend I speak of is not an Elf,' said Legolas; 'I mean Gimli, Glóin's son here.' Gimli bowed low, and the axe slipped from his belt and clattered on the ground.

'Hoom, hm! Ah now,' said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. 'A dwarf and an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good will to Elves; but you ask much. This is a strange friendship!' 'Strange it may seem,' said Legolas; 'but while Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but for orc-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn's Wood. Forty-two he hewed in the battle.'

'Hoo! Come now!' said Treebeard. 'That is a better story! Well, well, things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them. But now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark is eager for his own house.'

'Yes, we must go, and go now,' said Gandalf. 'I fear that I must take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.'

'Maybe I shall,' said Treebeard. 'But I shall miss them. We have become friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting hasty - growing backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there, they are the first new thing under Sun or Moon that I have seen for many a long, long day. I shall not forget them. I have put their names into the Long List. Ents will remember it.

Ents the earthborn, old as mountains,

the wide-walkers, water drinking;

and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children,

the laughing-folk, the little people,

they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you well! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land, in the Shire, send me word! You know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if you can!'

'We will!' said Merry and Pippin together, and they turned away hastily. Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking his head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.

'So Saruman would not leave?' he said. 'I did not think he would. His heart is as rotten as a black Huorn's. Still, if I were overcome and all my trees destroyed, I would not come while I had one dark hole left to hide in.'

'No,' said Gandalf. 'But you have not plotted to cover all the world with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it is, Saruman remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can. He has the Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.'

'Indeed no! Ents will see to that,' said Treebeard. 'Saruman shall not set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over him.'

'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped. Now I can go and turn to other matters with one care the less. But you must be wary. The waters have gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I do not doubt that there were deep ways delved under Orthanc, and that Saruman hopes to go and come unmarked, before long. If you will undertake the labour, I beg you to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard remains a standing pool, or you discover the outlets. When all the underground places are drowned, and the outlets blocked, then Saruman must stay upstairs and look out of the windows.'

'Leave it to the Ents!' said Treebeard. 'We shall search the valley from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming back to live here, old trees, wild trees. The Watchwood we will call it. Not a squirrel will go here, but I shall know of it. Leave it to Ents! Until seven times the years in which he tormented us have passed, we shall not tire of watching him.'

Chapter 11

The Palantír

The sun was sinking behind the long western arm of the mountains when Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of the king's men went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace.

Ents in a solemn row stood like statues at the gate, with their long arms uplifted, but they made no sound. Merry and Pippin looked back, when they had passed some way down the winding road. Sunlight was still shining in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey ruins falling into darkness. Treebeard stood alone there now, like the distant stump of an old tree: the hobbits thought of their first meeting, upon the sunny ledge far away on the borders of Fangorn.

They came to the pillar of the White Hand. The pillar was still standing, but the graven hand had been thrown down and broken into small pieces. Right in the middle of the road the long forefinger lay, white in the dusk, its red nail darkening to black.

'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf.

They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley.

'Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf?' asked Merry after a while. 'I don't know how you feel with small rag-tag dangling behind you; but the rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.'

'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is any comfort to your pride, I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in his thoughts than all the rest of us. Who you are; how you came there, and why; what you know; whether you were captured, and if so, how you escaped when all the Orcs perished - it is with those little riddles that the great mind of Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if you feel honoured by his concern.'

'Thank you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?'

Gandalf laughed. 'A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a hobbit or two in their care - to teach them the meaning of the word, and to correct them. I beg your pardon. But I have given thought even to these simple matters. We will ride for a few hours, gently, until we come to the end of the valley. Tomorrow we must ride faster.

'When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's house at Edoras over the plains, a ride of some days. But we have taken thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone ahead to Helm's Deep, to warn them that the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than two or three together are to go openly over the land, by day or night, when it can be avoided.'

'Nothing or a double helping is your way!' said Merry. 'I am afraid I was not looking beyond tonight's bed. Where and what are Helm's Deep and all the rest of it? I don't know anything about this country.'

'Then you'd best learn something, if you wish to understand what is happening. But not just now, and not from me: I have too many pressing things to think about.'

'All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less testy. But why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!'


Chapter 6
The Forbidden Pool
Frodo woke to find Faramir bending over him. For a second old fears seized him and he sat up and shrank away.

`There is nothing to fear,' said Faramir.

'Is it morning already? ' said Frodo yawning.

`Not yet, but night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is setting. Will you come and see it? Also there is a matter on which I desire your counsel. I am sorry to rouse you from sleep, but will you come? '

`I will,' said Frodo, rising and shivering a little as he left the warm blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the fireless cave. The noise of the water was loud in the stillness. He put on his cloak and followed Faramir.

Sam, waking suddenly by some instinct of watchfulness, saw first his master's empty bed and leapt to his feet. Then he saw two dark figures, Frodo and a man, framed against the archway, which was now filled with a pale white light. He hurried after them, past rows of men sleeping on mattresses along the wall. As he went by the cave-mouth he saw that the Curtain was now become a dazzling veil of silk and pearls and silver thread: melting icicles of moonlight. But he did not pause to admire it, and turning aside he followed his master through the narrow doorway in the wall of the cave.

They went first along a black passage, then up many wet steps, and so came to a small flat landing cut in the stone and lit by the pale sky, gleaming high above through a long deep shaft. From here two flights of steps led: one going on, as it seemed, up on to the high bank of the stream; the other turning away to the left. This they followed. It wound its way up like a turret-stair.

At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about. They were on a wide flat rock without rail or parapet. At their right, eastwards, the torrent fell, splashing over many terraces, and then, pouring down a steep race, it filled a smooth-hewn channel with a dark force of water flecked with foam, and curling and rushing almost at their feet it plunged sheer over the edge that yawned upon their left. A man stood there, near the brink, silent, gazing down.

Frodo turned to watch the sleek necks of the water as they curved and dived. Then he lifted his eyes and gazed far away. The world was quiet and cold, as if dawn were near. Far off in the West the full moon was sinking, round and white. Pale mists shimmered in the great vale below: a wide gulf of silver fume, beneath which rolled the cool night-waters of the Anduin. A black darkness loomed beyond, and in it glinted, here and there, cold, sharp, remote, white as the teeth of ghosts, the peaks of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountains of the Realm of Gondor, tipped with everlasting snow.

For a while Frodo stood there on the high stone, and a shiver ran through him, wondering if anywhere in the vastness of the night-lands his old companions walked or slept, or lay dead shrouded in mist. Why was he brought here out of forgetful sleep?

Sam was eager for an answer to the same question and could not refrain himself from muttering, for his master's ear alone as he thought: 'It's a fine view, no doubt, Mr. Frodo, but chilly to the heart, not to mention the bones! What's going on? '

Faramir heard and answered. `Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes from Middle-earth, glances upon the white locks of old Mindolluin. It is worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought you to see-though as for you, Samwise, you were not brought, and do but pay the penalty of your watchfulness. A draught of wine shall amend it. Come, look now! '

He stepped up beside the silent sentinel on the dark edge. and Frodo followed. Sam hung back. He already felt insecure enough on this high wet platform. Faramir and Frodo looked down. Far below them they saw the white waters pour into a foaming bowl, and then swirl darkly about a deep oval basin in the rocks. until they found their way out again through a narrow gate, and flowed away, fuming and chattering, into calmer and more level reaches. The moonlight still slanted down to the fall's foot and gleamed on the ripples of the basin. Presently Frodo was aware of a small dark thing on the near bank, but even as he looked at it, it dived and vanished just beyond the boil and bubble of the fall, cleaving the black water as neatly as an arrow or an edgewise stone.

Faramir turned to the man at his side. `Now what would you say that it is, Anborn? A squirrel, or a kingfisher? Are there black kingfishers in the night-pools of Mirkwood? '

`'Tis not a bird, whatever else it be,' answered Anborn. `It has four limbs and dives manwise; a pretty mastery of the craft it shows, too. What is it at? Seeking a way up behind the Curtain to our hidings? It seems we are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and I have posted other archers, nigh as good marksmen as myself, on either bank. We wait only for your command to shoot, Captain.'

`Shall we shoot? ' said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo.

Frodo did not answer for a moment. Then `No! ' he said. `No! I beg you not to.' If Sam had dared, he would have said `Yes,' quicker and louder. He could not see, but he guessed well enough from their words what they were looking at.

'You know, then, what this thing is? ' said Faramir. `Come, now you have seen, tell me why it should be spared. In all our words together you have not once spoken of your gangrel companion, and I let him be for the time. He could wait till he was caught and brought before me. I sent my keenest huntsmen to seek him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of him till now, save Anborn here, once at dusk yesterevening. But now he has done worse trespass than only to go coney-snaring in the uplands: he has dared to come to Henneth Annûn, and his life is forfeit. I marvel at the creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before our very window. Does he think that men sleep without watch all night? Why does he so?'

'There are two answers, I think,' said Frodo. `For one thing, he knows little of Men, and sly though he is, your refuge is so hidden that perhaps he does not know that Men are concealed here. For another, I think he is allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.'

`He is lured here, you say? ' said Faramir in a low voice. `Can he, does he then know of your burden? '

`Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.'

'He bore it? ' said Faramir, breathing sharply in his wonder. `This matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it? '

'Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.'

`What then does the creature seek? '

`Fish,' said Frodo. `Look! '

They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head appeared at the far end of the basin, just out of the deep shadow of the rocks. There was a brief silver glint, and a swirl of tiny ripples. It swam to the side, and then with marvellous agility a froglike figure climbed out of the water and up the bank. At once it sat down and began to gnaw at the small silver thing that glittered as it turned: the last rays of the moon were now falling behind the stony wall at the pool's end.

Faramir laughed softly. `Fish! ' he said. `It is a less perilous hunger. Or maybe not: fish from the pool of Henneth Annûn may cost him all he has to give.'

`Now I have him at the arrow-point,' said Anborn. `Shall I not shoot, Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law.'

`Wait, Anborn,' said Faramir. `This is a harder matter than it seems. What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare? '

`The creature is wretched and hungry,' said Frodo, `and unaware of his danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he would have bidden you not to slay him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the Elves to do so. I do not know clearly why, and of what I guess I cannot speak openly out here. But this creature is in some way bound up with my errand. Until you found us and took us, he was my guide.'

`Your guide! ' said Faramir. `The matter becomes ever stranger. I would do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this sly wanderer go free at his own will from here, to join you later if it please him, or to be caught by Orcs and tell all he knows under threat of pain. He must be slain or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very swiftly. But how can this slippery thing of many guises be caught, save by a feathered shaft? '

`Let me go down quietly to him,' said Frodo. `You may keep your bows bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.'

`Go then and be swift! ' said Faramir. `If he comes off alive, he should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead Frodo down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a nose and ears. Give me your bow.'

Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding stair to the landing, and then up the other stair, until at last they came to a narrow opening shrouded with thick bushes. Passing silently through, Frodo found himself on the top of the southern bank above the pool. It was now dark and the falls were pale and grey, reflecting only the lingering moonlight of the western sky. He could not see Gollum. He went forward a short way and Anborn came softly behind him.

`Go on! ' he breathed in Frodo's ear. `Have a care to your right. If you fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend can help you. And forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you may not see them.'

Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way and to steady himself. The rocks were for the most part flat and smooth but slippery. He halted listening. At first he could hear no sound but the unceasing rush of the fall behind him. Then presently he heard, not far ahead, a hissing murmur.

'Fissh, nice fissh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last, yes. Now we can eat fish in peace. No, not in peace, precious. For Precious is lost; yes, lost. Dirty hobbits, nasty hobbits. Gone and left us, gollum; and Precious is gone. Only poor Sméagol all alone. No Precious. Nasty Men, they'll take it, steal my Precious. Thieves. We hates them. Fissh, nice fissh: Makes us strong. Makes eyes bright, fingers tight, yes. Throttle them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if we gets chances. Nice fissh. Nice fissh! '

So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall, only interrupted by a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo shivered, listening with pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he never need hear that voice again. Anborn was not far behind. He could creep back and ask him to get the huntsmen to shoot. They would probably get close enough, while Gollum was gorging and off his guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be rid of the miserable voice for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now. The servant has a claim on the master for service, even service in fear. They would have foundered in the Dead Marshes but for Gollum. Frodo knew, too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it.

`Sméagol! ' he said softly.

`Fissh, nice fissh,' said the voice.

`Sméagol! ' he said, a little louder. The voice stopped.

`Sméagol, Master has come to look for you. Master is here. Come, Sméagol! ' There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath.

'Come, Sméagol! ' said Frodo. `We are in danger. Men will kill you, if they find you here. Come quickly, if you wish to escape death. Come to Master!'

'No!' said the voice. `Not nice Master. Leaves poor Sméagol and goes with new friends. Master can wait. Sméagol hasn't finished.'

`There's no time,' said Frodo. `Bring fish with you. Come! '

`No! Must finish fish.'

'Sméagol! ' said Frodo desperately. 'Precious will be angry. I shall take Precious, and I shall say: make him swallow the bones and choke. Never taste fish again. Come, Precious is waiting! '

There was a sharp hiss. Presently out of the darkness Gollum came crawling on all fours, like an erring dog called to heel. He had a half-eaten fish in his mouth and another in his hand. He came close to Frodo, almost nose to nose, and sniffed at him. His pale eyes were shining. Then he took the fish out of his mouth and stood up.

`Nice Master! ' he whispered. `Nice hobbit, come back to poor Sméagol. Good Sméagol comes. Now let's go, go quickly, yes. Through the trees, while the Faces are dark. Yes, come let's go! '

`Yes, we'll go soon,' said Frodo. `But not at once. I will go with you as I promised. I promise again. But not now. You are not safe yet. I will save you, but you must trust me.'

`We must trust Master? ' said Gollum doubtfully. 'Why? Why not go at once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is he?'

'Away up there,' said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. 'I am not going without him. We must go back to him.' His heart sank. This was too much like trickery. He did not really fear that Faramir would allow Gollum to be killed, but he would probably make him prisoner and bind him; and certainly what Frodo did would seem a treachery to the poor treacherous creature. It would probably be impossible ever to make him understand or believe that Frodo had saved his life in the only way he could. What else could he do? - to keep faith, as near as might be, with both sides. `Come!' he said. `Or the Precious will be angry. We are going back now, up the stream. Go on, go on, you go in front! '

Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way, snuffling and suspicious. Presently he stopped and raised his head. `Something's there! ' he said. `Not a hobbit.' Suddenly he turned back. A green light was flickering in his bulging eyes. `Masster, masster!' he hissed. 'Wicked! Tricksy! False!' He spat and stretched out his long arms with white snapping fingers.

At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind him and came down on him. A large strong hand took him in the nape of the neck and pinned him. He twisted round like lightning, all wet and slimy as he was, wriggling like an eel, biting and scratching like a cat. But two more men came up out of the shadows.

'Hold still! ' said one. `Or we'll stick you as full of pins as a hedgehog. Hold still!'

Gollum went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him, none too gently.

`Easy, easy! ' said Frodo. `He has no strength to match you. Don't hurt him, if you can help it. He'll be quieter, if you don't. Sméagol! They won't hurt you. I'll go with you, and you shall come to no harm. Not unless they kill me too. Trust Master! '

Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked him up, put a hood over his eyes, and carried him off.

Frodo followed them, feeling very wretched. They went through the opening behind the bushes. and back, down the stairs and passages, into the cave. Two or three torches had been lit. Men were stirring. Sam was there, and he gave a queer look at the limp bundle that the men carried. `Got him?' he said to Frodo.

'Yes. Well no, I didn't get him. He came to me, because he trusted me at first, I'm afraid. I did not want him tied up like this. I hope it will be all right; but I hate the whole business.'

`So do I,' said Sam. `And nothing will ever be all right where that piece of misery is.'

A man came and beckoned to the hobbits, and took them to the recess at the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in his chair, and the lamp had been rekindled in its niche above his head. He signed to them to sit down on the stools beside him. `Bring wine for the guests,' he said. `And bring the prisoner to me.'

The wine was brought, and then Anborn came carrying Gollum. He removed the cover from Gollum's head and set him on his feet standing behind him to support him. Gollum blinked, hooding the malice of his eyes with their heavy pale lids. A very miserable creature he looked, dripping and dank, smelling of fish (he still clutched one in his hand); his sparse locks were hanging like rank weed over his bony brows, his nose was snivelling.

`Loose us! Loose us! ' he said. `The cord hurts us, yes it does, it hurts us, and we've done nothing.'

`Nothing? ' said Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a keen glance, but without any expression in his face either of anger, or pity, or wonder. 'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of worse punishment? However, that is not for me to judge, happily. But tonight you have come where it is death to come. The fish of this pool are dearly bought.'

Gollum dropped the fish from his hand. `Don't want fish,' he said.

'The price is not set on the fish,' said Faramir. `Only to come here and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you so far at the prayer of Frodo here, who says that of him at least you have deserved some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is your name? Whence do you come? And whither do you go? What is your business? '

`We are lost, lost,' said Gollum. 'No name, no business, no Precious, nothing. Only empty. Only hungry; yes, we are hungry. A few little fishes, nasty bony little fishes, for a poor creature, and they say death. So wise they are; so just, so very just.'

'Not very wise,' said Faramir. 'But just: yes perhaps, as just as our little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! ' Faramir took a small nail-knife from his belt and handed it to Frodo. Gollum misunderstanding the gesture, squealed and fell down.

'Now, Sméagol! ' said Frodo. 'You must trust me. I will not desert you. Answer truthfully, if you can. It will do you good not harm.' He cut the cords on Gollum's wrists and ankles and raised him to his feet.

'Come hither! ' said Faramir. `Look at me! Do you know the name of this place? Have you been here before? '

Slowly Gollum raised his eyes and looked unwillingly into Faramir's. All light went out of them, and they stared bleak and pale for a moment into the clear unwavering eyes of the man of Gondor. There was a still silence. Then Gollum dropped his head and shrank down, until he was squatting on the floor, shivering. 'We doesn't know and we doesn't want to know,' he whimpered. `Never came here; never come again.'

`There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms behind them,' said Faramir. `But in this I judge that you speak the truth. It is well for you. What oath will you swear never to return; and never to lead any living creature hither by word or sign?'

`Master knows,' said Gollum with a sidelong glance at Frodo. `Yes, he knows. We will promise Master, if he saves us. We'll promise to It, yes.' He crawled to Frodo's feet. 'Save us, nice Master! ' he whined. `Sméagol promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never come again, never speak, no never! No, precious, no!'

`Are you satisfied? ' said Faramir.

`Yes,' said Frodo. 'At least, you must either accept this promise or carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came to me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved faithless.'

Faramir sat for a moment in thought. `Very good,' he said at last. `I surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he will do with you! '

'But, Lord Faramir,' said Frodo bowing, `you have not yet declared your will concerning the said Frodo, and until that is made known, he cannot shape his plans for himself or his companions. Your judgement was postponed until the morning; but that is now at hand.'

`Then I will declare my doom,' said Faramir. `As for you, Frodo, in so far as lies in me under higher authority, I declare you free in the realm of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you nor any that go with you have leave to come to this place unbidden. This doom shall stand for a year and a day, and then cease, unless you shall before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to the Lord and Steward of the City. Then I will entreat him to confirm what I have done and to make it lifelong. In the meantime, whomsoever you take under your protection shall be under my protection and under the shield of Gondor. Are you answered? '

Frodo bowed low. 'I am answered,' he said, `and I place myself at your service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.'

`It is of great worth,' said Faramir. 'And now, do you take this creature, this Sméagol, under your protection? '

`I do take Sméagol under my protection,' said Frodo. Sam sighed audibly; and not at the courtesies, of which, as any hobbit would, he thoroughly approved. Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have required a great many more words and bows.

'Then I say to you,' said Faramir, turning to Gollum, 'you are under doom of death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall fall. And may death find you swiftly, within Gondor or without, if you do not well serve him. Now answer me: whither would you go? You were his guide, he says. Whither were you leading him? ' Gollum made no reply.

`This I will not have secret,' said Faramir. `Answer me, or I will reverse my judgement! ' Still Gollum did not answer.

`I will answer for him,' said Frodo. `He brought me to the Black Gate, as I asked; but it was impassable.'

`There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,' said Faramir.

`Seeing this, we turned aside and came by the Southward road ' Frodo continued; 'for he said that there is, or there may be, a path near to Minas Ithil.'

`Minas Morgul,' said Faramir.

`I do not know clearly,' said Frodo; `but the path climbs, I think, up into the mountains on the northern side of that vale where the old city stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to - that which is beyond.'

`Do you know the name of that high pass? ' said Faramir.

'No,' said Frodo.

'It is called Cirith Ungol.' Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering to himself. `Is not that its name? ' said Faramir turning to him.

`No! ' said Gollum, and then he squealed, as if something had stabbed him. 'Yes, yes, we heard the name once. But what does the name matter to us? Master says he must get in. So we must try some way. There is no other way to try, no.'

'No other way? ' said Faramir. `How do you know that? And who has explored all the confines of that dark realm? ' He looked long and thoughtfully at Gollum. Presently he spoke again. `Take this creature away, Anborn. Treat him gently, but watch him. And do not you, Sméagol, try to dive into the falls. The rocks have such teeth there as would slay you before your time. Leave us now and take your fish! '

Anborn went out and Gollum went cringing before him. The curtain was drawn across the recess.

`Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,' said Faramir. `I do not think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.'

'No, not altogether wicked,' said Frodo.

'Not wholly, perhaps,' said Faramir; 'but malice eats it like a canker, and the evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you will part with him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to any point on the borders of Gondor that he may name.'

`He would not take it,' said Frodo. 'He would follow after me as he long has done. And I have promised many times to take him under my protection and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with him?'

'No,' said Faramir. `But my heart would. For it seems less evil to counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if one sees a friend bound unwitting to his own harm. But no - if he will go with you, you must now endure him. But I do not think you are holden to go to Cirith Ungol, of which he has told you less than he knows. That much I perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!'

`Where then shall I go? ' said Frodo. `Back to the Black Gate and deliver myself up to the guard? What do you know against this place that makes its name so dreadful? '

`Nothing certain,' said Faramir. 'We of Gondor do not ever pass east of the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ever done so, nor has any of us set foot upon the Mountains of Shadow. Of them we know only old report and the rumour of bygone days. But there is some dark terror that dwells in the passes above Minas Morgul. If Cirith Ungol is named, old men and masters of lore will blanch and fall silent.

,The valley of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and it was a menace and a dread while the banished Enemy dwelt yet far away, and Ithilien was still for the most part in our keeping. As you know, that city was once a strong place, proud and fair, Minas Ithil, the twin sister of our own city. But it was taken by fell men whom the Enemy in his first strength had dominated, and who wandered homeless and masterless after his fall. It is said that their lords were men of Númenor who had fallen into dark wickedness; to them the Enemy had given rings of power, and he had devoured them: living ghosts they were become, terrible and evil. After his going they took Minas Ithil and dwelt there, and they filled it, and all the valley about, with decay: it seemed empty and was not so, for a shapeless fear lived within the ruined walls. Nine Lords there were, and after the return of their Master, which they aided and prepared in secret, they grew strong again. Then the Nine Riders issued forth from the gates of horror, and we could not withstand them. Do not approach their citadel. You will be espied. It is a place of sleepless malice, full of lidless eyes. Do not go that way! '

'But where else will you direct me? ' said Frodo. 'You cannot yourself, you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over them. But over the mountains I am bound, by solemn undertaking to the Council, to find a way or perish in the seeking. And if I turn back, refusing the road in its bitter end, where then shall I go among Elves or Men? Would you have me come to Gondor with this Thing, the Thing that drove your brother mad with desire? What spell would it work in Minas Tirith? Shall there be two cities of Minas Morgul, grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness? '

`I would not have it so,' said Faramir.

`Then what would you have me do? '

`I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torment. And I do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way.'

'Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find. And there is no time for long searching,' said Frodo.

`It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,' said Faramir. 'But at the least, remember my warning: beware of this guide, Sméagol. He has done murder before now. I read it in him.' He sighed.

`Well, so we meet and part, Frodo son of Drogo. You have no need of soft words: I do not hope to see you again on any other day under this Sun. But you shall go now with my blessing upon you, and upon all your people. Rest a little while food is prepared for you.

'I would gladly learn how this creeping Sméagol became possessed of the Thing of which we speak, and how he lost it, but I will not trouble you now. If ever beyond hope you return to the lands of the living and we retell our tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing at old grief, you shall tell me then. Until that time, or some other time beyond the vision of the Seeing-stones of Númenor, farewell! '

He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed out into the cave.



Chapter 7
Journey to the Cross-roads
Frodo and Sam returned to their beds and lay there in silence resting for a little, while men bestirred themselves and the business of the day began. After a while water was brought to them, and then they were led to a table where food was set for three. Faramir broke his fast with them. He had not slept since the battle on the day before, yet he did not look weary.

When they had finished they stood up. `May no hunger trouble you on the road,' said Faramir. `You have little provision, but some small store of food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed in your packs. You will have no lack of water as you walk in Ithilien, but do not drink of any stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I must tell you. My scouts and watchers have all returned, even some that have crept within sight of the Morannon. They all find a strange thing. The land is empty. Nothing is on the road, and no sound of foot, or horn, or bowstring is anywhere to be heard. A waiting silence broods above the Nameless Land. I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If you are ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.'

The hobbits' packs were brought to them (a little heavier than they had been), and also two stout staves of polished wood, shod with iron, and with carven heads through which ran plaited leathern thongs.

'I have no fitting gifts to give you at our parting,' said Faramir; `but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in the wild. The men of the White Mountains use them; though these have been cut down to your height and newly shod. They are made of the fair tree lebethron, beloved of the woodwrights of Gondor, and a virtue has been set upon them of finding and returning. May that virtue not wholly fail under the Shadow into which you go!'

The hobbits bowed low. `Most gracious host,' said Frodo, 'it was said to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret and unlooked for. Certainly I looked for no such friendship as you have shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.'

Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some corner or hiding-hole, and he seemed better pleased with himself than he had been, though he kept close to Frodo and avoided the glance of Faramir.

'Your guide must be blindfolded,' said Faramir, 'but you and your servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.'

Gollum squealed, and squirmed, and clutched at Frodo, when they came to bind his eyes; and Frodo said: 'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm is meant.' This was done, and they were led from the cave of Henneth Annûn. After they had passed the passages and stairs they felt the cool morning air, fresh and sweet, about them. Still blind they went on for some little time, up and then gently down. At last the voice of Faramir ordered them to be uncovered.

They stood under the boughs of the woods again. No noise of the falls could be heard, for a long southward slope lay now between them and the ravine in which the stream flowed. To the west they could see light through the trees, as if the world came there to a sudden end, at a brink looking out only on to sky.

'Here is the last parting of our ways,' said Faramir. 'If you take my counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go straight on, for thus you will have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your west is an edge where the land falls into the great vales, sometimes suddenly and sheer, sometimes in long hillsides. Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest. In the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight, I think. The land dreams in a false peace, and for a while all evil is withdrawn. Fare you well, while you may!'

He embraced the hobbits then, after the manner of his people, stooping, and placing his hands upon their shoulders, and kissing their foreheads. 'Go with the good will of all good men!' he said.

They bowed to the ground. Then he turned and without looking back he left them and went to his two guards that stood at a little distance away. They marvelled to see with what speed these green-clad men now moved, vanishing almost in the twinkling of an eye. The forest where Faramir had stood seemed empty and drear, as if a dream had passed.

Frodo sighed and turned back southward. As if to mark his disregard of all such courtesy, Gollum was scrabbling in the mould at the foot of a tree. `Hungry again already?' thought Sam. `Well, now for it again!'

'Have they gone at last? ' said Gollum. `Nassty wicked Men! Sméagol's neck still hurts him, yes it does. Let's go! '

`Yes, let us go,' said Frodo. `But if you can only speak ill of those who showed you mercy, keep silent! '

`Nice Master! ' said Gollum. `Sméagol was only joking. Always forgives, he does, yes, yes, even nice Master's little trickses. Oh yes, nice Master, nice Sméagol! '

Frodo and Sam did not answer. Hoisting their packs and taking their staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien.

Twice that day they rested and took a little of the food provided by Faramir: dried fruits and salted meat, enough for many days; and bread enough to last while it was still fresh. Gollum ate nothing.

The sun rose and passed overhead unseen, and began to sink, and the light through the trees to the west grew golden; and always they walked in cool green shadow, and all about them was silence. The birds seemed all to have flown away or to have fallen dumb.

Darkness came early to the silent woods, and before the fall of night they halted, weary, for they had walked seven leagues or more from Henneth Annûn. Frodo lay and slept away the night on the deep mould beneath an ancient tree. Sam beside him was more uneasy: he woke many times, but there was never a sign of Gollum, who had slipped off as soon as the others had settled to rest. Whether he had slept by himself in some hole nearby, or had wandered restlessly prowling through the night, he did not say; but he returned with the first glimmer of light, and roused his companions.

`Must get up, yes they must!' he said. 'Long ways to go still, south and east. Hobbits must make haste!'

That day passed much as the day before had gone, except that the silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be stifling under the trees. It felt as if thunder was brewing. Gollum often paused, sniffing the air, and then he would mutter to himself and urge them to greater speed.

As the third stage of their day's march drew on and afternoon waned, the forest opened out, and the trees became larger and more scattered. Great ilexes of huge girth stood dark and solemn in wide glades with here and there among them hoary ash-trees. and giant oaks just putting out their brown-green buds. About them lay long launds of green grass dappled with celandine and anemones, white and blue, now folded for sleep; and there were acres populous with the leaves of woodland hyacinths: already their sleek bell-stems were thrusting through the mould. No living creature, beast or bird, was to be seen, but in these open places Gollum grew afraid, and they walked now with caution, flitting from one long shadow to another.

Light was fading fast when they came to the forest-end. There they sat under an old gnarled oak that sent its roots twisting like snakes down a steep crumbling bank. A deep dim valley lay before them. On its further side the woods gathered again, blue and grey under the sullen evening, and marched on southwards. To the right the Mountains of Gondor glowed, remote in the West, under a fire-flecked sky. To the left lay darkness: the towering walls of Mordor; and out of that darkness the long valley came, falling steeply in an ever-widening trough towards the Anduin. At its bottom ran a hurrying stream: Frodo could hear its stony voice coming up through the silence; and beside it on the hither side a road went winding down like a pale ribbon, down into chill grey mists that no gleam of sunset touched. There it seemed to Frodo that he descried far off, floating as it were on a shadowy sea, the high dim tops and broken pinnacles of old towers forlorn and dark.

He turned to Gollum. `Do you know where we are? ' he said.

'Yes, Master. Dangerous places. This is the road from the Tower of the Moon, Master, down to the ruined city by the shores of the River. The ruined city, yes, very nasty place, full of enemies. We shouldn't have taken Men's advice. Hobbits have come a long way out of the path. Must go east now, away up there.' He waved his skinny arm towards the darkling mountains. `And we can't use this road. Oh no! Cruel peoples come this way, down from the Tower.'

Frodo looked down on to the road. At any rate nothing was moving on it now. It appeared lonely and forsaken, running down to empty ruins in the mist. But there was an evil feeling in the air, as if things might indeed be passing up and down that eyes could not see. Frodo shuddered as he looked again at the distant pinnacles now dwindling into night, and the sound of the water seemed cold and cruel: the voice of Morgulduin, the polluted stream that flowed from the Valley of the Wraiths.

'What shall we do? ' he said. 'We have walked long and far. Shall we look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden? '

'No good hiding in the dark,' said Gollum. 'It's in day that hobbits must hide now, yes in day.'

`Oh come! ' said Sam. 'We must rest for a bit, even if we get up again in the middle of the night. There'll still be hours of dark then time enough for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.'

Gollum reluctantly agreed to this, and he turned back towards the trees, working eastward for a while along the straggling edges of the wood. He would not rest on the ground so near the evil road, and after some debate they all climbed up into the crotch of a large holm-oak, whose thick branches springing together from the trunk made a good hiding-place and a fairly comfortable refuge. Night fell and it grew altogether dark under the canopy of the tree. Frodo and Sam drank a little water and ate some bread and dried fruit, but Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep. The hobbits did not shut their eyes.

It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them. He listened and sniffed, which seemed, as they had noticed before, his usual method of discovering the time of night.

'Are we rested? Have we had beautiful sleep?' he said. 'Let's go!'

'We aren't, and we haven't,' growled Sam. 'But we'll go if we must.'

Gollum dropped at once from the branches of the tree on to all fours, and the hobbits followed more slowly.

As soon as they were down they went on again with Gollum leading, eastwards, up the dark sloping land. They could see little, for the night was now so deep that they were hardly aware of the stems of trees before they stumbled against them. The ground became more broken and walking was more difficult, but Gollum seemed in no way troubled. He led them through thickets and wastes of brambles; sometimes round the lip of a deep cleft or dark pit, sometimes down into black bush-shrouded hollows and out again; but if ever they went a little downward, always the further slope was longer and steeper. They were climbing steadily. At their first halt they looked back, and they could dimly perceive the roofs of the forest they had left behind lying like a vast dense shadow, a darker night under the dark blank sky. There seemed to be a great blackness looming slowly out of the East, eating up the faint blurred stars. Later the sinking moon escaped from the pursuing cloud, but it was ringed all about with a sickly yellow glare.

At last Gollum turned to the hobbits. 'Day soon,' he said. 'Hobbits must hurry. Not safe to stay in the open in these places. Make haste! '

He quickened his pace, and they followed him wearily. Soon they began to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most part it was covered with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry, and low tough thorns, though here and there clearings opened, the scars of recent fires. The gorse-bushes became more frequent as they got nearer the top; very old and tall they were, gaunt and leggy below but thick above, and already putting out yellow flowers that glimmered in the gloom and gave a faint sweet scent. So tall were the spiny thickets that the hobbits could walk upright under them, passing through long dry aisles carpeted with a deep prickly mould.

On the further edge of this broad hill-back they stayed their march and crawled for hiding underneath a tangled knot of thorns. Their twisted boughs, stooping to the ground, were overridden by a clambering maze of old briars. Deep inside there was a hollow hall, raftered with dead branch and bramble, and roofed with the first leaves and shoots of spring. There they lay for a while, too tired yet to eat; and peering out through the holes in the covert they watched for the slow growth of day.

But no day came, only a dead brown twilight. In the East there was a dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it was not the red of dawn. Across the tumbled lands between, the mountains of the Ephel Dúath frowned at them, black and shapeless below where night lay thick and did not pass away, above with jagged tops and edges outlined hard and menacing against the fiery glow. Away to their right a great shoulder of the mountains stood out, dark and black amid the shadows, thrusting westward.

`Which way do we go from here?' asked Frodo. `Is that the opening of-of the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass?'

`Need we think about it yet?' said Sam, `Surely we're not going to move any more today, if day it is?'

`Perhaps not, perhaps not,' said Gollum. `But we must go soon, to the Cross-roads. Yes, to the Cross-roads. That's the way over there yes, Master.'

The red glare over Mordor died away. The twilight deepened as great vapours rose in the East and crawled above them. Frodo and Sam took a little food and then lay down, but Gollum was restless. He would not eat any of their food, but he drank a little water and then crawled about under the bushes, sniffing and muttering. Then. suddenly he disappeared.

`Off hunting, I suppose,' said Sam and yawned. It was his turn to sleep first, and he was soon deep in a dream. He thought he was back in the Bag End garden looking for something; but he had a heavy pack on his back, which made him stoop. It all seemed very weedy and rank somehow, and thorns and bracken were invading the beds down near the bottom hedge.

`A job of work for me, I can see; but I'm so tired,' he kept on saying. Presently he remembered what he was looking for. `My pipe!' he said, and with that he woke up.

`Silly!' he said to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered why he was lying down under the hedge. `It's in your pack all the time!' Then he realized, first that the pipe might be in his pack but he had no leaf, and next that he was hundreds of miles from Bag End. He sat up. It seemed to be almost dark. Why had his master let him sleep on out of turn, right on till evening?

`Haven't you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'What's the time? Seems to be getting late!'

'No it isn't,' said Frodo. `But the day is getting darker instead of lighter: darker and darker. As far as I can tell, it isn't midday yet, and you've only slept for about three hours.'

'I wonder what's up,' said Sam. 'Is there a storm coming? If so it's going to be the worst there ever was. We shall wish we were down a deep hole, not just stuck under a hedge.' He listened. `What's that? Thunder, or drums, or what is it? '

'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It's been going on for a good while now. Sometimes the ground seems to tremble, sometimes it seems to be the heavy air throbbing in your ears.'

Sam looked round. `Where's Gollum? ' he said. 'Hasn't he come back yet?'

`No,' said Frodo. `There's not been a sign or sound of him.'

`Well, I can't abide him,' said Sam. `In fact, I've never taken anything on a journey that I'd have been less sorry to lose on the way. But it would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to go and get lost now, just when we shall need him most - that is, if he's ever going to be any use, which I doubt.'

`You forget the Marshes,' said Frodo. `I hope nothing has happened to him.'

`And I hope he's up to no tricks. And anyway I hope he doesn't fall into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we shall soon be in for trouble.'

At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again, louder now and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their feet. 'I think we are in for trouble anyhow,' said Frodo. `I'm afraid our journey is drawing to an end.'

'Maybe,' said Sam; `but where there's life there's hope, as my Gaffer used to say; and need of vittles, as he mostways used to add. You have a bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.'

The afternoon, as Sam supposed it must be called, wore on. Looking out from the covert he could see only a dun, shadowless world, fading slowly into a featureless, colourless gloom. It felt stifling but not warm. Frodo slept unquietly, turning and tossing, and sometimes murmuring. Twice Sam thought he heard him speaking Gandalf's name. The time seemed to drag interminably. Suddenly Sam heard a hiss behind him, and there was Gollum on all fours, peering at them with gleaming eyes.

`Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies!' he whispered. `Wake up! No time to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to lose!'

Sam stared at him suspiciously: he seemed frightened or excited. `Go now? What's your little game? It isn't time yet. It can't be tea-time even, leastways not in decent places where there is tea-time.'

`Silly! ' hissed Gollum. `We're not in decent places. Time's running short, yes, running fast. No time to lose. We must go. Wake up. Master, wake u He clawed at Frodo; and Frodo, startled out of sleep, sat up suddenly and seized him by the arm. Gollum tore himself loose and backed away.

'They mustn't be silly,' he hissed. `We must go. No time to lose!' And nothing more could they get out of him. Where he had been, and what he thought was brewing to make him in such a hurry, he would not say. Sam was filled with deep suspicion, and showed it; but Frodo gave no sign of what was passing in his mind. He sighed, hoisted his pack, and prepared to go out into the ever-gathering darkness.

Very stealthily Gollum led them down the hillside, keeping under cover wherever it was possible, and running, almost bent to the ground, across any open space; but the light was now so dim that even a keen-eyed beast of the wild could scarcely have seen the hobbits, hooded, in their grey cloaks, nor heard them, walking as warily as the little people can. Without the crack of a twig or the rustle of a leaf they passed and vanished.

For about an hour they went on, silently, in single file, oppressed by the gloom and by the absolute stillness of the land, broken only now and again by the faint rumbling as of thunder far away or drum-beats in some hollow of the hills. Down from their hiding-place they went, and then turning south they steered as straight a course as Gollum could find across a long broken slope that leaned up towards the mountains. Presently, not far ahead, looming up like a black wall, they saw a belt of trees. As they drew nearer they became aware that these were of vast size, very ancient it seemed, and still towering high, though their tops were gaunt and broken, as if tempest and lightning-blast had swept across them, but had failed to kill them or to shake their fathomless roots.

'The Cross-roads, yes,' whispered Gollum, the first words that had been spoken since they left their hiding-place. 'We must go that way.' Turning eastward now, he led them up the slope; and then suddenly there it was before them: the Southward Road, winding its way about the outer feet of the mountains, until presently it plunged into the great ring of trees.

'This is the only way,' whispered Gollum. 'No paths beyond the road. No paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be silent! '

As furtively as scouts within the campment of their enemies, they crept down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under the stony bank, grey as the stones themselves, and soft-footed as hunting cats. At length they reached the trees, and found that they stood in a great roofless ring, open in the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between their immense boles were like the great dark arches of some ruined hall. In the very centre four ways met. Behind them lay the road to the Morannon; before them it ran out again upon its long journey south; to their right the road from old Osgiliath came climbing up, and crossing, passed out eastward into darkness: the fourth way, the road they were to take.

Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a light was shining; he saw it glowing on Sam's face beside him. Turning towards it, he saw, beyond an arch of boughs, the road to Osgiliath running almost as straight as a stretched ribbon down, down, into the West. There, far away, beyond sad Gondor now overwhelmed in shade, the Sun was sinking, finding at last the hem of the great slow-rolling pall of cloud, and falling in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied Sea. The brief glow fell upon a huge sitting figure, still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath. The years had gnawed it, and violent hands had maimed it. Its head was gone, and in its place was set in mockery a round rough-hewn stone, rudely painted by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with one large red eye in the midst of its forehead. Upon its knees and mighty chair, and all about the pedestal, were idle scrawls mixed with the foul symbols that the maggot-folk of Mordor used.

Suddenly, caught by the level beams, Frodo saw the old king's head: it was lying rolled away by the roadside. `Look, Sam!' he cried, startled into speech. `Look! The king has got a crown again!'

The eyes were hollow and the carven beard was broken, but about the high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold. A trailing plant with flowers like small white stars had bound itself across the brows as if in reverence for the fallen king, and in the crevices of his stony hair yellow stonecrop gleamed.

'They cannot conquer for ever!' said Frodo. And then suddenly the brief glimpse was gone. The Sun dipped and vanished, and as if at the shuttering of a lamp, black night fell.



Chapter 8
The Stairs of Cirith Ungol
Gollum was tugging at Frodo's cloak and hissing with fear and impatience. `We must go,' he said. `We mustn't stand here. Make haste!'

Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as his guide led him, out into the darkness of the East. They left the ring of trees and crept along the road towards the mountains. This road, too, ran straight for a while, but soon it began to bend away southwards, until it came right under the great shoulder of rock that they had seen from the distance. Black and forbidding it loomed above them, darker than the dark sky behind. Crawling under its shadow the road went on, and rounding it sprang east again and began to climb steeply.

Frodo and Sam were plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer able to care greatly about their peril. Frodo's head was bowed; his burden was dragging him down again. As soon as the great Cross-roads had been passed, the weight of it, almost forgotten in Ithilien, had begun to grow once more. Now, feeling the way become steep before his feet, he looked wearily up; and then he saw it, even as Gollum had said that he would: the city of the Ringwraiths. He cowered against the stony bank.

A long-tilted valley, a deep gulf of shadow, ran back far into the mountains. Upon the further side, some way within the valley's arms high on a rocky seat upon the black knees of the Ephel Dúath, stood the walls and tower of Minas Morgul. All was dark about it, earth and sky, but it was lit with light. Not the imprisoned moonlight welling through the marble walls of Minas Ithil long ago, Tower of the Moon, fair and radiant in the hollow of the hills. Paler indeed than the moon ailing in some slow eclipse was the light of it now, wavering and blowing like a noisome exhalation of decay, a corpse-light, a light that illuminated nothing. In the walls and tower windows showed, like countless black holes looking inward into emptiness; but the topmost course of the tower revolved slowly, first one way and then another, a huge ghostly head leering into the night. For a moment the three companions stood there, shrinking, staring up with unwilling eyes. Gollum was the first to recover. Again he pulled at their cloaks urgently, but he spoke no word. Almost he dragged them forward. Every step was reluctant, and time seemed to slow its pace. so that between the raising of a foot and the setting of it down minutes of loathing passed.

So they came slowly to the white bridge. Here the road, gleaming faintly, passed over the stream in the midst of the valley, and went on, winding deviously up towards the city's gate: a black mouth opening in the outer circle of the northward walls. Wide flats lay on either bank, shadowy meads filled with pale white flowers. Luminous these were too, beautiful and yet horrible of shape, like the demented forms in an uneasy dream; and they gave forth a faint sickening charnel-smell; an odour of rottenness filled the air. From mead to mead the bridge sprang. Figures stood there at its head, carven with cunning in forms human and bestial, but all corrupt and loathsome. The water flowing beneath was silent, and it steamed, but the vapour that rose from it, curling and twisting about the bridge, was deadly cold. Frodo felt his senses reeling and his mind darkening. Then suddenly, as if some force were at work other than his own will, he began to hurry, tottering forward, his groping hands held out, his head lolling from side to side. Both Sam and Gollum ran after him. Sam caught his master in his arms, as he stumbled and almost fell, right on the threshold of the bridge.

`Not that way! No, not that way! ' whispered Gollum, but the breath between his teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a whistle, and he cowered to the ground in terror.

`Hold up, Mr. Frodo! ' muttered Sam in Frodo's ear. 'Come back! Not that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.'

Frodo passed his hand over his brow and wrenched his eyes away from the city on the hill. The luminous tower fascinated him, and he fought the desire that was on him to run up the gleaming road towards its gate. At last with an effort he turned back, and as he did so, he felt the Ring resisting him, dragging at the chain about his neck; and his eyes too, as he looked away, seemed for the moment to have been blinded. The darkness before him was impenetrable.

Gollum, crawling on the ground like a frightened animal, was already vanishing into the gloom. Sam, supporting and guiding his stumbling master, followed after him as quickly as he could. Not far from the near bank of the stream there was a gap in the stone-wall beside the road. Through this they passed, and Sam saw that they were on a narrow path that gleamed faintly at first, as the main road did, until climbing above the meads of deadly flowers it faded and went dark, winding its crooked way up into the northern sides of the valley.

Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see Gollum in front of them, except when he turned back to beckon them on. Then his eyes shone with a green-white light, reflecting the noisome Morgul-sheen perhaps, or kindled by some answering mood within. Of that deadly gleam and of the dark eyeholes Frodo and Sam were always conscious, ever glancing fearfully over their shoulders, and ever dragging their eyes back to find the darkening path. Slowly they laboured on. As they rose above the stench and vapours of the poisonous stream their breath became easier and their heads clearer; but now their limbs were deadly tired, as if they had walked all night under a burden, or had been swimming long against a heavy tide of water. At last they could go no further without a halt.

Frodo stopped and sat down on a stone. They had now climbed up to the top of a great hump of bare rock. Ahead of them there was a bay in the valley-side, and round the head of this the path went on, no more than a wide ledge with a chasm on the right; across the sheer southward face of the mountain it crawled upwards, until it disappeared into the blackness above.

`I must rest a while, Sam,' whispered Frodo. `It's heavy on me, Sam lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry it? Anyway I must rest before we venture on to that.' He pointed to the narrow way ahead.

`Sssh! ssh! ' hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. `Sssh! ' His fingers were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging at Frodo's sleeve, he pointed towards the path; but Frodo would not move.

`Not yet,' he said, 'not yet.' Weariness and more than weariness oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind and body. `I must rest,' he muttered.

At this Gollum's fear and agitation became so great that he spoke again, hissing behind his hand, as if to keep the sound from unseen listeners in the air. `Not here, no. Not rest here. Fools! Eyes can see us. When they come to the bridge they will see us. Come away! Climb, climb! Come! '

`Come, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. `He's right, again. We can't stay here.'

'All right,' said Frodo in a remote voice, as of one speaking half asleep. `I will try.' Wearily he got to his feet.

But it was too late. At that moment the rock quivered and trembled beneath them. The great rumbling noise, louder than ever before, rolled in the ground and echoed in the mountains. Then with searing suddenness there came a great red flash. Far beyond the eastern mountains it leapt into the sky and splashed the lowering clouds with crimson. In that valley of shadow and cold deathly light it seemed unbearably violent and fierce. Peaks of stone and ridges like notched knives sprang out in staring black against the uprushing flame in Gorgoroth. Then came a great crack of thunder.

And Minas Morgul answered. There was a flare of livid lightnings: forks of blue flame springing up from the tower and from the encircling hills into the sullen clouds. The earth groaned; and out of the city there came a cry. Mingled with harsh high voices as of birds of prey, and the shrill neighing of horses wild with rage and fear, there came a rending screech, shivering, rising swiftly to a piercing pitch beyond the range of hearing. The hobbits wheeled round towards it, and cast themselves down, holding their hands upon their ears.

As the terrible cry ended, falling back through a long sickening wail to silence, Frodo slowly raised his head. Across the narrow valley, now almost on a level with his eyes, the walls of the evil city stood, and its cavernous gate, shaped like an open mouth with gleaming teeth, was gaping wide. And out of the gate an army came.

All that host was clad in sable, dark as the night. Against the wan walls and the luminous pavement of the road Frodo could see them, small black figures in rank upon rank, marching swiftly and silently, passing outwards in an endless stream. Before them went a great cavalry of horsemen moving like ordered shadows, and at their head was one greater than all the rest: a Rider, all black, save that on his hooded head he had a helm like a crown that flickered with a perilous light. Now he was drawing near the bridge below, and Frodo's staring eyes followed him, unable to wink or to withdraw. Surely there was the Lord of the Nine Riders returned to earth to lead his ghastly host to battle? Here, yes here indeed was the haggard king whose cold hand had smitten down the Ring-bearer with his deadly knife. The old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo's heart.

Even as these thoughts pierced him with dread and held him bound as with a spell, the Rider halted suddenly, right before the entrance of the bridge, and behind him all the host stood still. There was a pause, a dead silence. Maybe it was the Ring that called to the Wraith-lord, and for a moment he was troubled, sensing some other power within his valley. This way and that turned the dark head helmed and crowned with fear, sweeping the shadows with its unseen eyes. Frodo waited, like a bird at the approach of a snake, unable to move. And as he waited, he felt, more urgent than ever before, the command that he should put on the Ring. But great as the pressure was, he felt no inclination now to yield to it. He knew that the Ring would only betray him, and that he had not, even if he put it on, the power to face the Morgul-king-not yet. There was no longer any answer to that command in his own will, dismayed by terror though it was, and he felt only the beating upon him of a great power from outside. It took his hand, and as Frodo watched with his mind, not willing it but in suspense (as if he looked on some old story far away), it moved the hand inch by inch towards the chain upon his neck. Then his own will stirred; slowly it forced the hand back. and set it to find another thing, a thing lying hidden near his breast. Cold and hard it seemed as his grip closed on it: the phial of Galadriel, so long treasured, and almost forgotten till that hour. As he touched it, for a while all thought of the Ring was banished from his mind. He sighed and bent his head.

At that moment the Wraith-king turned and spurred his horse and rode across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe the elven-hoods defied his unseen eyes, and the mind of his small enemy; being strengthened, had turned aside his thought. But he was in haste. Already the hour had struck, and at his great Master's bidding he must march with war into the West.

Soon he had passed, like a shadow into shadow, down the winding road, and behind him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So great an army had never issued from that vale since the days of Isildur's might; no host so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed the fords of Anduin; and yet it was but one and not the greatest of the hosts that Mordor now sent forth.

Frodo stirred. And suddenly his heart went out to Faramir. 'The storm has burst at last,' he thought. `This great array of spears and swords is going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He guessed it, but did he know the hour? And who can now hold the fords when the King of the Nine Riders comes? And other armies will come. I am too late. All is lost. I tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will ever know. There will be no one I can tell. It will be in vain.' Overcome with weakness he wept. And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge.

Then at a great distance, as if it came out of memories of the Shire, some sunlit early morning, when the day called and doors were opening, he heard Sam's voice speaking. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up! ' Had the voice added: `Your breakfast is ready,' he would hardly have been surprised. Certainly Sam was urgent. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone,' he said.

There was a dull clang. The gates of Minas Morgul had closed. The last rank of spears had vanished down the road. The tower still grinned across the valley, but the light was fading in it. The whole city was falling back into a dark brooding shade, and silence. Yet still it was filled with watchfulness.

'Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone, and we'd better go too. There's something still alive in that place, something with eyes, or a seeing mind, if you take me; and the longer we stay in one spot, the sooner it will get on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo! '

Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left him, but the weakness had passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling now as clearly as a moment before he had felt the opposite, that what he had to do, he had to do, if he could, and that whether Faramir or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel or Gandalf or anyone else ever knew about it was beside the purpose. He took his staff in one hand and the phial in his other. When he saw that the clear light was already welling through his fingers, he thrust it into his bosom and held it against his heart. Then turning from the city of Morgul, now no more than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf, he prepared to take the upward road.

Gollum, it seemed, had crawled off along the ledge into the darkness beyond, when the gates of Minas Morgul opened, leaving the hobbits where they lay. He now came creeping back, his teeth chattering and his fingers snapping. `Foolish! Silly! ' he hissed. `Make haste! They mustn't think danger has passed. It hasn't. Make haste! '

They did not answer, but they followed him on to the climbing ledge. It was little to the liking of either of them, not even after facing so many other perils; but it did not last long. Soon the path reached a rounded angle where the mountain-side swelled out again, and there it suddenly entered a narrow opening in the rock. They had come to the first stair that Gollum had spoken of. The darkness was almost complete, and they could see nothing much beyond their hands' stretch; but Gollum's eyes shone pale, several feet above, as he turned back towards them.

`Careful! ' he whispered. `Steps. Lots of steps. Must be careful! '

Care was certainly needed. Frodo and Sam at first felt easier, having now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as steep as a ladder, and as they climbed up and up, they became more and more aware of the long black fall behind them. And the steps were narrow, spaced unevenly, and often treacherous: they were worn and smooth at the edges, and some were broken, and some cracked as foot was set upon them. The hobbits struggled on, until at last they were clinging with desperate fingers to the steps ahead, and forcing their aching knees to bend and straighten; and ever as the stair cut its way deeper into the sheer mountain the rocky walls rose higher and higher above their heads.

At length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they saw Gollum's eyes peering down at them again. `We're up,' he whispered. 'First stair's past. Clever hobbits to climb so high, very clever hobbits. Just a few more little steps and that's all, yes.'

Dizzy and very tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up the last step, and sat down rubbing their legs and knees. They were in a deep dark passage that seemed still to go up before them, though at a gentler slope and without steps. Gollum did not let them rest long.

'There's another stair still,' he said. `Much longer stair. Rest when we get to the top of next stair. Not yet.'

Sam groaned. 'Longer, did you say? ' he asked.

'Yes, yess, longer,' said Gollum. `But not so difficult. Hobbits have climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair.'

'And what after that? ' said Sam.

`We shall see,' said Gollum softly. `O yes, we shall see! '

'I thought you said there was a tunnel,' said Sam. `Isn't there a tunnel or something to go through? '

'O yes, there's a tunnel,' said Gollum. `But hobbits can rest before they try that. If they get through that, they'll be nearly at the top. Very nearly, if they get through. O yes! '

Frodo shivered. The climb had made him sweat, but now he felt cold and clammy, and there was a chill draught in the dark passage, blowing down from the invisible heights above. He got up and shook himself. `Well, let's go on! ' he said. `This is no place to sit in.'

The passage seemed to go on for miles, and always the chill air flowed over them, rising as they went on to a bitter wind. The mountains seemed to be trying with their deadly breath to daunt them, to turn them back from the secrets of the high places, or to blow them away into the darkness behind. They only knew that they had come to the end, when suddenly they felt no wall at their right hand. They could see very little. Great black shapeless masses and deep grey shadows loomed above them and about them, but now and again a dull red light flickered up under the lowering clouds, and for a moment they were aware of tall peaks, in front and on either side, like pillars holding up a vast sagging roof. They seemed to have climbed up many hundreds of feet, on to a wide shelf. A cliff was on their left and a chasm on their right.

Gollum led the way close under the cliff. For the present they were no longer climbing, but the ground was now more broken and dangerous in the dark, and there were blocks and lumps of fallen stone in the way. Their going was slow and cautious. How many hours had passed since they had entered the Morgul Vale neither Sam nor Frodo could any longer guess. The night seemed endless.

At length they were once more aware of a wall looming up, and once more a stairway opened before them. Again they halted, and again they began to climb. It was a long and weary ascent; but this stairway did not delve into the mountain-side. Here the huge cliff face sloped backwards, and the path like a snake wound to and fro across it. At one point it crawled sideways right to the edge of the dark chasm, and Frodo glancing down saw below him as a vast deep pit the great ravine at the head of the Morgul Valley. Down in its depths glimmered like a glow-worm thread the wraith-road from the dead city to the Nameless Pass. He turned hastily away.

Still on and up the stairway bent and crawled, until at last with a final flight, short and straight, it climbed out again on to another level. The path had veered away from the main pass in the great ravine, and it now followed its own perilous course at the bottom of a lesser cleft among the higher regions of the Ephel Dúath. Dimly the hobbits could discern tall piers and jagged pinnacles of stone on either side, between which were great crevices and fissures blacker than the night, where forgotten winters had gnawed and carved the sunless stone. And now the red light in the sky seemed stronger; though they could not tell whether a dreadful morning were indeed coming to this place of shadow, or whether they saw only the flame of some great violence of Sauron in the torment of Gorgoroth beyond. Still far ahead, and still high above, Frodo, looking up, saw, as he guessed, the very crown of this bitter road. Against the sullen redness of the eastern sky a cleft was outlined in the topmost ridge, narrow, deep-cloven between two black shoulders; and on either shoulder was a horn of stone.

He paused and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left was tall and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red light in the land beyond was shining through a hole. He saw now: it was a black tower poised above the outer pass. He touched Sam's arm and pointed.

'I don't like the look of that! ' said Sam. `So this secret way of yours is guarded after all,' he growled, turning to Gollum. 'As you knew all along, I suppose? '

'All ways are watched, yes,' said Gollum. `Of course they are. But hobbits must try some way. This may be least watched. Perhaps they've all gone away to big battle, perhaps! '

'Perhaps,' grunted Sam. 'Well, it still seems a long way off, and a long way up before we get there. And there's still the tunnel. I think you ought to rest now, Mr. Frodo. I don't know what time of day or night it is, but we've kept going for hours and hours.'

`Yes, we must rest,' said Frodo. 'Let us find some corner out of the wind, and gather our strength-for the last lap.' For so he felt it to be. The terrors of the land beyond, and the deed to be done there, seemed remote, too far off yet to trouble him. All his mind was bent on getting through or over this impenetrable wall and guard. If once he could do that impossible thing, then somehow the errand would be accomplished, or so it seemed to him in that dark hour of weariness, still labouring in the stony shadows under Cirith Ungol.

In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down: Frodo and Sam a little way within. and Gollum crouched upon the ground near the opening. There the hobbits took what they expected would be their last meal before they went down into the Nameless Land, maybe the last meal they would ever eat together. Some of the food of Gondor they ate, and wafers of the waybread of the Elves. and they drank a little. But of their water they were sparing and took only enough to moisten their dry mouths.

`I wonder when we'll find water again? ' said Sam. 'But I suppose even over there they drink? Orcs drink, don't they? '

'Yes, they drink,' said Frodo. 'But do not let us speak of that. Such drink is not for us.'

`Then all the more need to fill our bottles,' said Sam. `But there isn't any water up here: not a sound or a trickle have I heard. And anyway Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.'

'No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,' said Frodo. `We are not in that valley now, and if we came on a spring it would be flowing into it and not out of it.'

'I wouldn't trust it,' said Sam, 'not till I was dying of thirst. There's a wicked feeling about this place.' He sniffed. 'And a smell, I fancy. Do you notice it? A queer kind of a smell, stuffy. I don't like it.'

'I don't like anything here at all.' said Frodo, `step or stone, breath or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our path is laid.'

'Yes, that's so,' said Sam. `And we shouldn't be here at all, if we'd known more about it before we started. But I suppose it's often that way. The brave things in the old tales and songs, Mr. Frodo: adventures, as I used to call them. I used to think that they were things the wonderful folk of the stories went out and looked for, because they wanted them, because they were exciting and life was a bit dull, a kind of a sport, as you might say. But that's not the way of it with the tales that really mattered, or the ones that stay in the mind. Folk seem to have been just landed in them, usually - their paths were laid that way, as you put it. But I expect they had lots of chances, like us, of turning back, only they didn't. And if they had, we shouldn't know, because they'd have been forgotten. We hear about those as just went on - and not all to a good end, mind you; at least not to what folk inside a story and not outside it call a good end. You know, coming home, and finding things all right, though not quite the same - like old Mr Bilbo. But those aren't always the best tales to hear, though they may be the best tales to get landed in! I wonder what sort of a tale we've fallen into? '

`I wonder,' said Frodo. 'But I don't know. And that's the way of a real tale. Take any one that you're fond of. You may know, or guess, what kind of a tale it is, happy-ending or sad-ending, but the people in it don't know. And you don't want them to.'

'No, sir, of course not. Beren now, he never thought he was going to get that Silmaril from the Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet he did, and that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours. But that's a long tale, of course, and goes on past the happiness and into grief and beyond it - and the Silmaril went on and came to Eärendil. And why, sir, I never thought of that before! We've got - you've got some of the light of it in that star-glass that the Lady gave you! Why, to think of it, we're in the same tale still! It's going on. Don't the great tales never end? '

'No, they never end as tales,' said Frodo. `But the people in them come, and go when their part's ended. Our part will end later - or sooner.'

'And then we can have some rest and some sleep,' said Sam. He laughed grimly. 'And I mean just that, Mr. Frodo. I mean plain ordinary rest, and sleep, and waking up to a morning's work in the garden. I'm afraid that's all I'm hoping for all the time. All the big important plans are not for my sort. Still, I wonder if we shall ever be put into songs or tales. We're in one, or course; but I mean: put into words, you know, told by the fireside, or read out of a great big book with red and black letters, years and years afterwards. And people will say: "Let's hear about Frodo and the Ring! " And they'll say: "Yes, that's one of my favourite stories. Frodo was very brave. wasn't he, dad?" "Yes, my boy, the famousest of the hobbits, and that's saying a lot."'

`It's saying a lot too much,' said Frodo, and he laughed, a long clear laugh from his heart. Such a sound had not been heard in those places since Sauron came to Middle-earth. To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the stones were listening and the tall rocks leaning over them. But Frodo did not heed them; he laughed again. 'Why, Sam,' he said, 'to hear you somehow makes me as merry as if the story was already written. But you've left out one of the chief characters: Samwise the stouthearted. "I want to hear more about Sam, dad. Why didn't they put in more of his talk, dad? That's what I like, it makes me laugh. And Frodo wouldn't have got far without Sam, would he, dad? " '

`Now, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'you shouldn't make fun. I was serious. '

`So was I,' said Frodo, 'and so I am. We're going on a bit too fast. You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the story, and it is all too likely that some will say at this point: "Shut the book now, dad; we don't want to read any more." '

`Maybe,' said Sam, 'but I wouldn't be one to say that. Things done and over and made into part of the great tales are different. Why, even Gollum might be good in a tale, better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he used to like tales himself once, by his own account. I wonder if he thinks he's the hero or the villain?

`Gollum!' he called. `Would you like to be the hero - now where's he got to again?'

There was no sign of him at the mouth of their shelter nor in the shadows near. He had refused their food, though he had, as usual, accepted a mouthful of water; and then he had seemed to curl up for a sleep: They had supposed that one at any rate of his objects in his long absence the day before had been to hunt for food to his own liking; and now he had evidently slipped off again while they talked. But what for this time?

`I don't like his sneaking off without saying,' said Sam. 'And least of all now. He can't be looking for food up here, not unless there's some kind of rock he fancies. Why, there isn't even a bit of moss! '

`It's no good worrying about him now,' said Frodo. `We couldn't have got so far, not even within sight of the pass, without him, and so we'll have to put up with his ways. If he's false, he's false.'

'All the same, I'd rather have him under my eye,' said Sam. 'All the more so, if he's false. Do you remember he never would say if this pass was guarded or no? And now we see a tower there - and it may be deserted, and it may not. Do you think he's gone to fetch them, Orcs or whatever they are?'

`No, I don't think so,' answered Frodo. 'Even if he's up to some wickedness, and I suppose that's not unlikely, I don't think it's that: not to fetch Orcs, or any servants of the Enemy. Why wait till now, and go through all the labour of the climb, and come so near the land he fears? He could probably have betrayed us to Orcs many times since we met him. No, if it's anything, it will be some little private trick of his own-that he thinks is quite secret.'

`Well, I suppose you're right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'Not that it comforts me mightily. I don't make no mistake: I don't doubt he'd hand me over to Orcs as gladly as kiss his hand. But I was forgetting - his Precious. No, I suppose the whole time it's been The Precious for poor Sméagol. That's the one idea in all his little schemes, if he has any. But how bringing us up here will help him in that is more than I can guess.'

'Very likely he can't guess himself,' said Frodo. `And I don't think he's got just one plain scheme in his muddled head. I think he really is in part trying to save the Precious from the Enemy. as long as he can. For that would be the last disaster for himself too. if the Enemy got it. And in the other part, perhaps, he's just biding his time and waiting on chance.'

'Yes, Slinker and Stinker, as I've said before,' said Sam. 'But the nearer they get to the Enemy's land the more like Stinker Slinker will get. Mark my words: if ever we get to the pass, he won't let us really take the precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble.'

`We haven't got there yet,' said Frodo.

'No, but we'd better keep our eyes skinned till we do. If we're caught napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quick. Not but what it would be safe for you to have a wink now, master. Safe, if you lay close to me. I'd be dearly glad to see you have a sleep. I'd keep watch over you; and anyway, if you lay near, with my arm round you, no one could come pawing you without your Sam knowing it.'

`Sleep!' said Frodo and sighed, as if out of a desert he had seen a mirage of cool green. 'Yes, even here I could sleep.'

`Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.'

And so Gollum found them hours later, when he returned, crawling and creeping down the path out of the gloom ahead. Sam sat propped against the stone, his head dropping sideways and his breathing heavy. In his lap lay Frodo's head, drowned deep in sleep; upon his white forehead lay one of Sam's brown hands, and the other lay softly upon his master's breast. Peace was in both their faces.

Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean hungry face. The gleam faded from his eyes, and they went dim and grey, old and tired. A spasm of pain seemed to twist him, and he turned away, peering back up towards the pass, shaking his head, as if engaged in some interior debate. Then he came back, and slowly putting out a trembling hand, very cautiously he touched Frodo's knee - but almost the touch was a caress. For a fleeting moment, could one of the sleepers have seen him, they would have thought that they beheld an old weary hobbit, shrunken by the years that had carried him far beyond his time, beyond friends and kin, and the fields and streams of youth, an old starved pitiable thing.

But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in his sleep, and immediately Sam was wide awake. The first thing he saw was Gollum - `pawing at master,' as he thought.

`Hey you!' he said roughly. `What are you up to?'

'Nothing, nothing,' said Gollum softly. `Nice Master!'

`I daresay,' said Sam. 'But where have you been to - sneaking off and sneaking back, you old villain? '

Gollum withdrew himself, and a green glint flickered under his heavy lids. Almost spider-like he looked now, crouched back on his bent limbs, with his protruding eyes. The fleeting moment had passed, beyond recall. `Sneaking, sneaking!' he hissed. 'Hobbits always so polite, yes. O nice hobbits! Sméagol brings them up secret ways that nobody else could find. Tired he is, thirsty he is, yes thirsty; and he guides them and he searches for paths, and they say sneak, sneak. Very nice friends, O yes my precious, very nice.'

Sam felt a bit remorseful, though not more trustful. 'Sorry.' he said. 'I'm sorry, but you startled me out of my sleep. And I shouldn't have been sleeping, and that made me a bit sharp. But Mr. Frodo. he's that tired, I asked him to have a wink; and well, that's how it is. Sorry. But where have you been to? '

`Sneaking,' said Gollum, and the green glint did not leave his eyes.

'O very well,' said Sam, `have it your own way! I don't suppose it's so far from the truth. And now we'd better all be sneaking along together. What's the time? Is it today or tomorrow? '

'It's tomorrow,' said Gollum, 'or this was tomorrow when hobbits went to sleep. Very foolish, very dangerous-if poor Sméagol wasn't sneaking about to watch.'

`I think we shall get tired of that word soon,' said Sam. 'But never mind. I'll wake master up.' Gently he smoothed the hair back from Frodo's brow, and bending down spoke softly to him.

`Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up! '

Frodo stirred and opened his eyes, and smiled, seeing Sam's face bending over him. `Calling me early aren't you, Sam?' he said. `It's dark still! '

'Yes it's always dark here,' said Sam. `But Gollum's come back Mr. Frodo, and he says it's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The last lap.'

Frodo drew a deep breath and sat up. `The last lap! ' he said. 'Hullo, Sméagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest? '

`No food, no rest, nothing for Sméagol,' said Gollum. `He's a sneak.'

Sam clicked his tongue, but restrained himself.

'Don't take names to yourself, Sméagol,' said Frodo. 'It's unwise whether they are true or false.'

`Sméagol has to take what's given him,' answered Gollum. 'He was given that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows so much.'

Frodo looked at Sam. 'Yes sir,' he said. `I did use the word, waking up out of my sleep sudden and all and finding him at hand. I said I was sorry, but I soon shan't be.'

'Come, let it pass then,' said Frodo. 'But now we seem to have come to the point, you and I, Sméagol. Tell me. Can we find the rest of the way by ourselves? We're in sight of the pass, of a way in, and if we can find it now, then I suppose our agreement can be said to be over. You have done what you promised, and you're free: free to go back to food and rest, wherever you wish to go, except to servants of the Enemy. And one day I may reward you, I or those that remember me.'

`No, no, not yet,' Gollum whined. `O no! They can't find the way themselves, can they? O no indeed. There's the tunnel coming. Sméagol must go on. No rest. No food. Not yet.'



Chapter 9
Shelob's Lair
It may indeed have been daytime now, as Gollum said, but the hobbits could see little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky above was less utterly black, more like a great roof of smoke; while instead of the darkness of deep night, which lingered still in cracks and holes, a grey blurring shadow shrouded the stony world about them. They passed on, Gollum in front and the hobbits now side by side, up the long ravine between the piers and columns of torn and weathered rock, standing like huge unshapen statues on either hand. There was no sound. Some way ahead, a mile or so, perhaps, was a great grey wall, a last huge upthrusting mass of mountain-stone. Darker it loomed, and steadily it rose as they approached, until it towered up high above them, shutting out the view of all that lay beyond. Deep shadow lay before its feet. Sam sniffed the air.

`Ugh! That smell!' he said. `It's getting stronger and stronger.'

Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of it they saw the opening of a cave. `This is the way in,' said Gollum softly. `This is the entrance to the tunnel.' He did not speak its name: Torech Ungol, Shelob's Lair. Out of it came a stench, not the sickly odour of decay in the meads of Morgul, but a foul reek, as if filth unnameable were piled and hoarded in the dark within.

`Is this the only way, Sméagol? ' said Frodo.

'Yes, yes,' he answered. 'Yes, we must go this way now.'

'D'you mean to say you've been through this hole?' said Sam. `Phew! But perhaps you don't mind bad smells.'

Gollum's eyes glinted. `He doesn't know what we minds, does he precious? No, he doesn't. But Sméagol can bear things. Yes. He's been through. O yes, right through. It's the only way.'

`And what makes the smell, I wonder,' said Sam. `It's like - well, I wouldn't like to say. Some beastly hole of the Orcs, I'll warrant, with a hundred years of their filth in it.'

'Well,' said Frodo, 'Orcs or no, if it's the only way, we must take it.'

Drawing a deep breath they passed inside. In a few steps they were in utter and impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages of Moria had Frodo or Sam known such darkness, and if possible here it was deeper and denser. There, there were airs moving, and echoes, and a sense of space. Here the air was still, stagnant, heavy, and sound fell dead. They walked as it were in a black vapour wrought of veritable darkness itself that, as it was breathed, brought blindness not only to the eyes but to the mind, so that even the memory of colours and of forms and of any light faded out of thought. Night always had been, and always would be, and night was all.

But for a while they could still feel, and indeed the senses of their feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls felt, to their surprise, smooth, and the floor, save for a step now and again, was straight and even, going ever up at the same stiff slope. The tunnel was high and wide, so wide that, though the hobbits walked abreast, only touching the side-walls with their outstretched hands, they were separated, cut off alone in the darkness.

Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While they were still able to give heed to such things, they could hear his breath hissing and gasping just in front of them. But after a time their senses became duller, both touch and hearing seemed to grow numb, and they kept on, groping, walking, on and on, mainly by the force of the will with which they had entered, will to go through and desire to come at last to the high gate beyond.

Before they had gone very far, perhaps, but time and distance soon passed out of his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling the wall, was aware that there was an opening at the side: for a moment he caught a faint breath of some air less heavy, and then they passed it by.

'There's more than one passage here,' he whispered with an effort: it seemed hard to make his breath give any sound. `It's as orc-like a place as ever there could be! '

After that, first he on the right, and then Frodo on the left, passed three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but there was as yet no doubt of the main way, for it was straight, and did not turn, and still went steadily up. But how long was it, how much more of this would they have to endure, or could they endure? The breathlessness of the air was growing as they climbed; and now they seemed often in the blind dark to sense some resistance thicker than the foul air. As they thrust forward they felt things brush against their heads, or against their hands, long tentacles, or hanging growths perhaps: they could not tell what they were. And still the stench grew. It grew, until almost it seemed to them that smell was the only clear sense left to them. and that was for their torment. One hour, two hours, three hours: how many had they passed in this lightless hole? Hours-days, weeks rather. Sam left the tunnel-side and shrank towards Frodo, and their hands met and clasped. and so together they still went on.

At length Frodo, groping along the left-hand wall, came suddenly to a void. Almost he fell sideways into the emptiness. Here was some opening in the rock far wider than any they had yet passed; and out of it came a reek so foul, and a sense of lurking malice so intense, that Frodo reeled. And at that moment Sam too lurched and fell forwards.

Fighting off both the sickness and the fear, Frodo gripped Sam's hand. `Up! ' he said in a hoarse breath without voice. 'It all comes from here, the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick! '

Calling up his remaining strength and resolution, he dragged Sam to his feet, and forced his own limbs to move. Sam stumbled beside him. One step, two steps, three steps-at last six steps. Maybe they had passed the dreadful unseen opening, but whether that was so or not, suddenly it was easier to move, as if some hostile will for the moment had released them. They struggled on, still hand in hand.

But almost at once they came to a new difficulty. The tunnel forked, or so it seemed, and in the dark they could not tell which was the wider way, or which kept nearer to the straight. Which should they take, the left, or the right? They knew of nothing to guide them, yet a false choice would almost certainly be fatal.

`Which way has Gollum gone? ' panted Sam. 'And why didn't he wait? '

`Sméagol! ' said Frodo, trying to call. 'Sméagol! ' But his voice croaked, and the name fell dead almost as it left his lips. There was no answer, not an echo, not even a tremor of the air.

`He's really gone this time, I fancy,' muttered Sam. `I guess this is just exactly where he meant to bring us. Gollum! If ever I lay hands on you again, you'll be sorry for it.'

Presently, groping and fumbling in the dark, they found that the opening on the left was blocked: either it was a blind, or else some great stone had fallen in the passage. 'This can't be the way,' Frodo whispered. 'Right or wrong, we must take the other.'

'And quick! ' Sam panted. 'There's something worse than Gollum about. I can feel something looking at us.'

They had not gone more than a few yards when from behind them came a sound, startling and horrible in the heavy padded silence: a gurgling, bubbling noise, and a long venomous hiss. They wheeled round, but nothing could be seen. Still as stones they stood, staring, waiting for they did not know what.

`It's a trap!' said Sam, and he laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword; and as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow whence it came. 'I wish old Tom was near us now!' he thought. Then as he stood, darkness about him and a blackness of despair and anger in his heart. it seemed to him that he saw a light: a light in his mind, almost unbearably bright at first, as a sun-ray to the eyes of one long hidden in a windowless pit. Then the light became colour: green, gold, silver, white. Far off, as in a little picture drawn by elven-fingers he saw the Lady Galadriel standing on the grass in Lórien, and gifts were in her hands. And you, Ring-bearer, he heard her say, remote but clear, for you I have prepared this.

The bubbling hiss drew nearer, and there was a creaking as of some great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A reek came on before it. 'Master, master!' cried Sam, and the life and urgency came back into his voice. 'The Lady's gift! The star-glass! A light to you in dark places, she said it was to be. The star-glass!'

`The star-glass?' muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly comprehending. `Why yes! Why had I forgotten it? A light when all other lights go out! And now indeed light alone can help us.'

Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held aloft the Phial of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as a rising star struggling in heavy earthward mists, and then as its power waxed, and hope grew in Frodo's mind, it began to burn, and kindled to a silver flame, a minute heart of dazzling light, as though Eärendil had himself come down from the high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon his brow. The darkness receded from it until it seemed to shine in the centre of a globe of airy crystal, and the hand that held it sparkled with white fire.

Frodo gazed in wonder at this marvellous gift that he had so long carried, not guessing its full worth and potency. Seldom had he remembered it on the road, until they came to Morgul Vale, and never had he used it for fear of its revealing light. Aiya Eärendil Elenion Ancalima! he cried, and knew not what he had spoken; for it seemed that another voice spoke through his, clear, untroubled by the foul air of the pit.

But other potencies there are in Middle-earth, powers of night, and they are old and strong. And She that walked in the darkness had heard the Elves cry that cry far back in the deeps of time, and she had not heeded it, and it did not daunt her now. Even as Frodo spoke he felt a great malice bent upon him, and a deadly regard considering him. Not far down the tunnel, between them and the opening where they had reeled and stumbled, he was aware of eyes growing visible, two great clusters of many-windowed eyes - the coming menace was unmasked at last. The radiance of the star-glass was broken and thrown back from their thousand facets, but behind the glitter a pale deadly fire began steadily to glow within, a flame kindled in some deep pit of evil thought. Monstrous and abominable eyes they were, bestial and yet filled with purpose and with hideous delight, gloating over their prey trapped beyond all hope of escape.

Frodo and Sam, horror-stricken, began slowly to back away, their own gaze held by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes; but as they backed so the eyes advanced. Frodo's hand wavered, and slowly the Phial drooped. Then suddenly, released from the holding spell to run a little while in vain panic for the amusement of the eyes, they both turned and fled together; but even as they ran Frodo looked back and saw with terror that at once the eyes came leaping up behind. The stench of death was like a cloud about him.

'Stand! stand! ' he cried desperately. `Running is no use.'

Slowly the eyes crept nearer.

`Galadriel! ' he called, and gathering his courage he lifted up the Phial once more. The eyes halted. For a moment their regard relaxed, as if some hint of doubt troubled them. Then Frodo's heart flamed within him, and without thinking what he did, whether it was folly or despair or courage, he took the Phial in his left hand, and with his right hand drew his sword. Sting flashed out, and the sharp elven-blade sparkled in the silver light, but at its edges a blue fire flicked. Then holding the star aloft and the bright sword advanced, Frodo, hobbit of the Shire, walked steadily down to meet the eyes.

They wavered. Doubt came into them as the light approached. One by one they dimmed, and slowly they drew back. No brightness so deadly had ever afflicted them before. From sun and moon and star they had been safe underground, but now a star had descended into the very earth. Still it approached, and the eyes began to quail. One by one they all went dark; they turned away, and a great bulk, beyond the light's reach, heaved its huge shadow in between. They were gone.

'Master, master!' cried Sam. He was close behind, his own sword drawn and ready. 'Stars and glory! But the Elves would make a song of that, if ever they heard of it! And may I live to tell them and hear them sing. But don't go on, master. Don't go down to that den! Now's our only chance. Now let's get out of this foul hole!'

And so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for as they went the floor of the tunnel rose steeply, and with every stride they climbed higher above the stenches of the unseen lair, and strength returned to limb and heart. But still the hatred of the Watcher lurked behind them, blind for a while, perhaps, but undefeated, still bent on death. And now there came a flow of air to meet them, cold and thin. The opening, the tunnel's end, at last it was before them. Panting, yearning for a roofless place, they flung themselves forward, and then in amazement they staggered, tumbling back. The outlet was blocked with some barrier, but not of stone: soft and a little yielding it seemed, and yet strong and impervious; air filtered through, hut not a glimmer of any light. Once more they charged and were hurled back.

Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and before him he saw a greyness which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce and did not illuminate, as if it were a shadow that being cast by no light, no light could dissipate. Across the width and height of the tunnel a vast web was spun, orderly as the web of some huge spider, but denser-woven and far greater, and each thread was as thick as rope.

Sam laughed grimly. `Cobwebs! ' he said. `Is that all? Cobwebs! But what a spider! Have at 'em, down with 'em! '

In a fury he hewed at them with his sword, but the thread that he struck did not break. It gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked bowstring, turning the blade and tossing up both sword and arm. Three times Sam struck with all his force, and at last one single cord of all the countless cords snapped and twisted, curling and whipping through the air. One end of it lashed Sam's hand, and he cried out in pain, starting back and drawing his hand across his mouth.

`It will take days to clear the road like this,' he said. `What's to be done? Have those eyes come back? '

`No, not to be seen,' said Frodo. `But I still feel that they are looking at me, or thinking about me: making some other plan, perhaps. If this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly come again.'

`Trapped in the end! ' said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above weariness and despair. `Gnats in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite that Gollum and bite him quick! '

'That would not help us now,' said Frodo. `Come! Let us see what Sting can do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines of Beleriand where it was forged. But you must be the guard and hold back the eyes. Here, take the star-glass. Do not be afraid. Hold it up and watch!'

Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey net, and hewed it with a wide sweeping stroke, drawing the bitter edge swiftly across a ladder of close-strung cords, and at once springing away. The blue-gleaming blade shore through them like a scythe through grass, and they leaped and writhed and then hung loose. A great rent was made.

Stroke after stroke he dealt, until at last all the web within his reach was shattered, and the upper portion blew and swayed like a loose veil in the incoming wind. The trap was broken.

`Come! ' cried Frodo. `On! On! ' Wild joy at their escape from the very mouth of despair suddenly filled all his mind. His head whirled as with a draught of potent wine. He sprang out, shouting as he came.

It seemed light in that dark land to his eyes that had passed through the den of night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinner, and the last hours of a sombre day were passing; the red glare of Mordor had died away in sullen gloom. Yet it seemed to Frodo that he looked upon a morning of sudden hope. Almost he had reached the summit of the wall. Only a little higher now. The Cleft, Cirith Ungol, was before him, a dim notch in the black ridge, and the horns of rock darkling in the sky on either side. A short race, a sprinter's course and he would be through!

`The pass, Sam! ' he cried, not heeding the shrillness of his voice, that released from the choking airs of the tunnel rang out now high and wild. 'The pass! Run, run, and we'll be through-through before any one can stop us! '

Sam came up behind as fast as he could urge his legs; but glad as he was to be free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on glancing back at the dark arch of the tunnel, fearing to see eyes, or some shape beyond his imagining, spring out in pursuit. Too little did he or his master know of the craft of Shelob. She had many exits from her lair.

There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider-form, even such as once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under the Sea, such as Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror in Doriath, and so came to Lúthien upon the green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight long ago. How Shelob came there, flying from ruin, no tale tells, for out of the Dark Years few tales have come. But still she was there, who was there before Sauron, and before the first stone of Barad-dûr; and she served none but herself, drinking the blood of Elves and Men, bloated and grown fat with endless brooding on her feasts, weaving webs of shadow; for all living things were her food, and her vomit darkness. Far and wide her lesser broods, bastards of the miserable mates, her own offspring, that she slew, spread from glen to glen, from the Ephel Dúath to the eastern hills, to Dol Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood. But none could rival her, Shelob the Great, last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world.

Already, years before, Gollum had beheld her, Sméagol who pried into all dark holes, and in past days he had bowed and worshipped her, and the darkness of her evil will walked through all the ways of his weariness beside him, cutting him off from light and from regret. And he had promised to bring her food. But her lust was not his lust. Little she knew of or cared for towers, or rings, or anything devised by mind or hand, who only desired death for all others, mind and body, and for herself a glut of life. alone, swollen till the mountains could no longer hold her up and the darkness could not contain her.

But that desire was yet far away, and long now had she been hungry, lurking in her den, while the power of Sauron grew, and light and living things forsook his borders; and the city in the valley was dead, and no Elf or Man came near, only the unhappy Orcs. Poor food and wary. But she must eat, and however busily they delved new winding passages from the pass and from their tower, ever she found some way to snare them. But she lusted for sweeter meat. And Gollum had brought it to her.

`We'll see, we'll see,' he said often to himself, when the evil mood was on him, as he walked the dangerous road from Emyn Muil to Morgul Vale, 'we'll see. It may well be, O yes, it may well be that when She throws away the bones and the empty garments, we shall find it, we shall get it, the Precious, a reward for poor Sméagol who brings nice food. And we'll save the Precious, as we promised. O yes. And when we've got it safe, then She'll know it, O yes, then we'll pay Her back, my precious. Then we'll pay everyone back! '

So he thought in an inner chamber of his cunning, which he still hoped to hide from her, even when he had come to her again and had bowed low before her while his companions slept.

And as for Sauron: he knew where she lurked. It pleased him that she should dwell there hungry but unabated in malice, a more sure watch upon that ancient path into his land than any other that his skill could have devised. And Orcs, they were useful slaves, but he had them in plenty. If now and again Shelob caught them to stay her appetite, she was welcome: he could spare them. And sometimes as a man may cast a dainty to his cat (his cat he calls her, but she owns him not) Sauron would send her prisoners that he had no better uses for: he would have them driven to her hole, and report brought back to him of the play she made.

So they both lived, delighting in their own devices, and feared no assault, nor wrath, nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet had any fly escaped from Shelob's webs, and the greater now was her rage and hunger.

But nothing of this evil which they had stirred up against them did poor Sam know, except that a fear was growing on him, a menace which he could not see; and such a weight did it become that it was a burden to him to run, and his feet seemed leaden.

Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and his master was in a fey mood running heedlessly to meet them. Turning his eyes away from the shadow behind and the deep gloom beneath the cliff upon his left, he looked ahead, and he saw two things that increased his dismay. He saw that the sword which Frodo still held unsheathed was glittering with blue flame; and he saw that though the sky behind was now dark. still the window in the tower was glowing red.

`Orcs! ' he muttered. `We'll never rush it like this. There's Orcs about, and worse than Orcs.' Then returning quickly to his long habit of secrecy, he closed his hand about the precious Phial which he still bore. Red with his own living blood his hand shone for a moment, and then he thrust the revealing light deep into a pocket near his breast and drew his elven-cloak about him. Now he tried to quicken his pace. His master was gaining on him; already he was some twenty strides ahead, flitting on like a shadow; soon he would be lost to sight in that grey world.



