
Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

product over the value of its constituent elements, is equal to the expansion of the capital advanced or to
the surplus-value produced.

Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little more closely. The two things compared are, the
value of the product and the value of its constituents consumed in the process of production. Now we
have seen how that portion of the constant capital which consists of the instruments of labour, transfers to
the production only a fraction of its value, while the remainder of that value continues, to reside in those
instruments. Since this remainder plays no part in the formation of value, we may at present leave it on
one side. To introduce it into the calculation would make no difference. For instance, taking our former
example, c = £410: suppose this sum to consist of £312 value of raw material, £44 value of auxiliary
material, and £54 value of the machinery worn away in the process; and suppose that the total value of
the machinery employed is £1,054. Out of this latter sum, then, we reckon as advanced for the purpose of
turning out the product, the sum of £54 alone, which the machinery loses by wear and tear in the process;
for this is all it parts with to the product. Now if we also reckon the remaining £1,000, which still
continues in the machinery, as transferred to the product, we ought also to reckon it as part of the value
advanced, and thus make it appear on both sides of our calculation. [1] We should, in this way, get
£1,500 on one side and £1,590 on the other. The difference of these two sums, or the surplus-value,
would still be £90. Throughout this Book therefore, by constant capital advanced for the production of
value, we always mean, unless the context is repugnant thereto, the value of the means of production
actually consumed in the process, and that value alone.

This being so, let us return to the formula C = c + v, which we saw was transformed into C = (c + v) + s,
C becoming C. We know that the value of the constant capital is transferred to, and merely re-appears in
the product. The new value actually created in the process, the value produced, or value-product, is
therefore not the same as the value of the product; it is not, as it would at first sight appear (c + v) + s or
£410 const. + £90 var. + £90 surpl.; but v + s or £90 var. + £90 surpl., not £590 but £180. If c = 0, or in
other words, if there were branches of industry in which the capitalist could dispense with all means of
production made by previous labour, whether they be raw material, auxiliary material, or instruments of
labour, employing only labour-power and materials supplied by Nature, in that case, there would be no
constant capital to transfer to the product. This component of the value of the product, i.e., the £410 in
our example, would be eliminated, but the sum of £180, the amount of new value created, or the value
produced, which contains £90 of surplus-value, would remain just as great as if c represented the highest
value imaginable. We should have C = (0 + v) = v or C the expanded capital = v + s and therefore C - C
= s as before. On the other hand, if s = 0, or in other words, if the labour-power, whose value is advanced
in the form of variable capital, were to produce only its equivalent, we should have C = c + v or C the
value of the product — (c + v) + or C = C. The capital advanced would, in this case, not have
expanded its value.

From what has gone before, we know that surplus-value is purely the result of a variation in the value of
v, of that portion of the capital which is transformed into labour-power; consequently, v + s = v + v, orv
plus an increment of v. But the fact that it is v alone that varies, and the conditions of that variation, are
obscured by the circumstance that in consequence of the increase in the variable component of the
capital, there is also an increase in. the sum total of the advanced capital. It was originally £500 and
becomes £590. Therefore in order that our investigation may lead to accurate results, we must make
abstraction from that portion of the value of the product, in which constant capital alone appears, and
consequently must equate the constant capital to zero or make c = 0. This is merely an application of a
mathematical rule, employed whenever we operate with constant and variable magnitudes, related to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (2 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

each other by the symbols of addition and subtraction only.

A further difficulty is caused by the original form of the variable capital. In our example, C = £410
const. + £90 var. + £90 surpl.; but £90 is a given and therefore a constant quantity; hence it appears
absurd to treat it as variable. But in fact, the term £90 var. is here merely a symbol to show that this value
undergoes a process. The portion of the capital invested in the purchase of labour-power is a definite
quantity of materialised labour, a constant value like the value of the labour-power purchased. But in the
process of production the place of the £90 is taken by the labour-power in action, dead labour is replaced
by living labour, something stagnant by something flowing, a constant by a variable. The result is the
reproduction of v plus an increment of v. From the point of view then of capitalist production, the whole
process appears as the spontaneous variation of the originally constant value, which is transformed into
labour-power. Both the process and its result, appear to be owing to this value. If, therefore, such
expressions as "£90 variable capital," or "so much self-expanding value", appear contradictory, this is
only because they bring to the surface a contradiction immanent in capitalist production.

At first sight it appears a strange proceeding, to equate the constant capital to zero. Yet it is what we do
every day. If, for example, we wish to calculate the amount of England's profits from the cotton industry,
we first of all deduct the sums paid for cotton to the United States, India, Egypt and other countries; in
other words, the value of the capital that merely re-appears in the value of the product, is put = 0.

Of course the ratio of surplus-value not only to that portion of the capital from which it immediately
springs, and whose change of value it represents, but also -to the sum total of the capital advanced is
economically of very great importance. We shall, therefore, in the third book, treat of this ratio
exhaustively. In order to enable one portion of a capital to expand its value by being converted into
labour-power, it is necessary that another portion be converted into means of production. In order that
variable capital may perform its function, constant capital must be advanced in proper proportion, a
proportion given by the special technical conditions of each labour-process. The circumstance, however,
that retorts and other vessels, are necessary to a chemical process, does not compel the chemist to notice
them in the result of his analysis. If we look at the means of production, in their relation to the creation of
value, and to the variation in the quantity of value, apart from anything else, they appear simply as the
material in which labour-power, the value-creator, incorporates itself. Neither the nature, nor the value of
this material is of any importance. The only requisite is that there be a sufficient supply to absorb the
labour expended in the process of production. That supply once given, the material may rise or fall in
value, or even be, as land and the sea, without any value in itself; but this will have no influence on the
creation of value or on the variation in the quantity of value. [2]

In the first place then we equate the constant capital to zero. The capital advanced is consequently
reduced from c + v to v, and instead of the value of the product (c + v) + s we have now the value
produced (v + s). Given the new value produced = £180, which sum consequently represents the whole
labour expended during the process, then subtracting from it £90 the value of the variable capital, we
have remaining £90, the amount of the surplus-value. This sum of £90 or s expresses the absolute
quantity of surplus-value produced. The relative quantity produced, or the increase per cent of the
variable capital, is determined, it is plain, by the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable capital, or is
expressed by s/v. In our example this ratio is 90/90, which gives an increase of 100%. This relative
increase in the value of the variable capital, or the relative magnitude of the surplus-value, I call, "The
rate of surplus-value." \3]



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (3 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

We have seen that the labourer, during one portion of the labour-process, produces only the value of his
labour-power, that is, the value of his means of subsistence. Now since his work forms part of a system,
based on the social division of labour, he does not directly produce the actual necessaries which he
himself consumes; he produces instead a particular commodity, yarn for example, whose value is equal
to the value of those necessaries or of the money with which they can be bought. The portion of his day's
labour devoted to this purpose, will be greater or less, in proportion to the value of the necessaries that he
daily requires on an average, or, what amounts to the same thing, in proportion to the labour-time
required on an average to produce them. If the value of those necessaries represent on an average the
expenditure of six hours' labour, the workman must on an average work for six hours to produce that
value. If instead of working for the capitalist, he worked independently on his own account, he would,
other things being equal, still be obliged to labour for the same number of hours, in order to produce the
value of his labour-power, and thereby to gain the means of subsistence necessary for his conservation or
continued reproduction. But as we have seen, during that portion of his day's labour in which he produces
the value of his labour-power, say three shillings, he produces only an equivalent for the value of his
labour-power already advanced [41 by the capitalist; the new value created only replaces the variable
capital advanced. It is owing to this fact, that the production of the new value of three shillings takes the
semblance of a mere reproduction. That portion of the working-day, then, during which this reproduction
takes place, I call "necessary" labour-time, and the labour expended during that time I call "necessary"
labour £52 Necessary, as regards the labourer, because independent of the particular . 2 social form of his
labour; necessary, as regards capital, and the world of capitalists, because on the continued existence of
the labourer depends their existence also.

During the second period of the labour-process, that in which his labour is no longer necessary labour,
the workman, it is true, labours, expends labour-power; but his labour, being no longer necessary labour,
he creates no value for himself. He creates surplus-value which, for the capitalist, has all the charms of a
creation out of nothing. This portion of the working-day, I name surplus labour-time, and to the labour
expended during that time, I give the name of surplus-labour. It is every bit as important, for a correct
understanding of surplus-value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of surplus labour-time, as nothing
but materialised surplus-labour, as it is, for a proper comprehension of value, to conceive it as a mere
congelation of so many hours of labour, as nothing but materialised labour. The essential difference
between the various economic forms of society, between, for instance, a society based on slave-labour,
and one based on wage-labour, lies only in the mode in which this surplus-labour is in each case
extracted from the actual producer, the labourer. [6]

Since, on the one hand, the values of the variable capital and of the labour-power purchased by that
capital are equal, and the value of this labour-power determines the necessary portion of the
working-day; and since, on the other hand, the surplus- value is determined by the surplus portion of the
working-day, it follows that surplus-value bears the same ratio to variable capital, that surplus-labour
does to necessary labour, or in other words, the rate of surplus-value

s surplus-labour



v necessary labour

Both ratios, s/v and surplus-labour/necessary-labour, express the same thing in different ways; in the one
case by reference to materialised, incorporated labour, in the other by reference to living, fluent labour.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (4 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

The rate of surplus-value is therefore an exact expression for the degree of exploitation of labour-power
by capital, or of the labourer by the capitalist. £7]

We assumed in our example, that the value of the product £410 const. + £90 var. + £90 surpl., and that
the capital advanced = £500. Since the surplus-value = £90, and the advanced capital = £500, we should,
according to the usual way of reckoning, get as the rate of surplus-value (generally confounded with rate
of profits) 18%, a rate so low as possibly to cause a pleasant surprise to Mr. Carey and other harmonisers.
But in truth, the rate of surplus-value is not equal to s/C or s/C+v: thus it is not 90/500 but 90/500 or
100%, which is more than five times the apparent degree of exploitation. Although, in the case we have
supposed, we are ignorant of the actual length of the working-day, and of the duration in days or weeks
of the labour-process, as also of the number of labourers employed, yet the rate of surplus-value s/v
accurately discloses to us, by means of its equivalent expression, surplus-labour/necessary labour the
relation between the two parts of the working-day. This relation is here one of equality, the rate being
100%. Hence, it is plain, the labourer, in our example, works one half of the day for himself, the other
half for the capitalist.

The method of calculating the rate of surplus-value is therefore, shortly, as follows. We take the total
value of the product and put the constant capital which merely re-appears in it, equal to zero. What
remains, is the only value that has, in the process of producing the commodity, been actually created. If
the amount of surplus-value be given, we have only to deduct it from this remainder, to find the variable
capital. And vice versa, if the latter be given, and we require to find the surplus-value. If both be given,
we have only to perform the concluding operation, viz., to calculate s/v, the ratio of the surplus- value to
the v variable capital.

Though the method is so simple, yet it may not be amiss, by means of a few examples, to exercise the
reader in the application of the novel principles underlying it.

First we will take the case of a spinning mill containing 10,000 mule spindles, spinning No. 32 yarn from
American cotton, and producing 1 lb. of yarn weekly per spindle. We assume the waste to be 6%: under
these circumstances 10,600 lbs. of cotton are consumed weekly, of which 600 lbs. go to waste. The price
of the cotton in April, 1871, was 7 3/4d. per lb.; the raw material therefore costs in round numbers
£342. The 10,000 spindles, including preparation-machinery, and motive power, cost, we will assume, £1
per spindle, amounting to a total of £10,000. The wear and tear we put at 10%, or £1,000 yearly = £20
weekly. The rent of the building we suppose to be £300 a year, or £6 a week. Coal consumed (for 100
horse-power indicated, at 4 lbs. of coal per horse-power per hour during 60 hours, and inclusive of that
consumed in heating the mill), 1 1 tons a week at 8s. 6 d. a ton, amounts to about £4 1/2 a week: gas, £1 a
week, oil, &c, £4 1/2 a week. Total cost of the above auxiliary materials, £10 weekly. Therefore the
constant portion of the value of the week's product is £378. Wages amount to £52 a week. The price of
the yarn is 12 l/4d. per. lb. which gives for the value of 10,000 lbs. the sum of £510. The surplus-value is
therefore in this case £510 - £430 = £80. We put the constant part of the value of the product = 0, as it
plays no part in the creation of value. There remains £132 as the weekly value created, which = £52 var.
+ £80 surpl. The rate of surplus-value is therefore 80/52 = 153 1 1/13%. In a working-day of 10 hours
with average labour the result is: necessary labour = 3 31/33 hours, and surplus-labour = 6 2/33. £81

One more example. Jacob gives the following calculation for the year 1815. Owing to the previous
adjustment of several items it is very imperfect; nevertheless for our purpose it is sufficient. In it he
assumes the price of wheat to be 8s. a quarter, and the average yield per acre to be 22 bushels.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (5 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine



VALUE PRODUCED PER ACRE


Seed


£1 9s. Od.


Tithes, Rates,
and taxes,


£1 Is. Od.


Manure


£2 10s. Od.


Rent


£1 8s. Od.


Wages


£3 10s. Od.


Farmer's Profit
and Interest


£1 2s. Od.


TOTAL


£7 9s. Od.


TOTAL


£3 llsOd.



Assuming that the price of the product is the same as its value, we here find the surplus-value distributed
under the various heads of profit, interest, rent, &c. We have, nothing to do with these in detail; we
simply add them together, and the sum is a surplus-value of £3 lis. Od. The sum of £3 19s. Od., paid for
seed and manure, is constant capital, and we put it equal to zero. There is left the sum of £3 10s. Od.,
which is the variable capital advanced: and we see that a new value of £3 10s. Od + £3 lis. Od. has been
produced in its place. Therefore ' s/v = £3 lis. Od. / £3 10s. 0d., giving a rate of surplus-value of more
than 100%. The labourer employs more than one half of his working-day in producing the surplus-value,
which different persons, under different pretexts, share amongst themselves. [9J



SECTION 2.

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE COMPONENTS OF THE VALUE OF THE PRODUCT BY
CORRESPONDING PROPORTIONAL PARTS OF THE PRODUCT ITSELF



Let us now return to the example by which we were shown how the capitalist converts money into
capital.

The product of a working-day of 12 hours is 20 lbs. of yarn, having a value of 30s. No less than 8/10ths
of this value, or 24s., is due to mere re-appearance in it, of the value of the means of production (20 lbs.
of cotton, value 20s., and spindle worn away, 4s.): it is therefore constant capital. The remaining 2/10ths
or 6s. is the new value created during the spinning process: of this one half replaces the value of the day's
labour-power, or the variable capital, the remaining half constitutes a surplus- value of 3s. The total value
then of the 20 lbs. of yarn is made up as follows:

30s. value of yarn = 24s. const. + 3s. var. + 3s. surpl.

Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lbs. of yarn produced, it follows that the various
component parts of this value, can be represented as being contained respectively in corresponding parts
of the product.

If the value of 30s. is contained in 20 lbs. of yarn, then 8/10ths of this value, or the 24s. that form its
constant part, is contained in 8/10ths of the product or in 16 lbs. of yarn. Of the latter 13 1/3 lbs.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (6 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

represent the value of the raw material, the 20s. worth of cotton spun, and 2 2/3 lbs. represent the 4s.
worth of spindle, &c, worn away in the process.

Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 lbs. of yarn, is represented by 13 1/3 lbs. of
yarn. This latter weight of yarn contains, it is true, by weight, no more than 13 1/3 lbs. of cotton, worth
13 1/3 shillings; but the 6 2/3 shillings additional value contained in it, are the equivalent for the cotton
consumed in spinning the remaining 6 2/3 lbs. of yarn. The effect is the same as if these 6 2/3 lbs. of yarn
contained no cotton at all, and the whole 20 lbs. of cotton were concentrated in the 13 1/3 lbs. of yarn.
The latter weight, on the other hand, does not contain an atom either of the value of the auxiliary
materials and implements, or of the value newly created in the process.

In the same way, the 2 2/3 lbs. of yarn, in which the 4s., the remainder of the constant capital, is
embodied, represents nothing but the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of labour
consumed in producing the 20 lbs. of yarn.

We have, therefore, arrived at this result: although eight-tenths of the product, or 16 lbs. of yarn, is, in its
character of an article of utility, just as much the fabric of the spinner's labour, as the remainder of the
same product, yet when viewed in this connexion, it does not contain, and has not absorbed any labour
expended during the process of spinning. It is just as if the cotton had converted itself into yarn, without
help; as if the shape it had assumed was mere trickery and deceit: for so soon as our capitalist sells it for
24s., and with the money replaces his means of production, it becomes evident that this 16 lbs. of yarn is
nothing more than so much cotton and spindle-waste in disguise.

On the other hand, the remaining 2/10 ths of the product, or 4 lbs. of yarn, represent nothing but the new
value of 6s., created during the 12 hours' spinning process. All the value transferred to those 4 lbs., from
the raw material and instruments of labour consumed, was, so to say, intercepted in order to be
incorporated in the 16 lbs. first spun. In this case, it is as if the spinner had spun 4 lbs. of yarn out of air,
or, as if he had spun them with the aid of cotton and spindles, that, being the spontaneous gift of Nature,
transferred no value to the product.

Of this 4 lbs. of yarn, in which the whole of the value newly created during the process, is condensed,
one half represents the equivalent for the value of the labour consumed, or the 3s. variable capital, the
other half represents the 3s. surplus- value.

Since 12 working-hours of the spinner are embodied in 6s., it follows that in yarn of the value of 30s.,
there must be embodied 60 working-hours. And this quantity of labour- time does in fact exist in the 20
lbs. of yarn; for in 8/10ths or 16 lbs. there are materialised the 48 hours of 10 labour expended, before the
commencement of the spinning process, on the means of production; and in the remaining 2 ths or 4 lbs.
there 10 are materialised the 12 hours' work done during the process itself.

On a former page we saw that the value of the yarn is equal to the sum of the new value created during
the production of that yarn plus the value previously existing in the means of production.

It has now been shown how the various component parts of the value of the product, parts that differ
functionally from each other, may be represented by corresponding proportional parts of the product
itself.

To split up in this manner the product into different parts, of which one represents only the labour
previously spent on the means of production, or the constant capital, another, only the necessary labour

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (7 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

spent during the process of production, or the variable capital, and another and last part, only the
surplus-labour expended during the same process, or the surplus-value; to do this, is, as will be seen later
on from its application to complicated and hitherto unsolved problems, no less important than it is
simple.

In the preceding investigation we have treated the total product as the final result, ready for use, of a
working-day of 12 hours. We can however follow this total product through all the stages of its
production; and in this way we shall arrive at the same result as before, if we represent the partial
products, given off at the different stages, as functionally different parts of the final or total product.

The spinner produces in 12 hours 20 lbs. of yarn, or in I hour 1 2/3 lbs; consequently he produces in 8
hours 13 2/3 lbs., or a partial product equal in value to all the cotton that is spun in a whole day. In like
manner the partial product of the next period of 1 hour and 36 minutes, is 2 2/3 lbs. of yarn: this
represents the value of the instruments of labour that are consumed in 12 hours. In the following hour
and 12 minutes, the spinner produces 2 lbs. of yarn worth 3 shillings, a value equal to the whole value he
creates in his 6 hours' necessary labour. Finally, in the last hour and 12 minutes he produces another 2
lbs. of yarn, whose value is equal to the surplus-value, created by his surplus-labour during half a day.
This method of calculation serves the English manufacturer for every-day use; it shows, he will say, that
in the first 8 hours, or 2/3 of the working-day, he gets back the value of his cotton; and so on for the
remaining hours. It is also a perfectly correct method: being in fact the first method given above with this
difference, that instead of being applied to space, in which the different parts of the completed product lie
side by side, it deals with time, in which those parts are successively produced. But it can also be
accompanied by very barbarian notions, more especially in the heads of those who are as much
interested, practically, in the process of making value beget value, as they are in misunderstanding that
process theoretically. Such people may get the notion into their heads, that our spinner, for example,
produces or replaces in the first 8 hours of his working-day the value of the cotton; in the following hour
and 36 minutes the value of the instruments of labour worn away; in the next hour and 12 minutes the
value of the wages; and that he devotes to the production of surplus-value for the manufacturer, only that
well known "last hour." In this way the poor spinner is made to perform the two-fold miracle not only of
producing cotton, spindles, steam-engine, coal, oil, &c, at the same time that he spins with them, but
also of turning one working-day into five; for, in the example we are considering, the production of the
raw material and instruments of labour demands four working-days of twelve hours each, and their
conversion into yarn requires another such day. That the love of lucre induces an easy belief in such
miracles, and that sycophant doctrinaires are never wanting to prove them, is vouched for by the
following incident of historical celebrity.



SECTION 3.

SENIOR'S "LAST HOUR"

One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W. Senior, who may be called the bel-esprit of English

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (8 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

economists, well known, alike for his economic "science," and for his beautiful style, was summoned
from Oxford to Manchester, to learn in the latter place, the Political Economy that he taught in the
former. The manufacturers elected him as their champion, not only against the newly passed Factory Act,
but against the still more menacing Ten-hours' agitation. With their usual practical acuteness, they had
found out- that the learned Professor "wanted a good deal of finishing;" it was this discovery that caused
them to write for him. On his side the Professor has embodied the lecture he received from the
Manchester manufacturers, in a pamphlet, entitled: "Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the cotton
manufacture." London, 1837. Here we find, amongst others, the following edifying passage: "Under the
present law, no mill in which persons under 18 years of age are employed, ... can be worked more than
1 1 1/2 hours a day, that is 12 hours for 5 days in the week, and nine on Saturday.

"Now the following analysis (!) will show that in a mill so worked, the whole net profit is derived/rom
the last hour. I will suppose a manufacturer to invest £100,000: — £80,000 in his mill and machinery,
and £20,000 in raw material and wages. The annual return of that mill, supposing the capital to be turned
once a year, and gross profits to be 15 per cent., ought to be goods worth £15,000.... Of this £1 15,000,
each of the twenty-three half-hours of work produces 5-1 15ths or one twenty-third. Of these 23-23rds
(constituting the whole £1 15,000) twenty, that is to say £100,000 out of the £1 15,000, simply replace the
capital; — one twenty-third (or £5,000 out of the £1 15,000) makes up for the deterioration of the mill
and machinery. The remaining 2-23rds, that is, the last two of the twenty-three half-hours of every day,
produce the net profit of 10 per cent. If, therefore (prices remaining the same), the factory could be kept
at work thirteen hours instead of eleven and a half, with an addition of about £2,600 to the circulating
capital, the net profit would be more than doubled. On the other hand, if the hours of working were
reduced by one hour per day (prices remaining the same), the net profit would be destroyed — if they
were reduced by one hour and a half, even the gross profit would be destroyed. "£101

And the Professor calls this an "analysis!" If, giving credence to the out-cries of the manufacturers, he
believed that the workmen spend the best part of the day in the production, i.e., the reproduction or
replacement of the value of the buildings, machinery, cotton, coal, &c, then his analysis was
superfluous. His answer would simply have been: — Gentlemen! if you work your mills for 10 hours
instead of 1 1 1/2, then, other things being equal, the daily consumption of cotton, machinery, &c, will
decrease in proportion. You gain just as much as you lose. Your work-people will in future spend one
hour and a half less time in reproducing or replacing the capital that has been advanced. — If, on the
other hand, he did not believe them without further inquiry, but, as being an expert in such matters,
deemed an analysis necessary, then he ought, in a question that is concerned exclusively with the
relations of net profit to the length of the working-day, before all things to have asked the manufacturers,
to be careful not to lump together machinery, workshops, raw material, and labour, but to be good
enough to place the constant capital, invested in buildings, machinery, raw material, &c, on one side of
the account, and the capital advanced in wages on the other side. If the Professor then found, that in
accordance with the calculation of the manufacturers, the workman reproduced or replaced his wages in
2 half-hours, in that case, he should have continued his analysis thus:

According to your figures, the workman in the last hour but one produces his wages, and in the last hour
your surplus-value or net profit. Now, since in equal periods he produces equal values, the produce of the
last hour but one, must have the same value as that of the last hour. Further, it is only while he labours
that he produces any value at all, and the amount of his labour is measured by his labour-time. This you
say, amounts to 1 1 1/2 hours a day. He employs one portion of these 1 1 1/2 hours, in producing or
replacing his wages, and the remaining portion in producing your net profit. Beyond this he does

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (9 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

absolutely nothing. But since, on your assumption, his wages, and the surplus-value he yields, are of
equal value, it is clear that he produces his wages in 5 3/4 hours, and your net profit in the other 5 3/4
hours. Again, since the value of the yarn produced in 2 hours, is equal to the sum of the values of his
wages and of your net profit, the measure of the value of this yarn must be 1 1 1/2 working-hours, of
which 5 3/4 hours measure the value of the yarn produced in the last hour but one, and 5 3/4, the value of
the yarn produced in the last hour. We now come to a ticklish point; therefore, attention! The last
working-hour but one is, like the first, an ordinary working-hour, neither more nor less. How then can the
spinner produce in one hour, in the shape of yarn, a value that embodies 5 3/4 hours' labour? The truth is
that he performs no such miracle. The use-value produced by him in one hour, is a definite quantity of
yarn. The value of this yarn is measured by 5 3/4 working-hours, of which 4 3/4 were, without
any assistance from him, previously embodied in the means of production, in the cotton, the machinery,
and so on; the remaining one hour alone is added by him. Therefore since his wages are produced in 5
3/4 hours, and the yarn produced in one hour also contains 5 3/4 hours' work, there is no witchcraft in the
result, that the value created by his 5 3/4 hours' spinning, is equal to the value of the product spun in one
hour. You are altogether on the wrong track, if you think that he loses a single moment of his
working-day, in reproducing or replacing the values of the cotton, the machinery, and so on. On the
contrary, it is because his labour converts the cotton and spindles into yarn, because he spins, that the
values of the cotton and spindles go over to the yarn of their own accord. This result is owing to the
quality of his labour, not to its quantity. It is true, he will in one hour transfer to the yarn more value, in
the shape of cotton, than he will in half an hour; but that is only because in one hour he spins up more
cotton than in half an hour. You see then, your assertion, that the workman produces, in the last hour but
one, the value of his wages, and in the last hour your net profit, amounts to no more than this, that in the
yarn produced by him in 2 working-hours, whether they are the 2 first or the 2 last hours of the
working-day, in that yarn, there are incorporated 11 1/2 working-hours, or just a whole day's work, i.e.,
two hours of his own work and 9 1/2 hours of other people's. And my assertion that, in the first 5 3/4
hours, he produces his wages, and in the last 5 3/4 hours your net profit, amounts only to this, that you
pay him for the former, but not for the latter. In speaking of payment of labour, instead of payment of
labour-power, I only talk your own slang. Now, gentlemen, if you compare the working-time you pay
for, with that which you do not pay for, you will find that they are to one another, as half a day is to half
a day; this gives a rate of 100%, and a very pretty percentage it is. Further, there is not the least doubt,
that if you make you "hands" toil for 13 hours, instead of 1 1 1/2, and, as may be expected from you, treat
the work done in that extra one hour and a half, as pure surplus-labour, then the latter will be increased
from 5 3/4 hours' labour to 7 1/4 hours' labour, and the rate of surplus-value from 100% to 126 2/23%.
So that you are altogether too sanguine, in expecting that by such an addition of 1 1/2 hours to the
working-day, the rate will rise from 100% to 200% and more, in other words that it will be "more than
doubled." On the other hand-man's heart is a wonderful thing, especially when carried in the purse —
you take too pessimist a view, when you fear, that with a reduction of the hours of labour from 1 1 1/2 to
10, the whole of your net profit will go to the dogs. Not at all. All other conditions remaining the same,
the surplus-labour will fall from 5 3/4 hours to 4 3/4 hours, a period that still gives a very profitable rate
of surplus-value, namely 82 14/23%. But this dreadful "last hour," about which you have invented more
stories than have the millenarians about the day of judgment, is "all bosh." If it goes, it will cost neither
you, your net profit, nor the boys and girls whom you employ, their "purity of mind." fill Whenever
your "last hour" strikes in earnest, think of the Oxford Professor. And now, gentlemen, "farewell, and
may we meet again in yonder better world, but not before."

Senior invented the battle cry of the "last hour" in 1836. f!21 In the London Economist of the 15th April,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (10 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

1848, the same cry was again raised by James Wilson, an economic mandarin of high standing: this time
in opposition to the 10 hours' bill.



SECTION 4.

SURPLUS-PRODUCE



The portion of the product that represents the surplus-value, (one tenth of the 20 lbs., or 2 lbs. of yarn, in
the example given in Sec. 2) we call "surplus-produce." Just as the rate of surplus-value is determined by
its relation, not to the sum total of the capital, but to its variable part; in like manner, the relative quantity
of surplus-produce is determined by the ratio that this produce bears, not to the remaining part of the total
product, but to that part of it in which is incorporated the necessary labour. Since the production of
surplus-value is the chief end and aim of capitalist production, it is clear, that the greatness of a man's or
a nation's wealth should be measured, not by the absolute quantity produced, but by the relative
magnitude of the surplus-produce, f 131

The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus-labour, i.e., of the periods of time during which the
workman replaces the value of his labour-power, and produces the surplus-value, this sum constitutes the
actual time during which he works, i.e., the working-day.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "If we reckon the value of the fixed capital employed as a part of the advances, we must reckon the
remaining value of such capital at the end of the year as a part of the annual returns." (Malthus, "Princ. of
Pol. Econ." 2nd. ed., Lond., 1836, p. 269.)

\2] What Lucretius says is self-evident; "nil posse creari de nihilo," out of nothing, nothing can be
created. Creation of value is transformation of labour-power into labour. Labourpower itself is energy
transferred to a human organism by means of nourishing matter.

\3] In the same way that the English use the terms "rate of profit," "rate of interest." We shall see, in
Book III, that the rate of profit is no mystery, so soon as we know the laws of surplus-value. If we
reverse the process, we cannot comprehend either the one or the other.

[4J Note added in the 3rd German edition. — The author resorts here to the economic language in
current use. It will be remembered that on p. 182 (present edition, p. 174) it was shown that in reality the
labourer "advances" to the capitalist and not the capitalist to the labourer. — F. E.

[52 In this work, we have, up to now, employed the term "necessary labour-time," to designate the time



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (11 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

necessary under given social conditions for the production of any commodity. Henceforward we use it to
designate also the time necessary for the production of the particular commodity labour-power. The use
of one and the same technical term in different senses is inconvenient, but in no science can it be
altogether avoided. Compare, for instance, the higher with the lower branches of mathematics.

[61 Herr Wilhelm Thucydides Roscher has found a mare's nest. He has made the important discovery that
if, on the one hand, the formation of surplus-value, or surplus-produce, and the consequent accumulation
of capital, is now-a-days due to the thrift of the capitalist, on the other hand, in the lowest stages of
civilisation it is the strong who compel the weak to economise. (1. c, p. 78.) To economise what?
Labour? Or superfluous wealth that does not exist? What is it that makes such men as Roscher account
for the origin of surplus-value, by a mere rechauffe of the more of less plausible excuses by the capitalist,
for his appropriation of surplus-value? It is, besides their real ignorance, their apologetic dread of a
scientific analysis of value and surplus-value, and of obtaining a result, possibly not altogether palatable
to the powers that be.

[71 Although the rate of surplus-value is an exact expression for the degree of exploitation of
labour-power, it is, in no sense, an expression for the absolute amount of exploitation. For example, if the
necessary labour 5 hours and the surplus-labour = 5 hours, the degree of exploitation is 100%. The
amount of exploitation is here measured by 5 hours. If, on the other hand, the necessary labour = 6 hours
and the surplus-labour = 6 hours, the degree of exploitation remains, as before, 100%, while the actual
amount of exploitation has increased 20%, namely from five hours to six.

[81 The above data, which may be relied upon, were given me by a Manchester spinner. In England the
horse-power of an engine was formerly calculated from the diameter of its cylinder, now the actual
horse-power shown by the indicator is taken.

[91 The calculations given in the text are intended merely as illustrations. We have in fact, assumed that
prices = values. We shall, however, see, in Book 111., that even in the case of average prices the
assumption cannot be made in this very simple manner.

f 101 Senior, 1. c, pp. 12, 13. We let pass such extraordinary notions as are of no importance for our
purpose; for instance, the assertion, that manufacturers reckon as part of their profit, gross or net, the
amount required to make good wear and tear of machinery, or in other words, to replace a part of the
capital. So, too, we pass over any question as to the accuracy of his figures. Leonard Homer has shown in
"A Letter to Mr. Senior," &c, London, 1837, that they are worth no more than so-called "Analysis."
Leonard Horner was one of the Factory Inquiry Commissioners in 1833, and Inspector, or rather Censor
of Factories till 1859. He rendered undying service to the English working-class. He carried on a
life-long contest, not only with the embittered manufacturers, but also with the Cabinet, to whom the
number of votes given by the masters in the Lower House, was a matter of far greater importance than
the number of hours worked by the "hands" in the mills.

Apart from efforts in principle, Senior's statement is confused. What he really intended to say was this:
The manufacturer employs the workman for 1 1 1/2 hours or for 23 half-hours daily. As the working-day,
so, too, the working year, may be conceived to consist of 1 1 1/2 hours or 23 half-hours, but each
multiplied by the number of working-days in the year. On this supposition, the 23 half-hours yield an
annual product of £1 15,000; one half-hour yields 1/23 x £1 15,000; 20 half-hours yield 20/23 x £1 15,000
= £100,000, i.e., they replace no more than the capital advanced. There remain 3 half-hours, which yield



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (12 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

3/23 x £1 15,000 = £5,000 or the gross profit. Of these 3 half-hours, one yields 1/23 x £1 15,000 = £5,000;
i.e., it makes up for the wear and tear of the machinery; the remaining 2 half-hours, i.e., the last hour,
yield 2/23 x £1 15,000 = £10,000 or the net profit. In the text Senior converts the last 2/23 of the product
into portions of the working-day itself.

fill If, on the one hand, Senior proved that the net profit of the manufacturer, the existence of the
English cotton industry, and England's command of the markets of the world, depend on "the last
working-hour," on the other hand, Dr. Andrew Ure showed, that if children and young persons under 18
years of age, instead of being kept the full 12 hours in the warm and pure moral atmosphere of the
factory, are turned out an hour sooner into the heartless and frivolous outer world, they will be deprived,
by idleness and vice, of all hope of salvation for their souls. Since 1848, the factory inspectors have
never tired of twitting the masters with this "last," this "fatal hour." Thus Mr. Ho veil in his report of the
21st May, 1855: "Had the following ingenious calculation (he quotes Senior) been correct, every cotton
factory in the United Kingdom would have been working at a loss since the year 1850." (Reports of the
Insp. of Fact., for the half-year, ending 30th April, 1855, pp. 19, 20.) In the year 1848, after the passing
of the 10 hours' bill, the masters of some flax spinning mills, scattered, few and far between, over the
country on the borders of Dorset and Somerset, foisted a petition against the bill on to the shoulders of a
few of their work-people. One of the clauses of this petition is as follows: "Your petitioners, as parents,
conceive that an additional hour of leisure will tend more to demoralise the children than otherwise,
believing that idleness is the parent of vice." On this the factory report of 31st Oct., 1848, says: The
atmosphere of the flax mills, in which the children of these virtuous and tender parents work, is so loaded
with dust and fibre from the raw material, that it is exceptionally unpleasant to stand even 10 minutes in
the spinning rooms: for you are unable to do so without the most painful sensation, owing to the eyes, the
ears, the nostrils, and mouth, being immediately filled by the clouds of flax dust from which there is no
escape. The labour itself, owing to the feverish haste of the machinery, demands unceasing application of
skill and movement, under the control of a watchfulness that never tires, and it seems somewhat hard, to
let parents apply the term "idling" to their own children, who, after allowing for meal-times, are fettered
for 10 whole hours to such an occupation, in such an atmosphere.... These children work longer than the
labourers in the neighbouring villages.... Such cruel talk about "idleness and vice" ought to be branded as
the purest cant, and the most shameless hypocrisy.... That portion of the public, who, about 12 years ago,
were struck by the assurance with which, under the sanction of high authority, it was publicly and most
earnestly proclaimed, that the whole net profit of the manufacturer flows from the labour of the last hour,
and that, therefore, the reduction of the working-day by one hour, would destroy his net profit, that
portion of the public, we say, will hardly believe its own eyes, when it now finds, that the original
discovery of the virtues of "the last hour" has since been so far improved, as to include morals as well as
profit; so that, if the duration of the labour of children, is reduced to a full 10 hours, their morals, together
with the net profits of their employers, will vanish, both being dependent on this last, this fatal hour. (See
Repts., Insp. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1848, p. 101.) The same report then gives some examples of the
morality and virtue of these same pure-minded manufacturers, of the tricks, the artifices, the cajoling, the
threats, and the falsifications, they made use of, in order, first, to compel a few defenceless workmen to
sign petitions of such a kind, and then to impose them upon Parliament as the petitions of a whole branch
of industry, or a whole country. It is highly characteristic of the present status of so-called economic
science, that neither Senior himself, who, at a later period, to his honour be it said, energetically
supported the factory legislation, nor his opponents, from first to last, have ever been able to explain the
false conclusions of the "original discovery." They appeal to actual experience, but the why and
wherefore remains a mystery.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (13 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

fl21 Nevertheless, the learned professor was not without some benefit from his journey to Manchester. In
the "Letters on the Factory Act," he makes the whole net gains including "profit" and "interests" and even
"something more," depend upon a single unpaid hour's work of the labourer. One year previously, in his
"Outlines of Political Economy," written for the instruction of Oxford students and cultivated Philistines,
he had also "discovered, in opposition to Ricardo's determination of value by labour, that profit is derived
from the labour of the capitalist, and interest from his asceticism, in other words, from his abstinence. "
The dodge was an old one, but the word "abstinence " was new. Herr Roscher translates it rightly by
"Enthaltung." Some of his countrymen, the Browns, Jones, and Robinsons, of Germany, not so well
versed in Latin as he, have, monk-like, rendered it by "Entsagung" (renunciation).

f 131 "To an individual with a capital of £20,000, whose profits were £2,000 per annum, it would be a
matter quite indifferent whether his capital would employ a 100 or 1,000 men, whether the commodity
produced sold for £10,000 or £20,000, provided, in all cases, his profit were not diminished below
£2,000. Is not the real interest of the nation similar? Provided its net real income, its rent and profits, be
the same, it is of no importance whether the nation consists of 10 or of 12 millions of inhabitants." (Ric.
1. c.,.p. 416.) Long before Ricardo, Arthur Young, a fanatical upholder of surplus-produce, for the rest, a
rambling, uncritical writer, whose reputation is in the inverse ratio of his merit, says, "Of what use, in a
modem kingdom, would be a whole province thus divided [in the old Roman manner, by small
independent peasants], however well cultivated, except for the mere purpose of breeding men, which
taken singly is a most useless purpose?" (Arthur Young: "Political Arithmetic, &c." London, 1774, p.
47.)

Very curious is "the strong inclination... to represent net wealth as beneficial to the labouring class...
though it is evidently not on account of being net." (Th . Hopkins, "On Rent of Land, &c." London, 1828,
p. 126.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Ten: The Working Day
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (14 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute Surplus-Value



CHAPTER TEN:
THE WORKING-DAY

Contents

Section 1 - The Limits of the Working-Day

Section 2 - The Greed for Surplus-Labour. Manufacturer and Boyard

Section 3 - Branches of English Industry without Legal Limits to Exploitation

Section 4 - Day and Night Work. The Relay System

Section 5 - The Struggle for a Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Laws for the Extension of the Working-Day

from the Middle of the 14th to the End of the 17th Century

Section 6 - The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Limitation by Law of the Working-Time. The

English Factory Acts, 1833 to 1864

Section 7 - The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Reaction of the English Factory Acts on Other Countries



SECTION 1

THE LIMITS OF THE WORKING-DAY



We started with the supposition that labour-power is bought and sold at its value. Its value, like that of all other
commodities, is determined by the working-time necessary to its production. If the production of the average daily
means of subsistence of the labourer takes up 6 hours, he must work, on the average, 6 hours every day, to produce
his daily labour-power, or to reproduce the value received as the result of its sale. The necessary part of his
working-day amounts to 6 hours, and is, therefore, caeteris paribus, a given quantity. But with this, the extent of the
working-day itself is not yet given.

Let us assume that the line A — B represents the length of the necessary working-time, say 6 hours. If the labour be
prolonged 1, 3, or 6 hours beyond A — B, we have 3 other lines:

Working-day I. Working-day II. Working-day III.

A B-C. A B — C. A B C.



representing 3 different working-days of 7, 9, and 12 hours. The extension B — C of the line A — B represents the
length of the surplus-labour. As the working-day is A — B + B — C or A — C, it varies with the variable quantity



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (1 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:42]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

B — C. Since A — B is constant, the ratio of B — C to A — B can always be calculated. In working-day I, it is 1/6,
in working-day II, 3/6, in working day III 6/6 of A — B. Since further the ratio

surplus working-time,



necessary working-time,



determines the rate of the surplus-value, the latter is given by the ratio of B — C to A — B. It amounts in the 3
different working-days respectively to 16 2/3, 50 and 100 per cent. On the other hand, the rate of surplus-value
alone would not give us the extent of the working-day. If this rate, e.g., were 100 per cent., the working-day might
be of 8, 10, 12, or more hours. It would indicate that the 2 constituent parts of the working-day, necessary-labour
and surplus-labour time, were equal in extent, but not how long each of these two constituent parts was.

The working-day is thus not a constant, but a variable quantity. One of its parts, certainly, is determined by the
working-time required for the reproduction of the labour-power of the labourer himself. But its total amount varies
with the duration of the surplus-labour. The working-day is, therefore, determinable, but is, per se, indeterminate.

m

Although the working-day is not a fixed, but a fluent quantity, it can, on the other hand, only vary within certain
limits. The minimum limit is, however, not determinable; of course, if we make the extension line B — C or the
surplus-labour = 0, we have a minimum limit, i.e., the part of the day which the labourer must necessarily work for
his own maintenance. On the basis of capitalist production, however, this necessary labour can form a part only of
the working-day; the working-day itself can never be reduced to this minimum. On the other hand, the working-day
has a maximum limit. It cannot be prolonged beyond a certain point. This maximum limit is conditioned by two
things. First, by the physical bounds of labour-power. Within the 24 hours of the natural day a man can expend only
a definite quantity of his vital force. A horse, in like manner, can only work from day to day, 8 hours. During part
of the day this force must rest, sleep; during another part the man has to satisfy other physical needs, to feed, wash,
and clothe himself. Besides these purely physical limitations, the extension of the working-day encounters moral
ones. The labourer needs time for satisfying his intellectual and social wants, the extent and number of which are
conditioned by the general state of social advancement. The variation of the working-day fluctuates, therefore,
within physical and social bounds. But both these limiting conditions are of a very elastic nature, and allow the
greatest latitude. So we find working-days of 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18 hours, i.e., of the most different lengths.

The capitalist has bought the labour-power at its day-rate. To him its use-value belongs during one working-day. He
has thus acquired the right to make the labourer work for him during one day. But, what is a working-day? [21

At all events, less than a natural day. By how much? The capitalist has his own views of this ultima Thule, the
necessary limit of the working-day. As capitalist, he is only capital personified. His soul is the soul of capital. But
capital has one single life impulse, the tendency to create value and surplus-value, to make its constant factor, the
means of production, absorb the greatest possible amount of surplus-labour. [3]

Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it
sucks. The time during which the labourer works, is the time during which the capitalist consumes the labour-power
he has purchased of him. [4J

If the labourer consumes his disposable time for himself, he robs the capitalist. [5J

The capitalist then takes his stand on the law of the exchange of commodities. He, like all other buyers, seeks to get
the greatest possible benefit out of the use-value of his commodity. Suddenly the voice of the labourer, which had
been stifled in the storm and stress of the process of production, rises:

The commodity that I have sold to you differs from the crowd of other commodities, in that its use creates value,
and a value greater than its own. That is why you bought it. That which on your side appears a spontaneous



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (2 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:42]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

expansion of capital, is on mine extra expenditure of labour-power. You and I know on the market only one law,
that of the exchange of commodities. And the consumption of the commodity belongs not to the seller who parts
with it, but to the buyer, who acquires it. To you, therefore, belongs the use of my daily labour-power. But by
means of the price that you pay for it each day, I must be able to reproduce it daily, and to sell it again. Apart from
natural exhaustion through age, &c, I must be able on the morrow to work with the same normal amount of force,
health and freshness as to-day. You preach to me constantly the gospel of "saving" and "abstinence." Good! I will,
like a sensible saving owner, husband my sole wealth, labour-power, and abstain from all foolish waste of it. I will
each day spend, set in motion, put into action only as much of it as is compatible with its normal duration, and
healthy development. By an unlimited extension of the working-day, you may in one day use up a quantity of
labour-power greater than I can restore in three. What you gain in labour I lose in substance. The use of my
labour-power and the spoliation of it are quite different things. If the average time that (doing a reasonable amount
of work) an average labourer can live, is 30 years, the value of my labour-power, which you pay me from day to
day is 1 / 365 x 30 or 1 / 10950 of its total value. But if you consume it in 10 years, you pay me daily 1 / 10950
instead of 1 / 3650 of its total value, i.e., only 1/3 of its daily value, and you rob me, therefore, every day of 2/3 of
the value of my commodity. You pay me for one day's labour-power, whilst you use that of 3 days. That is against
our contract and the law of exchanges. I demand, therefore, a working-day of normal length, and I demand it
without any appeal to your heart, for in money matters sentiment is out of place. You may be a model citizen,
perhaps a member of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and in the odour of sanctity to boot; but
the thing that you represent face to face with me has no heart in its breast. That which seems to throb there is my
own heart-beating. I demand the normal working-day because I, like every other seller, demand the value of my
commodity. [6J

We see then, that, apart from extremely elastic bounds, the nature of the exchange of commodities itself imposes no
limit to the working-day, no limit to surplus-labour. The capitalist maintains his rights as a purchaser when he tries
to make the working-day as long as possible, and to make, whenever possible, two working-days out of one. On the
other hand, the peculiar nature of the commodity sold implies a limit to its consumption by the purchaser, and the
labourer maintains his right as seller when he wishes to reduce the working-day to one of definite normal duration.
There is here, therefore, an antinomy, right against right, both equally bearing the seal of the law of exchanges.
Between equal rights force decides. Hence is it that in the history of capitalist production, the determination of what
is a working-day, presents itself as the result of a struggle, a struggle between collective capital, i.e., the class of
capitalists, and collective labour, i.e., the working-class.



SECTION 2

THE GREED FOR SURPLUS-LABOUR. MANUFACTURER AND BOYARD



Capital has not invented surplus-labour. Wherever a part of society possesses the monopoly of the means of
production, the labourer, free or not free, must add to the working-time necessary for his own maintenance an extra
working-time in order to produce the means of subsistence for the owners of the means of production, J7] whether
this proprietor be the Athenian xxxxx xxxxxxx, Etruscan theocrat, civis Romanus, Norman baron, American
slave-owner, Wallachian Boyard, modern landlord or capitalist. £8] It is, however, clear that in any given economic
formation of society, where not the exchange-value but the use-value of the product predominates, surplus-labour
will be limited by a given set of wants which may be greater or less, and that here no boundless thirst for
surplus-labour arises from the nature of the production itself. Hence in antiquity over- work becomes horrible only
when the object is to obtain exchange-value in its specific independent money-form; in the production of gold and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (3 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

silver. Compulsory working to death is here the recognised form of over- work. Only read Diodorus Siculus. \9]
Still these are exceptions in antiquity. But as soon as people, whose production still moves within the lower forms
of slave-labour, corvee-labour, &c, are drawn into the whirlpool of an international market dominated by the
capitalistic mode of production, the sale of their products for export becoming their principal interest, the civilised
horrors of over-work are grafted on the barbaric horrors of slavery, serfdom, &c. Hence the negro labour in the
Southern States of the American Union preserved something of a patriarchal character, so long as production was
chiefly directed to immediate local consumption. But in proportion, as the export of cotton became of vital interest
to these states, the over- working of the negro and sometimes the using up of his life in 7 years of labour became a
factor in a calculated and calculating system. It was no longer a question of obtaining from him a certain quantity of
useful products. It was now a question of production of surplus-labour itself: So was it also with the corvee, e.g., in
the Danubian Principalities (now Roumania).

The comparison of the greed for surplus-labour in the Danubian Principalities with the same greed in English
factories has a special interest, because surplus-labour in the corvee has an independent and palpable form.

Suppose the working-day consists of 6 hours of necessary labour, and 6 hours of surplus-labour. Then the free
labourer gives the capitalist every week 6 x 6 or 36 hours of surplus-labour. It is the same as if he worked 3 days in
the week for himself, and 3 days in the week gratis for the capitalist. But this is not evident on the surface.
Surplus-labour and necessary labour glide one into the other. I can, therefore, express the same relationship by
saying, e.g., that the labourer in every minute works 30 seconds for himself, and 30 for the capitalist, etc. It is
otherwise with the corvee. The necessary labour which the Wallachian peasant does for his own maintenance is
distinctly marked off from his surplus-labour on behalf of the Boyard. The one he does on his own field, the other
on the seignorial estate. Both parts of the labour-time exist, therefore, independently, side by side one with the
other. In the corvee the surplus-labour is accurately marked off from the necessary labour. This, however, can make
no difference with regard to the quantitative relation of surplus-labour to necessary labour. Three days'
surplus-labour in the week remain three days that yield no equivalent to the labourer himself, whether it be called
corvee or wage-labour. But in the capitalist the greed for surplus-labour appears in the straining after an unlimited
extension of the working-day, in the Boyard more simply in a direct hunting after days of corvee. [101

In the Danubian Principalities the corvee was mixed up with rents in kind and other appurtenances of bondage, but
it formed the most important tribute paid to the ruling class. Where this was the case, the corvee rarely arose from
serfdom; serfdom much more frequently on the other hand took origin from the corvee. [Ill This is what took
place in the Roumanian provinces. Their original mode of production was based on community of the soil, but not
in the Slavonic or Indian form. Part of the land was cultivated in severally as freehold by the members of the
community, another part — ager publicus — was cultivated by them in common. The products of this common
labour served partly as a reserve fund against bad harvests and other accidents, partly as a public store for providing
the costs of war, religion, and other common expenses. In course of time military and clerical dignitaries usurped,
along with the common land, the labour spent upon it. The labour of the free peasants on their common land was
transformed into corvee for the thieves of the common land. This corvee soon developed into a servile relationship
existing in point of fact, not in point of law, until Russia, the liberator of the world, made it legal under presence of
abolishing serfdom. The code of the corvee, which the Russian General Kisseleff proclaimed in 1831, was of course
dictated by the Boyards themselves. Thus Russia conquered with one blow the magnates of the Danubian
provinces, and the applause of liberal cretins throughout Europe.

According to the "Reglement organique," as this code of the corvee is called, every Wallachian peasant owes to the
so-called landlord, besides a mass of detailed payments in kind: (1), 12 days of general labour; (2), one day of field
labour; (3), one day of wood carrying. In all, 14 days in the year. With deep insight into Political Economy,
however, the working-day is not taken in its ordinary sense, but as the working-day necessary to the production of
an average daily product; and that average daily product is determined in so crafty a way that no Cyclops would be
done with it in 24 hours. In dry words, the Reglement itself declares with true Russian irony that by 12
working-days one must understand the product of the manual labour of 36 days, by 1 day of field labour 3 days, and



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (4 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

by 1 day of wood carrying in like manner three times as much. In all, 42 corvee days. To this had to be added the
so-called jobagie, service due to the lord for extraordinary occasions. In proportion to the size of its population,
every village has to furnish annually a definite contingent to the jobagie. This additional corvee is estimated at 14
days for each Wallachian peasant. Thus the prescribed corvee amounts to 56 working-days yearly. But the
agricultural year in Wallachia numbers in consequence of the severe climate only 210 days, of which 40 for
Sundays and holidays, 30 on an average for bad weather, together 70 days, do not count. 140 working-days remain.
The ratio of the corvee to the necessary labour 56/84 or 66 2/3 % gives a much smaller rate of surplus-value than
that which regulates the labour of the English agricultural or factory labourer. This is, however, only the legally
prescribed corvee. And in a spirit yet more "liberal" than the English Factory Acts, the "Reglement organique" has
known how to facilitate its own evasion. After it has made 56 days out of 12, the nominal day's work of each of the
56 corvee days is again so arranged that a portion of it must fall on the ensuing day. In one day, e.g., must be
weeded an extent of land, which, for this work, especially in maize plantations, needs twice as much time. The legal
day's work for some kinds of agricultural labour is interpretable in such a way that the day begins in May and ends
in October. In Moldavia conditions are still harder. "The 12 corvee days of the 'Reglement organique' cried a
Boyard drunk with victory, amount to 365 days in the year." [121

If the Reglement organique of the Danubian provinces was a positive expression of the greed for surplus-labour
which every paragraph legalised, the English Factory Acts are the negative expression of the same greed. These acts
curb the passion of capital for a limitless draining of labour-power, by forcibly limiting the working-day by state
regulations, made by a state that is ruled by capitalist-and landlord. Apart from the working-class movement that
daily grew more threatening, the limiting of factory labour was dictated by the same necessity which spread guano
over the English fields. The same blind eagerness for plunder that in the one case exhausted the soil, had, in the
other, torn up by the roots the living force of the nation. Periodical epidemics speak on this point as clearly as the
diminishing military standard in Germany and France. [131

The Factory Act of 1850 now in force (1867) allows for the average working-day 10 hours, i.e., for the first 5 days
12 hours from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., including 1/2 an hour for breakfast, and an hour for dinner, and thus leaving 10 1/2
working -hours, and 8 hours for Saturday, from 6 a.m. to 2 p.m., of which 1/2 an hour is subtracted for breakfast. 60
working-hours are left, 10 1/2 for each of the first 5 days, 7 1/2 for the last. [141

Certain guardians of these laws are appointed, Factory Inspectors, directly under the Home Secretary, whose reports
are published half-yearly, by order of Parliament. They give regular and official statistics of the capitalistic greed
for surplus-labour.

Let us listen, for a moment, to the Factory Inspectors. [151 "The fraudulent mill-owner begins work a quarter of an
hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) before 6 a.m., and leaves off a quarter of an hour (sometimes more,
sometimes less) after 6 p.m. He takes 5 minutes from the beginning and from the end of the half hour nominally
allowed for breakfast, and 10 minutes at the beginning and end of the hour nominally allowed for dinner. He works
for a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 2 p.m. on Saturday. Thus his gain is —

Before 6 a.m., 15 minutes.

After 6 p.m., 15"

At breakfast time, 10 "

At dinner time, 20 "



Five days — 300 minutes, 60 "

On Saturday before 6 a.m., 15 minutes.

At breakfast time, 10 "

After 2 p.m., 15"



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (5 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

40 minutes.
Total weekly, 340 minutes.

Or 5 hours and 40 minutes weekly, which multiplied by 50 working weeks in the year (allowing two for holidays
and occasional stoppages) is equal to 27 working-days." [161

"Five minutes a day's increased work, multiplied by weeks, are equal to two and a half days of produce in the year."
£121

"An additional hour a day gained by small instalments before 6 a.m., after 6 p.m., and at the beginning and end of
the times nominally fixed for meals, is nearly equivalent to working 13 months in the year." [181

Crises during which production is interrupted and the factories work "short time," i.e., for only a part of the week,
naturally do not affect the tendency to extend the working-day. The less business there is, the more profit has to be
made on the business done. The less time spent in work, the more of that time has to be turned into surplus
labour- time.

Thus the Factory Inspector's report on the period of the crisis from 1857 to 1858:

"It may seem inconsistent that there should be any overworking at a time when trade is so bad; but that very
badness leads to the transgression by unscrupulous men, they get the extra profit of it. ... In the last half year, says
Leonard Homer, 122 mills in my district have been given up; 143 were found standing," yet, over-work is
continued beyond the legal hours. [191

"For a great part of the time," says Mr. Howell, "owing to the depression of trade, many factories were altogether
closed, and a still greater number were working short time. I continue, however, to receive about the usual number
of complaints that half, or three-quarters of an hour in the day, are snatched from the workers by encroaching upon
the times professedly allowed for rest and refreshment." [201 The same phenomenon was reproduced on a smaller

scale during the frightful cotton-crises from 1861 to 1865. [211 "It is sometimes advanced by way of excuse, when
persons are found at work in a factory, either at a meal hour, or at some illegal time, that they will not leave the mill
at the appointed hour, and that compulsion is necessary to force them to cease work [cleaning their machinery,
&c], especially on Saturday afternoons. But, if the hands remain in a factory after the machinery has ceased to
revolve ... they would not have been so employed if sufficient time had been set apart specially for cleaning, &c,
either before 6 a.m. [sic.!] or before 2 p.m. on Saturday afternoons." [221

"The profit to be gained by it (over-working in violation of the Act) appears to be, to many, a greater temptation
than they can resist; they calculate upon the chance of not being found out; and when they see the small amount of
penalty and costs, which those who have been convicted have had to pay, they find that if they should be detected
there will still be a considerable balance of gain.... [231 In cases where the additional time is gained by a
multiplication of small thefts in the course of the day, there are insuperable difficulties to the inspectors making out
a case." [241

These "small thefts" of capital from the labourer's meal and recreation time, the factory inspectors also designate as
"petty pilferings of minutes," [251 "snatching a few minutes," [261 or, as the labourers technically called them,
"nibbling and cribbling at meal-times." [271

It is evident that in this atmosphere the formation of surplus-value by surplus-labour, is no secret. "If you allow
me," said a highly respectable master to me, "to work only ten minutes in the day over- time, you put one thousand a
year in my pocket." [281 "Moments are the elements of profit." [291

Nothing is from this point of view more characteristic than the designation of the workers who work full time as
"full-timers," and the children under 13 who are only allowed to work 6 hours as "half-timers." The worker is here
nothing more than personified labour- time. All individual distinctions are merged in those of "full-timers" and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (6 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
"half-timers " [301



SECTION 3

BRANCHES OF ENGLISH INDUSTRY WITHOUT LEGAL LIMITS TO EXPLOITATION



We have hitherto considered the tendency to the extension of the working-day, the were-wolfs hunger for
surplus-labour in a department where the monstrous exactions, not surpassed, says an English bourgeois economist,
by the cruelties of the Spaniards to the American red-skins, [311 caused capital at last to be bound by the chains of
legal regulations. Now, let us cast a glance at certain branches of production in which the exploitation of labour is
either free from fetters to this day, or was so yesterday.

Mr. Broughton Charlton, county magistrate, declared, as chairman of a meeting held at the Assembly Rooms,
Nottingham, on the 14th January, 1860, "that there was an amount of privation and suffering among that portion of
the population connected with the lace trade, unknown in other parts of the kingdom, indeed, in the civilised world
.... Children of nine or ten years are dragged from their squalid beds at two, three, or four o'clock in the morning
and compelled to work for a bare subsistence until ten, eleven, or twelve at night, their limbs wearing away, their
frames dwindling, their faces whitening, and their humanity absolutely sinking into a stone-like torpor, utterly
horrible to contemplate.... We are not surprised that Mr. Mallett, or any other manufacturer, should stand forward
and protest against discussion.... The system, as the Rev. Montagu Valpy describes it, is one of unmitigated slavery,
socially, physically, morally, and spiritually.... What can be thought of a town which holds a public meeting to
petition that the period of labour for men shall be diminished to eighteen hours a day? .... We declaim against the
Virginian and Carolinian cotton-planters. Is their black-market, their lash, and their barter of human flesh more
detestable than this slow sacrifice of humanity which takes place in order that veils and collars may be fabricated
for the benefit of capitalists?" [321

The potteries of Staffordshire have, during the last 22 years, been the subject of three parliamentary inquiries. The
result is embodied in Mr. Scriven's Report of 1841 to the "Children's Employment Commissioners," in the report of
Dr. Greenhow of 1860 published by order of the medical officer of the Privy Council (Public Health, 3rd Report,
112-113), lastly, in the report of Mr. Longe of 1862 in the "First Report of the Children's Employment Commission,
of the 13th June, 1863." For my purpose it is enough to take, from the reports of 1860 and 1863, some depositions
of the exploited children themselves. From the children we may form an opinion as to the adults, especially the girls
and women, and that in a branch of industry by the side of which cotton-spinning appears an agreeable and
healthful occupation. [331

William Wood, 9 years old, was 7 years and 10 months when he began to work. He "ran moulds" (carried
ready-moulded articles into the drying-room, afterwards bringing back the empty mould) from the beginning. He
came to work every day in the week at 6 a.m., and left off about 9 p.m. "I work till 9 o'clock at night six days in the
week. I have done so seven or eight weeks." Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 years old! J. Murray, 12 years of
age, says: "I turn jigger, and run moulds. I come at 6. Sometimes I come at 4. 1 worked all night last night, till 6
o'clock this morning. I have not been in bed since the night before last. There were eight or nine other boys working
last night. All but one have come this morning. I get 3 shillings and sixpence. I do not get any more for working at
night. I worked two nights last week." Fernyhough, a boy of ten: "I have not always an hour (for dinner). I have
only half an hour sometimes; on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday. [341

Dr. Greenhow states that the average duration of life in the pottery districts of Stoke-on-Trent, and Wolstanton is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (7 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

extraordinarily short. Although in the district of Stoke, only 36.6% and in Wolstanton only 30.4% of the adult male
population above 20 are employed in the potteries, among the men of that age in the first district more than half, in
the second, nearly 2/5 of the whole deaths are the result of pulmonary diseases among the potters. Dr. Boothroyd, a
medical practitioner at Hanley, says: "Each successive generation of potters is more dwarfed and less robust than
the preceding one." In like manner another doctor, Mr. M'Bean: "Since he began to practice among the potters 25
years ago, he had observed a marked degeneration especially shown in diminution of stature and breadth." These
statements are taken from the report of Dr. Greenhow in 1860. [351

From the report of the Commissioners in 1863, the following: Dr. J. T. Arledge, senior physician of the North
Staffordshire Infirmary, says: "The potters as a class, both men and women, represent a degenerated population,
both physically and morally. They are, as a rule, stunted in growth, ill-shaped, and frequently ill-formed in the
chest; they become prematurely old, and are certainly short-lived; they are phlegmatic and bloodless, and exhibit
their debility of constitution by obstinate attacks of dyspepsia, and disorders of the liver and kidneys, and by
rheumatism. But of all diseases they are especially prone to chest-disease, to pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, and
asthma. One form would appear peculiar to them, and is known as potter's asthma, or potter's consumption.
Scrofula attacking the glands, or bones, or other parts of the body, is a disease of two-thirds or more of the potters
.... That the 'degenerescence' of the population of this district is not even greater than it is, is due to the constant
recruiting from the adjacent country, and intermarriages with more healthy races." [361

Mr. Charles Parsons, late house surgeon of the same institution, writes in a letter to Commissioner Longe, amongst
other things: "I can only speak from personal observation and not from statistical data, but I do not hesitate to assert
that my indignation has been aroused again and again at the sight of poor children whose health has been sacrificed
to gratify the avarice of either parents or employers." He enumerates the causes of the diseases of the potters, and
sums them up in the phrase, "long hours." The report of the Commission trusts that "a manufacture which has
assumed so prominent a place in the whole world, will not long be subject to the remark that its great success is
accompanied with the physical deterioration, widespread bodily suffering, and early death of the workpeople ... by
whose labour and skill such great results have been achieved." [371 And all that holds of the potteries in England is
true of those in Scotland. [381

The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, from the discovery of the method of applying phosphorus to
the match itself. Since 1845 this manufacture has rapidly developed in England, and has extended especially
amongst the thickly populated parts of London as well as in Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Norwich,
Newcastle and Glasgow. With it has spread the form of lockjaw, which a Vienna physician in 1845 discovered to be
a disease peculiar to lucifer-matchmakers. Half the workers are children under thirteen, and young persons under
eighteen. The manufacture is on account of its unhealthiness and unpleasantness in such bad odour that only the
most miserable part of the labouring class, half-starved widows and so forth, deliver up their children to it, "the
ragged, half-starved, untaught children." [391

Of the witnesses that Commissioner White examined (1863), 270 were under 18, 50 under 10, 10 only 8, and 5 only
6 years old. A range of the working-day from 12 to 14 or 15 hours, night-labour, irregular meal-times, meals for the
most part taken in the very workrooms that are pestilent with phosphorus. Dante would have found the worst
horrors of his Inferno surpassed in this manufacture.

In the manufacture of paper-hangings the coarser sorts are printed by machine; the finer by hand (block-printing).
The most active business months are from the beginning of October to the end of April. During this time the work
goes on fast and furious without intermission from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m. or further into the night.

J. Leach deposes: "Last winter six out of nineteen girls were away from ill-health at one time from over-work. I
have to bawl at them to keep them awake." W. Duffy: "I have seen when the children could none of them keep their
eyes open for the work; indeed, none of us could." J. Lightbourne: "Am 13 We worked last winter till 9 (evening),
and the winter before till 10. 1 used to cry with sore feet every night last winter." G. Apsden: "That boy of mine
when he was 7 years old I used to carry him on my back to and fro through the snow, and he used to have 16 hours

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (8 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

a day ... I have often knelt down to feed him as he stood by the machine, for he could not leave it or stop." Smith,
the managing partner of a Manchester factory: "We (he means his "hands" who work for "us") work on with no
stoppage for meals, so that day's work of 10 1/2 hours is finished by 4.30 p.m., and all after that is over-time." [401
(Does this Mr. Smith take no meals himself during 10 1/2 hours?) "We (this same Smith) seldom leave off working
before 6 p.m. (he means leave off the consumption of "our" labour-power machines), so that we (iterum Crispinus)
are really working over-time the whole year round For all these, children and adults alike (152 children and young
persons and 140 adults), the average work for the last 18 months has been at the very least 7 days, 5 hours, or 78 1/2
hours a week. For the six weeks ending May 2nd this year (1862), the average was higher — 8 days or 84 hours a
week." Still this same Mr. Smith, who is so extremely devoted to the pluralis majestatis, adds with a smile,
"Machine- work is not great." So the employers in the block-printing say: "Hand labour is more healthy than
machine work." On the whole, manufacturers declare with indignation against the proposal "to stop the machines at
least during meal-times." A clause, says Mr. Otley, manager of a wall-paper factory in the Borough, "which allowed
work between, say 6 a.m. and 9 p. in would suit us (!) very well, but the factory hours, 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., are not
suitable. Our machine is always stopped for dinner. (What generosity!) There is no waste of paper and colour to
speak of. But," he adds sympathetically, "I can understand the loss of time not being liked." The report of the
Commission opines with naivete that the fear of some "leading firms" of losing time, i.e., the time for appropriating
the labour of others, and thence losing profit is not a sufficient reason for allowing children under 13, and young
persons under 18, working 12 to 16 hours per day, to lose their dinner, nor for giving it to them as coal and water
are supplied to the steam-engine, soap to wool, oil to the wheel — as merely auxiliary material to the instruments of
labour, during the process of production itself. [411

No branch of industry in England (we do not take into account the making of bread by machinery recently
introduced) has preserved up to the present day a method of production so archaic, so — as we see from the poets
of the Roman Empire — pre-christian, as baking. But capital, as was said earlier, is at first indifferent as to
the technical character of the labour-process; it begins by taking it just as it finds it.

The incredible adulteration of bread, especially in London, was first revealed by the House of Commons Committee
"on the adulteration of articles of food" (1855-56), and Dr. Hassall's work, "Adulterations detected." [421 The
consequence of these revelations was the Act of August 6th, 1860, "for preventing the adulteration of articles of
food and drink," an inoperative law, as it naturally shows the tenderest consideration for every Free-trader who
determines by the buying or selling of adulterated commodities "to turn an honest penny." [431 The Committee
itself formulated more or less naively its conviction that Free-trade meant essentially trade with adulterated, or as
the English ingeniously put it, "sophisticated" goods. In fact this kind of sophistry knows better than Protagoras
how to make white black, and black white, and better than the Eleatics how to demonstrate ad oculos that
everything is only appearance. [441

At all events the Committee had directed the attention of the public to its "daily bread," and therefore to the baking
trade. At the same time in public meetings and in petitions to Parliament rose the cry of the London journeymen
bakers against their over-work, &c. The cry was so urgent that Mr. H. S. Tremenheere, also a member of the
Commission of 1863 several times mentioned, was appointed Royal Commissioner of Inquiry. His report. [451
together with the evidence given, roused capitalist, or landlord, or sinecurist, is commanded to eat his bread in the
sweat of his brow, but they did not know that he had to eat daily in his bread a certain quantity of human
perspiration mixed with the discharge of abscesses, cobwebs, dead black-beetles, and putrid German yeast, without
counting alum, sand, and other agreeable mineral ingredients. Without any regard to his holiness, Free-trade, the
free baking-trade was therefore placed under the supervision of the State inspectors (Close of the Parliamentary
session of 1863), and by the same Act of Parliament, work from 9 in the evening to 5 in the morning was forbidden
for journeymen bakers under 18. The last clause speaks volumes as to the over-work in this old-fashioned, homely
line of business.

"The work of a London journeyman baker begins, as a rule, at about eleven at night. At that hour he 'makes the
dough,' — a laborious process, which lasts from half an hour to three quarters of an hour, according to the size of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (9 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

the batch or the labour bestowed upon it. He then lies down upon the kneading-board, which is also the covering of
the trough in which the dough is 'made'; and with a sack under him, and another rolled up as a pillow, he sleeps for
about a couple of hours. He is then engaged in a rapid and continuous labour for about five hours — throwing out
the dough, 'scaling it off,' moulding it, putting it into the oven, preparing and baking rolls and fancy bread, taking
the batch bread out of the oven, and up into the shop, &c, &c. The temperature of a bakehouse ranges from about
75 to upwards of 90 degrees, and in the smaller bakehouses approximates usually to the higher rather than to the
lower degree of heat. When the business of making the bread, rolls, &c, is over, that of its distribution begins, and
a considerable proportion of the journeymen in the trade, after working hard in the manner described during the
night, are upon their legs for many hours during the day, carrying baskets, or wheeling hand-carts, and sometimes
again in the bakehouse, leaving off work at various hours between 1 and 6 p.m. according to the season of the year,
or the amount and nature of their master's business; while others are again engaged in the bakehouse in 'bringing
out' more batches until late in the afternoon. [461 ■■■ During what is called 'the London season, 'the operatives
belonging to the 'full-priced' bakers at the West End of the town, generally begin work at 1 1 p.m., and are engaged
in making the bread, with one or two short (sometimes very short) intervals of rest, up to 8 o'clock the next
morning. They are then engaged all day long, up to 4, 5, 6, and as late as 7 o'clock in the evening carrying out
bread, or sometimes in the afternoon in the bakehouse again, assisting in the biscuit-baking. They may have, after
they have done their work, sometimes five or six, sometimes only four or five hours' sleep before they begin again.
On Fridays they always begin sooner, some about ten o'clock, and continue in some cases, at work, either in making
or delivering the bread up to 8 p.m. on Saturday night, but more generally up to 4 or 5 o'clock, Sunday morning. On
Sundays the men must attend twice or three times during the day for an hour or two to make preparations for the
next day's bread.... The men employed by the underselling masters (who sell their bread under the 'full price,' and
who, as already pointed out, comprise three-fourths of the London bakers) have not only to work on the average
longer hours, but their work is almost entirely confined to the bakehouse. The underselling masters generally sell
their bread... in the shop. If they send it out, which is not common, except as supplying chandlers' shops, they
usually employ other hands for that purpose. It is not their practice to deliver bread from house to house. Towards
the end of the week ... the men begin on Thursday night at 10 o'clock, and continue on with only slight intermission
until late on Saturday evening." [471

Even the bourgeois intellect understands the position of the "underselling" masters. "The unpaid labour of the men
was made the source whereby the competition was carried on." [481 And the "full-priced" baker denounces his
underselling competitors to the Commission of Inquiry as thieves of foreign labour and adulterators. "They only
exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for 12 hours' wages." [491

The adulteration of bread and the formation of a class of bakers that sells the bread below the full price, date from
the beginning of the 18th century, from the time when the corporate character of the trade was lost, and the
capitalist in the form of the miller or flour-factor, rises behind the nominal master baker [501 Thus was laid the

foundation of capitalistic production in this trade, of the unlimited extension of the working-day and of
night-labour, although the latter only since 1824 gained a serious footing, even in London. [511

After what has just been said, it will be understood that the Report of the Commission classes journeymen bakers
among the short-lived labourers, who, having by good luck escaped the normal decimation of the children of the
working-class, rarely reach the age of 42. Nevertheless, the baking trade is always overwhelmed with applicants.
The sources of the supply of these labour-powers to London are Scotland, the western agricultural districts of
England, and Germany.

In the years 1858-60, the journeymen bakers in Ireland organised at their own expense great meetings to agitate
against night and Sunday work. The public — e.g., at the Dublin meeting in May, 1860 — took their part with Irish
warmth. As a result of this movement, day-labour alone was successfully established in Wexford, Kilkenny,
Clonmel, Waterford, &c. "In Limerick, where the grievances of the journeymen are demonstrated to be excessive,
the movement has been defeated by the opposition of the master bakers, the miller bakers being the greatest
opponents. The example of Limerick led to a retrogression in Ennis and Tipperary. In Cork, where the strongest

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (10 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

possible demonstration of feeling took place, the masters, by exercising their power of turning the men out of
employment, have defeated the movement. In Dublin, the master bakers have offered the most determined
opposition to the movement, and by discountenancing as much as possible the journeymen promoting it, have
succeeded in leading the men into acquiescence in Sunday work and night- work, contrary to the convictions of the
men." [52]

The Committee of the English Government, which Government, in Ireland, is armed to the teeth, and generally
knows how to show it, remonstrates in mild, though funereal, tones with the implacable master bakers of Dublin,
Limerick, Cork, &c: "The Committee believe that the hours of labour are limited by natural laws, which cannot be
violated with impunity. That for master bakers to induce their workmen, by the fear of losing employment, to
violate their religious convictions and their better feelings, to disobey the laws of the land, and to disregard public
opinion (this all refers to Sunday labour), is calculated to provoke ill-feeling between workmen and masters, ... and
affords an example dangerous to religion, morality, and social order.... The Committee believe that any constant
work beyond 12 hours a-day encroaches on the domestic and private life of the working-man, and so leads to
disastrous moral results, interfering with each man's home, and the discharge of his family duties as a son, a brother,
a husband, a father. That work beyond 12 hours has a tendency to undermine the health of the workingman, and so
leads to premature old age and death, to the great injury of families of working-men, thus deprived of the care and
support of the head of the family when most required." [531

So far, we have dealt with Ireland. On the other side of the channel, in Scotland, the agricultural labourer, the
ploughman, protests against his 13-14 hours' work in the most inclement climate, with 4 hours' additional work on
Sunday (in this land of Sabbatarians!), [541 whilst, at the same time, three railway men are standing before a
London coroner's jury — a guard, an engine-driver, a signalman. A tremendous railway accident has hurried
hundreds of passengers into another world. The negligence of the employee is the cause of the misfortune. They
declare with one voice before the jury that ten or twelve years before, their labour only lasted eight hours a-day.
During the last five or six years it had been screwed up to 14, 18, and 20 hours, and under a specially severe
pressure of holiday-makers, at times of excursion trains, it often lasted for 40 or 50 hours without a break. They
were ordinary men, not Cyclops. At a certain point their labour-power failed. Torpor seized them. Their brain
ceased to think, their eyes to see. The thoroughly "respectable" British jurymen answered by a verdict that sent
them to the next assizes on a charge of manslaughter, and, in a gentle "rider" to their verdict, expressed the pious
hope that the capitalistic magnates of the railways would, in future, be more extravagant in the purchase of a
sufficient quantity of labour-power, and more "abstemious", more "self-denying,' more "thrifty," in the draining of
paid labour-power. [551

From the motley crowd of labourers of all callings, ages, sexes, that press on us more busily than the souls of the
slain on Ulysses, on whom — without referring to the Blue books under their arms — we see at a glance the mark
of over-work, let us take two more figures whose striking contrast proves that before capital all men are alike — a
milliner and a blacksmith.

In the last week of June, 1863, all the London daily papers published a paragraph with the "sensational" heading,
"Death from simple over-work." It dealt with the death of the milliner, Mary Anne Walkley, 20 years of age,
employed in a highly-respectable dressmaking establishment, exploited by a lady with the pleasant name of Elise.
The old, often-told story, [561 was once more recounted. This girl worked, on an average, 16 1/2 hours, during the
season often 30 hours, without a break, whilst her failing labour-power was revived by occasional supplies of
sherry, port, or coffee. It was just now the height of the season. It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling of an
eye the gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to the ball in honour of the newly-imported Princess of Wales.
Mary Anne Walkley had worked without intermission for 26 1/2 hours, with 60 other girls, 30 in one room, that
only afforded 3 of the cubic feet of air required for them. At night, they slept in pairs in one of the stifling holes into
which the bedroom was divided by partitions of board. [571 And this was one of the best millinery establishments in
London. Mary Anne Walkley fell ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without, to the astonishment of Madame Elise,
having previously completed the work in hand. The doctor, Mr. Keys, called too late to the death-bed, duly bore

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (11 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

witness before the coroner's jury that "Mary Anne Walkley had died from long hours of work in an over-crowded
work-room, and a too small and badly ventilated bedroom." In order to give the doctor a lesson in good manners,
the coroner's jury thereupon brought in a verdict that "the deceased had died of apoplexy, but there was reason to
fear that her death had been accelerated by over-work in an over-crowded workroom, &c." "Our white slaves,"
cried the Morning Star, the organ of the Free-traders, Cobden and Bright, "our white slaves, who are toiled into the
grave, for the most part silently pine and die." [581

"It is not in dressmakers' rooms that working to death is the order of the day, but in a thousand other places; in
every place I had almost said, where 'a thriving business' has to be done.... We will take the blacksmith as a type. If
the poets were true, there is no man so hearty, so merry, as the blacksmith; he rises early and strikes his sparks
before the sun; he eats and drinks and sleeps as no other man. Working in moderation, he is, in fact, in one of the
best of human positions, physically speaking. But we follow him into the city or town, and we see the stress of
work on that strong man, and what then is his position in the death-rate of his country. In Marylebone, blacksmiths
die at the rate of 3 1 per thousand per annum, or 1 1 above the mean of the male adults of the country in its entirety.
The occupation, instinctive almost as a portion of human art, unobjectionable as a branch of human industry, is
made by mere excess of work, the destroyer of the man. He can strike so many blows per day, walk so many steps,
breathe so many breaths, produce so much work, and live an average, say of fifty years; he is made to strike so
many more blows, to walk so many more steps, to breathe so many more breaths per day, and to increase altogether
a fourth of his life. He meets the effort; the result is, that producing for a limited time a fourth more work, he dies at
37 for 50. "159]



SECTION 4

DAY AND NIGHT WORK. THE RELAY SYSTEM.



Constant capital, the means of production, considered from the standpoint of the creation of surplus-value, only
exist to absorb labour, and with every drop of labour a proportional quantity of surplus-labour. While they fail to do
this, their mere existence causes a relative loss to the capitalist, for they represent during the time they lie fallow, a
useless advance of capital. And this loss becomes positive and absolute as soon as the intermission of their
employment necessitates additional outlay at the recommencement of work. The prolongation of the working-day
beyond the limits of the natural day, into the night, only acts as a palliative. It quenches only in a slight degree the
vampire thirst for the living blood of labour. To appropriate labour during all the 24 hours of the day is, therefore,
the inherent tendency of capitalist production. But as it is physically impossible to exploit the same individual
labour-power constantly during the night as well as the day, to overcome this physical hindrance, an alternation
becomes necessary between the workpeople whose powers are exhausted by day, and those who are used up by
night. This alternation may be effected in various ways; e.g., it may be so arranged that part of the workers are one
week employed on day-work, the next week on night-work. It is well known that this relay system, this alternation
of two sets of workers, held full sway in the full-blooded youth-time of the English cotton manufacture, and that at
the present time it still flourishes, among others, in the cotton spinning of the Moscow district. This 24 hours'
process of production exists to-day as a system in many of the branches of industry of Great Britain that are still
"free," in the blast-furnaces, forges, plate -rolling mills, and other metallurgical establishments in England, Wales,
and Scotland. The working-time here includes, besides the 24 hours of the 6 working-days, a great part also of the
24 hours of Sunday. The workers consist of men and women, adults and children of both sexes. The ages of the
children and young persons run through all intermediate grades, from 8 (in some cases from 6) to 18. [601



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (12 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
In some branches of industry, the girls and women work through the night together with the males. [611

Placing on one side the generally injurious influence of night-labour, [621 the duration of the process of production,
unbroken during the 24 hours, offers very welcome opportunities of exceeding the limits of the normal
working-day, e.g., in the branches of industry already mentioned, which are of an exceedingly fatiguing nature; the
official working-day means for each worker usually 12 hours by night or day. But the over-work beyond this
amount is in many cases, to use the words of the English official report, "truly fearful." [631

"It is impossible," the report continues, "for any mind to realise the amount of work described in the following
passages as being performed by boys of from 9 to 12 years of age ... without coming irresistibly to the conclusion
that such abuses of the power of parents and of employers can no longer be allowed to exist." [641

"The practice of boys working at all by day and night turns either in the usual course of things, or at pressing times,
seems inevitably to open the door to their not unfrequently working unduly long hours. These hours are, indeed, in
some cases, not only cruelly but even incredibly long for children. Amongst a number of boys it will, of course, not
unfrequently happen that one or more are from some cause absent. When this happens, their place is made up by
one or more boys, who work in the other turn. That this is a well understood system is plain ... from the answer of
the manager of some large rolling-mills, who, when I asked him how the place of the boys absent from their turn
was made up, 'I daresay, sir, you know that as well as I do,' and admitted the fact." [651

"At a rolling-mill where the proper hours were from 6 a.m. to 5 1/2 p.m., a boy worked about four nights every
week till 8 1/2 p.m. at least ... and this for six months. Another, at 9 years old, sometimes made three 12-hour shifts
running, and, when 10, has made two days and two nights running." A third, "now 10 ... worked from 6 a.m. till 12
p.m. three nights, and till 9 p.m. the other nights." "Another, now 13, ... worked from 6 p.m. till 12 noon next day,
for a week together, and sometimes for three shifts together, e.g., from Monday morning till Tuesday night."
"Another, now 12, has worked in an iron foundry at Stavely from 6 a.m. till 12 p.m. for a fortnight on end; could
not do it any more." "George Allinsworth, age 9, came here as cellar-boy last Friday; next morning we had to begin
at 3, so I stopped here all night. Live five miles off. Slept on the floor of the furnace, over head, with an apron under
me, and a bit of a jacket over me. The two other days I have been here at 6 a.m. Aye! it is hot in here. Before I came
here I was nearly a year at the same work at some works in the country. Began there, too, at 3 on Saturday morning
— always did, but was very gain [near] home, and could sleep at home. Other days I began at 6 in the morning, and
gi'en over at 6 or 7 in the evening," &c. [661

Let us now hear how capital itself regards this 24 hours' system. The extreme forms of the system, its abuse in the
"cruel and incredible" extension of the working-day are naturally passed over in silence. Capital only speaks of the
system in its "normal" form.

Messrs. Naylor & Vickers, steel manufacturers, who employ between 600 and 700 persons, among whom only 10
per cent are under 18, and of those, only 20 boys under 18 work in night sets, thus express themselves: "The boys
do not suffer from the heat. The temperature is probably from 86° to 90°.... At the forges and in the rollingmills the
hands work night and day, in relays, but all the other parts of the work are day-work, i.e., from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. In
the forge the hours are from 12 to 12. Some of the hands always work in the night, without any alternation of day
and night work.... We do not find any difference in the health of those who work regularly by night and those who
work by day, and probably people can sleep better if they have the same period of rest than if it is changed.... About
20 of the boys under the age of 18 work in the night sets.... We could not well do without lads under 18 working by
night. The objection would be the increase in the cost of production.... Skilled hands and the heads in every
department are difficult to get, but of lads we could get any number.... But from the small proportion of boys that
we employ, the subject (i.e., of restrictions on night-work) is of little importance or interest to us." [671

Mr. J. Ellis, one of the firm of Messrs. John Brown & Co., steel and iron works, employing about 3,000 men and
boys, part of whose operations, namely, iron and heavier steel work, goes on night and day by relays, states "that in
the heavier steel work one or two boys are employed to a score or two men." Their concern employs upwards of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (13 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

500 boys under 18, of whom about 1/3 or 170 are under the age of 13. With reference to the proposed alteration of
the law, Mr. Ellis says: "I do not think it would be very objectionable to require that no person under the age of 18
should work more than 12 hours in the 24. But we do not think that any line could be drawn over the age of 12, at
which boys could be dispensed with for night-work. But we would sooner be prevented from employing boys under
the age of 13, or even so high as 14, at all, than not be allowed to employ boys that we do have at night. Those boys
who work in the day sets must take their turn in the night sets also, because the men could not work in the night sets
only; it would ruin their health.... We think, however, that night-work in alternate weeks is no harm. (Messrs.
Naylor & Vickers, on the other hand, in conformity with the interest of their business, considered that periodically
changed night-labour might possibly do more harm than continual night-labour.) We find the men who do it, as
well as the others who do other work only by day.... Our objections to not allowing boys under 18 to work at night,
would be on account of the increase of expense, but this is the only reason. (What cynical naivete!) We think that
the increase would be more than the trade, with due regard to its being successfully carried out, could fairly bear.
(What mealy-mouthed phraseology!) labour is scarce here, and might fall short if there were such a regulation."
(i.e., Ellis Brown & Co. might fall into the fatal perplexity of being obliged to pay labour-power its full value.) [681

The "Cyclops Steel and Iron Works," of Messrs. Cammell & Co., are concocted on the same large scale as those of
the above-mentioned John Brown & Co. The managing director had handed in his evidence to the Government
Commissioner, Mr. White, in writing. Later he found it convenient to suppress the MS. when it had been returned
to him for revision. Mr. White, however, has a good memory. He remembered quite clearly that for the Messrs.
Cyclops the forbidding of the night-labour of children and young persons "would be impossible, it would be
tantamount to stopping their works," and yet their business employs little more than 6% of boys under 18, and less
than 1% under 13.[691

On the same subject Mr. E. F. Sanderson, of the firm of Sanderson, Bros., & Co., steel rolling-mills and forges,
Attercliffe, says: "Great difficulty would be caused by preventing boys under 18 from working at night. The chief
would be the increase of cost from employing men instead of boys. I cannot say what this would be, but probably it
would not be enough to enable the manufacturers to raise the price of steel, and consequently it would fall on them,
as of course the men (what queer-headed folk!) would refuse to pay it." Mr. Sanderson does not know how much he
pays the children, but "perhaps the younger boys get from 4s. to Ss. a week.... The boys' work is of a kind for which
the strength of the boys is generally ('generally,' of course not always) quite sufficient, and consequently there
would be no gain in the greater strength of the men to counterbalance the loss, or it would be only in the few cases
in which the metal is heavy. The men would not like so well not to have boys under them, as men would be less
obedient. Besides, boys must begin young to learn the trade. Leaving day-work alone open to boys would not
answer this purpose." And why not? Why could not boys learn their handicraft in the day-time? Your reason?
"Owing to the men working days and nights in alternate weeks, the men would be separated half the time from their
boys, and would lose half the profit which they make from them. The training which they give to. an apprentice is
considered as part of the return for the boys' labour, and thus enables the man to get it at a cheaper rate. Each man
would want half of this profit." In other words, Messrs. Sanderson would have to pay part of the wages of the adult
men out of their own pockets instead of by the night-work of the boys. Messrs. Sanderson's profit would thus fall to
some extent, and this is the good Sandersonian reason why boys cannot learn their handicraft in the day. [701 In
addition to this, it would throw night-labour on those who worked instead of the boys, which they would not be able
to stand. The difficulties in fact would be so great that they would very likely lead to the giving up of night-work
altogether, and "as far as the work itself is concerned," says E. F. Sanderson, "this would suit as well, but — " But
Messrs. Sanderson have something else to make besides steel. Steel-making is simply a pretext for surplus-value
making. The smelting furnaces, rolling-mills, &c, the buildings, machinery, iron, coal, &c, have something more
to do than transform themselves into steel. They are there to absorb surplus-labour, and naturally absorb more in 24
hours than in 12. In fact they give, by grace of God and law, the Sandersons a cheque on the working-time of a
certain number of hands for all the 24 hours of the day, and they lose their character as capital, are therefore a pure
loss for the Sandersons, as soon as their function of absorbing labour is interrupted. "But then there would be the
loss from so much expensive machinery, lying idle half the time, and to get through the amount of work which we



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (14 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

are able to do on the present system, we should have to double our premises and plant, which would double the
outlay." But why should these Sandersons pretend to a privilege not enjoyed by the other capitalists who only work
during the day, and whose buildings, machinery, raw material, therefore lie "idle" during the night? E. F. Sanderson
answers in the name of all the Sandersons: "It is true that there is this loss from machinery lying idle in those
manufactories in which work only goes on by day. But the use of furnaces would involve a further loss in our case.
If they were kept up there would be a waste of fuel (instead of, as now, a waste of the living substance of the
workers), and if they were not, there would be loss of time in laying the fires and getting the heat up (whilst the loss
of sleeping time, even to children of 8 is a gain of working-time for the Sanderson tribe), and the furnaces
themselves would suffer from the changes of temperature." (Whilst those same furnaces suffer nothing from the day
and night change of labour.) [711



SECTION 5

THE STRUGGLE FOR A NORMAL WORKING-DAY.

COMPULSORY LAWS FOR THE EXTENSION OF THE WORKING-DAY FROM THE MIDDLE OF THE

14TH TO THE END OF THE 17TH CENTURY



"What is a working-day? What is the length of time during which capital may consume the labour-power whose
daily value it buys? How far may the working-day be extended beyond the working-time necessary for the
reproduction of labour-power itself?" It has been seen that to these questions capital replies: the working-day
contains the full 24 hours, with the deduction of the few hours of repose without which labour-power absolutely
refuses its services again. Hence it is self-evident that the labourer is nothing else, his whole life through, than
labour-power, that therefore all his disposable time is by nature and law labour-time, to be devoted to the
self-expansion of capital. Time for education, for intellectual development, for the fulfilling of social functions and
for social intercourse, for the free-play of his bodily and mental activity, even the rest time of Sunday (and that in a
country of Sabbatarians!) [721 — moonshine! But in its blind unrestrainable passion, its were- wolf hunger for
surplus-labour, capital oversteps not only the moral, but even the merely physical maximum bounds of the
working-day. It usurps the time for growth, development, and healthy maintenance of the body. It steals the time
required for the consumption of fresh air and sunlight. It higgles over a meal-time, incorporating it where possible
with the process of production itself, so that food is given to the labourer as to a mere means of production, as coal
is supplied to the boiler, grease and oil to the machinery. It reduces the sound sleep needed for the restoration,
reparation, refreshment of the bodily powers to just so many hours of torpor as the revival of an organism,
absolutely exhausted, renders essential. It is not the normal maintenance of the labour-power which is to determine
the limits of the working-day; it is the greatest possible daily expenditure of labour-power, no matter how diseased,
compulsory, and painful it may be, which is to determine the limits of the labourers' period of repose. Capital cares
nothing for the length of life of labour-power. All that concerns it is simply and solely the maximum of
labour-power, that can be rendered fluent in a working-day. It attains this end by shortening the extent of the
labourer's life, as a greedy farmer snatches increased produce from the soil by robbing it of its fertility.

The capitalistic mode of production (essentially the production of surplus- value, the absorption of surplus-labour),
produces thus, with the extension of the working-day, not only the deterioration of human labour-power by robbing
it of its normal, moral and physical, conditions of development and function. It produces also the premature
exhaustion and death of this labour-power itself. [731 It extends the labourer's time of production during a given
period by shortening his actual life-time.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (15 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

But the value of the labour-power includes the value of the commodities necessary for the reproduction of the
worker, or for the keeping up of the working-class. If then the unnatural extension of the working-day, that capital
necessarily strives after in its unmeasured passion for self-expansion, shortens the length of life of the individual
labourer, and therefore the duration of his labour-power, the forces used up have to be replaced at a more rapid rate
and the sum of the expenses for the reproduction of labour-power will be greater; just as in a machine the part of its
value to be reproduced every day is greater the more rapidly the machine is worn out. It would seem therefore that
the interest capital itself points in the direction of a normal working-day.

The slave-owner buys his labourer as he buys his horse. If he loses his slave, he loses capital that can only be
restored by new outlay in the slave-mart. But "the rice-grounds of Georgia, or the swamps of the Mississippi may
be fatally injurious to the human constitution; but the waste of human life which the cultivation of these districts
necessitates, is not so great that it cannot be repaired from the teeming preserves of Virginia and Kentucky.
Considerations of economy, moreover, which, under a natural system, afford some security for humane treatment
by identifying the master's interest with the slave's preservation, when once trading in slaves is practiced, become
reasons for racking to the uttermost the toil of the slave; for, when his place can at once be supplied from foreign
preserves, the duration of his life becomes a matter of less moment than its productiveness while it lasts. It is
accordingly a maxim of slave management, in slave-importing countries, that the most effective economy is that
which takes out of the human chattel in the shortest space of time the utmost amount of exertion it is capable of
putting forth. It is in tropical culture, where annual profits often equal the whole capital of plantations, that negro
life is most recklessly sacrificed. It is the agriculture of the West Indies, which has been for centuries prolific of
fabulous wealth, that has engulfed millions of the African race. It is in Cuba, at this day, whose revenues are
reckoned by millions, and whose planters are princes, that we see in the servile class, the coarsest fare, the most
exhausting and unremitting toil, and even the absolute destruction of a portion of its numbers every year." [741

Mutato nomine de tefabula narratur. For slave-trade read labour-market, for Kentucky and Virginia, Ireland and
the agricultural districts of England, Scotland, and Wales, for Africa, Germany. We heard how over-work thinned
the ranks of the bakers in London. Nevertheless, the London labour-market is always over-stocked with German
and other candidates for death in the bakeries. Pottery, as we saw, is one of the shortest-lived industries. Is there any
want therefore of potters? Josiah Wedgwood, the inventor of modern pottery, himself originally a common
workman, said in 1785 before the House of Commons that the whole trade employed from 15,000 to 20,000 people.
[751 In the year 1861 the population alone of the town centres of this industry in Great Britain numbered 101,302.
"The cotton trade has existed for ninety years.... It has existed for three generations of the English race, and I
believe I may safely say that during that period it has destroyed nine generations of factory operatives." [761

No doubt in certain epochs of feverish activity the labour-market shows significant gaps. In 1834, e.g. But then the
manufacturers proposed to the Poor Law Commissioners that they should send the "surplus-population" of the
agricultural districts to the north, with the explanation "that the manufacturers would absorb and use it up." [771
Agents were appointed with the consent of the Poor Law Commissioners. ... An office was set up in Manchester, to
which lists were sent of those workpeople in the agricultural districts wanting employment, and their names were
registered in books. The manufacturers attended at these offices, and selected such persons as they chose; when
they had selected such persons as their 'wants required', they gave instructions to have them forwarded to
Manchester, and they were sent, ticketed like bales of goods, by canals, or with carriers, others tramping on the
road, and many of them were found on the way lost and half-starved. This system had grown up unto a regular
trade. This House will hardly believe it, but I tell them, that this traffic in human flesh was as well kept up, they
were in effect as regularly sold to these [Manchester] manufacturers as slaves are sold to the cotton-grower in the
United States.... In 1860, 'the cotton trade was at its zenith.' ... The manufacturers again found that they were short
of hands.... They applied to the 'flesh agents, as they are called. Those agents sent to the southern downs of
England, to the pastures of Dorsetshire, to the glades of Devonshire, to the people tending kine in Wiltshire, but
they sought in vain. The surplus-population was 'absorbed.'" The Bury Guardian said, on the completion of the
French treaty, that "10,000 additional hands could be absorbed by Lancashire, and that 30,000 or 40,000 will be
needed." After the "flesh agents and sub-agents" had in vain sought through the agricultural districts, "a deputation

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (16 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

came up to London, and waited on the right hon. gentleman [Mr. Villiers, President of the Poor Law Board] with a
view of obtaining poor children from certain union houses for the mills of Lancashire." [781

What experience shows to the capitalist generally is a constant excess of population, i.e., an excess in relation to the
momentary requirements of surplus-labour-absorbing capital, although this excess is made up of generations of
human beings stunted, short-lived, swiftly replacing each other, plucked, so to say, before maturity. [791 And,
indeed, experience shows to the intelligent observer with what swiftness and grip the capitalist mode of production,
dating, historically speaking, only from yesterday, has seized the vital power of the people by the very root —
shows how the degeneration of the industrial population is only retarded by the constant absorption of primitive and
physically uncorrupted elements from the country — shows how even the country labourers, in spite of fresh air
and the principle of natural selection, that works so powerfully amongst them, and only permits the survival of the
strongest, are already beginning to die off. [801 Capital that has such good reasons for denying the sufferings of the
legions of workers that surround it, is in practice moved as much and as little by the sight of the coming degradation
and final depopulation of the human race, as by the probable fall of the earth into the sun. In every stockjobbing
swindle every one knows that some time or other the crash must come, but every one hopes that it may fall on the
head of his neighbour, after he himself has caught the shower of gold and placed it in safety. Apres moi le deluge! is
the watchword of every capitalist and of every capitalist nation. Hence Capital is reckless of the health or length of
life of the labourer, unless under compulsion from society. [811 To the out-cry as to the physical and mental
degradation, the premature death, the torture of over-work, it answers: Ought these to trouble us since they increase
our profits? But looking at things as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good or ill will of the
individual capitalist. Free competition brings out the inherent laws of capitalist production, in the shape of external
coercive laws having power over every individual capitalist. [821

The establishment of a normal working-day is the result of centuries of struggle between capitalist and labourer.
The history of this struggle shows two opposed tendencies. Compare, e.g., the English factory legislation of our
time with the English labour Statutes from the 14th century to well into the middle of the 18th. [831 Whilst the
modern Factory Acts compulsorily shortened the working-day, the earlier statutes tried to lengthen it by
compulsion. Of course the pretensions of capital in embryo — when, beginning to grow, it secures the right of
absorbing a quantum sufficit of surplus-labour, not merely by the force of economic relations, but by the help of the
State — appear very modest when put face to face with the concessions that, growling and struggling, it has to
make in its adult condition. It takes centuries ere the "free" labourer, thanks to the development of capitalistic
production, agrees, i.e., is compelled by social conditions, to sell the whole of his active life, his very capacity for
work, for the price of the necessaries of life, his birth-right for a mess of pottage. Hence it is natural that the
lengthening of the working-day, which capital, from the middle of the 14th to the end of the 17th century, tries to
impose by State-measures on adult labourers, approximately coincides with the shortening of the working-day
which, in the second half of the 19th century, has here and there been effected by the State to prevent the coining of
children's blood into capital. That which to-day, e.g., in the State of Massachusetts, until recently the freest State of
the North-American Republic, has been proclaimed as the statutory limit of the labour of children under 12, was in
England, even in the middle of the 17th century, the normal working-day of able-bodied artisans, robust labourers,
athletic blacksmiths. [841

The first "Statute of Labourers" (23 Edward III., 1349) found its immediate pretext (not its cause, for legislation of
this kind lasts centuries after the pretext for it has disappeared) in the great plague that decimated the people, so
that, as a Tory writer says, "The difficulty of getting men to work on reasonable terms (i.e., at a price that left their
employers a reasonable quantity of surplus-labour) grew to such a height as to be quite intolerable." [851
Reasonable wages were, therefore, fixed by law as well as the limits of the working-day. The latter point, the only
one that here interests us, is repeated in the Statute of 1496 (Henry VII.). The working-day for all artificers and field
labourers from March to September ought, according to this statute (which, however, could not be enforced), to last
from 5 in the morning to between 7 and 8 in the evening. But the meal-times consist of 1 hour for breakfast, 1 1/2
hours for dinner, and 1/2 an hour for "noon-meate," i.e., exactly twice as much as under the factory acts now in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (17 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

force. [861 In winter, work was to last from 5 in the morning until dark, with the same intervals. A statute of
Elizabeth of 1562 leaves the length of the working-day for all labourers "hired for daily or weekly wage"
untouched, but aims at limiting the intervals to 2 1/2 hours in the summer, or to 2 in the winter. Dinner is only to
last 1 hour, and the "afternoon- sleep of half an hour" is only allowed between the middle of May and the middle of
August. For every hour of absence Id. is to be subtracted from the wage. In practice, however, the conditions were
much more favourable to the labourers than in the statute-book. William Petty, the father of Political Economy, and
to some extent the founder of Statistics, says in a work that he published in the last third of the 17th century:
"Labouring-men (then meaning field-labourers) work 10 hours per diem, and make 20 meals per week, viz., 3 a day
for working-days, and 2 on Sundays; whereby it is plain, that if they could fast on Friday nights, and dine in one
hour and an half, whereas they take two, from eleven to one; thereby thus working 1/20 more, and spending 1/20
less, the above-mentioned (tax) might be raised." [871 Was not Dr. Andrew Ure right in crying down the 12 hours'

bill of 1833 as a retrogression to the times of the dark ages? It is true these regulations contained in the statute
mentioned by Petty, apply also to apprentices. But the condition of child-labour, even at the end of the 17th century,
is seen from the following complaint: "Tis not their practice (in Germany) as with us in this kingdom, to bind
an apprentice for seven years; three or four is their common standard: and the reason is, because they are educated
from their cradle to something of employment, which renders them the more apt and docile, and consequently the
more capable of attaining to a ripeness and quicker proficiency in business. Whereas our youth, here in England,
being bred to nothing before they come to be apprentices, make a very slow progress and require much longer time
wherein to reach the perfection of accomplished artists." [881

Still, during the greater part of the 18th century, up to the epoch of Modern Industry and machinism, capital in
England had not succeeded in seizing for itself, by the payment of the weekly value of labour-power, the whole
week of the labourer, with the exception, however, of the agricultural labourers. The fact that they could live for a
whole week on the wage of four days, did not appear to the labourers a sufficient reason that they should work the
other two days for the capitalist. One party of English economists, in the interest of capital, denounces this
obstinacy in the most violent manner, another party defends the labourers. Let us listen, e.g., to the contest between
Postlethwayt whose Dictionary of Trade then had the same reputation as the kindred works of MacCulloch and
MacGregor to-day, and the author (already quoted) of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce." [891

Postlethwayt says among other things: "We cannot put an end to those few observations, without noticing that trite
remark in the mouth of too many; that if the industrious poor can obtain enough to maintain themselves in five
days, they will not work the whole six. Whence they infer the necessity of even the necessaries of life being made
dear by taxes, or any other means, to compel the working artisan and manufacturer to labour the whole six days in
the week, without ceasing. I must beg leave to differ in sentiment from those great politicians, who contend for the
perpetual slavery of the working people of this kingdom; they forget the vulgar adage, all work and no play. Have
not the English boasted of the ingenuity and dexterity of her working artists and manufacturers which have
heretofore given credit and reputation to British wares in general? What has this been owing to? To nothing more
probably than the relaxation of the working people in their own way. Were they obliged to toil the year round, the
whole six days in the week, in a repetition of the same work, might it not blunt their ingenuity, and render them
stupid instead of alert and dexterous; and might not our workmen lose their reputation instead of maintaining it by
such eternal slavery? ... And what sort of workmanship could we expect from such hard-driven animals? ... Many of
them will execute as much work in four days as a Frenchman will in five or six. But if Englishmen are to be eternal
drudges, 'tis to be feared they will degenerate below the Frenchmen. As our people are famed for bravery in war, do
we not say that it is owing to good English roes t beef and pudding in their bellies, as well as their constitutional
spirit of liberty? And why may not the superior ingenuity and dexterity of, our artists and manufacturers, be owing
to that freedom and liberty to direct themselves in their own way, and I hope we shall never have them deprived of
such privileges and that good living from whence their ingenuity no less than their courage may proceed. " [901
Thereupon the author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" replies: "If the making of every seventh day an
holiday is supposed to be of divine institution, as it implies the appropriating the other six days to labour" (he
means capital as we shall soon see) "surely it will not be thought cruel to enforce it .... That mankind in general, are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (18 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

naturally inclined to ease and indolence, we fatally experience to be true, from the conduct of our manufacturing
populace, who do not labour, upon an average, above four days in a week, unless provisions happen to be very
dear.... Put all the necessaries of the poor under one denomination; for instance, call them all wheat, or suppose that
... the bushel of wheat shall cost five shillings and that he (a manufacturer) earns a shilling by his labour, he then
would be obliged to work five days only in a week. If the bushel of wheat should cost but four shillings, he would
be obliged to work but four days; but as wages in this kingdom are much higher in proportion to the price of
necessaries ... the manufacturer, who labours four days, has a surplus of money to live idle with the rest of the week
. ... I hope I have said enough to make it appear that the moderate labour of six days in a week is no slavery. Our
labouring people do this, and to all appearance are the happiest of all our labouring poor, [911 but the Dutch do this
in manufactures, and appear to be a very happy people. The French do so, when holidays do not intervene. [921 But
our populace have adopted a notion, that as Englishmen they enjoy a birthright privilege of being more free and
independent than in any country in Europe. Now this idea, as far as it may affect the bravery of our troops, may be
of some use; nut the less the manufacturing poor have of it, certainly the better for themselves and for the State. The
labouring people should never) think themselves independent of their superiors.... It is extremely dangerous to
encourage mobs in a commercial state like ours, where, perhaps, seven parts out of eight of the whole, are people
with little or no property. The cure will not be perfect, till our manufacturing poor are contented to labour six days
for the same sum which they now earn in four days." [931 To this end, and for "extirpating idleness debauchery and
excess," promoting a spirit of industry, "lowering the price of labour in our manufactories, and easing the lands of
the heavy burden of poor's rates," our "faithful Eckart" of capital proposes this approved device: to shut up such
labourers as become dependent on public support, in a word, paupers, in "an ideal workhouse. " Such ideal
workhouse must be made a "House of Terror," and not an asylum for the poor, "where they are to be plentifully fed,
warmly and decently clothed, and where they do but little work." [941 In this "House of Terror," this "ideal
workhouse, the poor shall work 14 hours in a day, allowing proper time for meals, in such manner that there shall
remain 12 hours of neat-labour." [951

Twelve working-hours daily in the Ideal Workhouse, in the "House of Terror" of 1770! 63 years later, in 1833,
when the English Parliament reduced the working-day for children of 13 to 18, in four branches of industry to 12
full hours, the judgment day of English Industry had dawned! In 1852, when Louis Bonaparte sought to secure his
position with the bourgeoisie by tampering with the legal working-day, the French working people cried out with
one voice "the law that limits the working-day to 12 hours is the one good that has remained to us of the legislation
of the Republic!" [961 At Zurich the work of children over 10, is limited to 12 hours; in Aargau in 1862, the work
of children between 13 and 16, was reduced from 12 1/2 to 12 hours; in Austria in 1860, for children between 14
and 16, the same reduction was made. [971 "What a progress," since 1770! Macaulay would shout with exultation!

The "House of Terror" for paupers of which the capitalistic soul of 1770 only dreamed, was realised a few years
later in the shape of a gigantic "Workhouse" for the industrial worker himself. It is called the Factory. And the ideal
this time fades before the reality.



SECTION 6

THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY.
COMPULSORY LIMITATION BY LAW OF THE WORKING-TIME.
THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS, 1833 TO 1864



After capital had taken centuries in extending the working-day to its normal maximum limit, and then beyond this

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (19 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

to the limit of the natural day of 12 hours, [981 there followed on the birth of machinism and modern industry in the
last third of the 1 8th century, a violent encroachment like that of an avalanche in its intensity and extent. All bounds
of morals and nature, age and sex, day and night, were broken down. Even the ideas of day and night, of rustic
simplicity in the old statutes, became so confused that an English judge, as late as 1860, needed a quite Talmudic
sagacity to explain "judicially" what was day and what was night. [991 Capital celebrated its orgies.

As soon as the working-class, stunned at first by the noise and turmoil of the new system of production, recovered,
in some measure, its senses, its resistance began, and first in the native land of machinism, in England. For 30
years, however, the concessions conquered by the workpeople were purely nominal. Parliament passed 5 labour
Laws between 1802 and 1833, but was shrewd enough not to vote a penny for their carrying out, for the requisite
officials, &c. £1001

They remained a dead letter. "The fact is, that prior to the Act of 1833, young persons and children were worked all
night, all day, or both ad libitum." [1011

A normal working-day for modern industry only dates from the Factory Act of 1833, which included cotton, wool,
flax, and silk factories. Nothing is more characteristic of the spirit of capital than the history of the English Factory
Acts from 1833 to 1864.

The Act of 1833 declares the ordinary factory working-day to be from half-past five in the morning to half-past
eight in the evening and within these limits, a period of 15 hours, it is lawful to employ young persons (i.e., persons
between 13 and 18 years of age), at any time of the day, provided no one individual young person should work
more than 12 hours in any one day, except in certain cases especially provided for. The 6th section of the Act
provided. "That there shall be allowed in the course of every day not less than one and a half hours for meals to
every such person restricted as hereinbefore provided." The employment of children under 9, with exceptions
mentioned later was forbidden; the work of children between 9 and 13 was limited to 8 hours a day, night-work,
i.e., according to this Act, work between 8:30 p.m. and 5:30 a.m., was forbidden for all persons between 9 and 18.

The law-makers were so far from wishing to trench on the freedom of capital to exploit adult labour-power, or, as
they called it, "the freedom of labour," that they created a special system in order to prevent the Factory Acts from
having a consequence so outrageous.

"The great evil of the factory system as at present conducted," says the first report of the Central Board of the
Commission of June 28th 1833, "has appeared to us to be that it entails the necessity of continuing the labour of
children to the utmost length of that of the adults. The only remedy for this evil, short of the limitation of the labour
of adults which would, in our opinion, create an evil greater than that which is sought to be remedied, appears to be
the plan of working double sets of children." ... Under the name of System of Relays, this "plan" was therefore
carried out, so that, e.g., from 5.30 a.m. until 1.30 in the afternoon, one set of children between 9 and 13, and from
1.30 p.m. to 8.30 in the evening another set were "put to," &c.

In order to reward the manufacturers for having, in the most barefaced way, ignored all the Acts as to children's
labour passed during the last twenty-two years, the pill was yet further gilded for them. Parliament decreed that
after March 1st, 1834, no child under 11, after March 1st 1835, no child under 12, and after March 1st, 1836, no
child under 13 was to work more than eight hours in a factory. This "liberalism," so full of consideration for
"capital," was the more noteworthy as. Dr. Farre, Sir A. Carlisle, Sir B. Brodie, Sir C. Bell, Mr. Guthrie, &c, in a
word, the most distinguished physicians and surgeons in London, had declared in their evidence before the House
of Commons, that there was danger in delay. Dr. Farre expressed himself still more coarsely. "Legislation is
necessary for the prevention of death, in any form in which it can be prematurely inflicted, and certainly this (i.e.,
the factory method) must be viewed as a most cruel mode of inflicting it."

That same "reformed" Parliament, which in its delicate consideration for the manufacturers, condemned children
under 13, for years to come, to 72 hours of work per week in the Factory Hell, on the other hand, in the
Emancipation Act, which also administered freedom drop by drop, forbade the planters, from the outset, to work

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (20 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
any negro slave more than 45 hours a week.

But in no wise conciliated, capital now began a noisy agitation that went on for several years. It turned chiefly on
the age of those who, under the name of children, were limited to 8 hours' work, and were subject to a certain
amount of compulsory education. According to capitalistic anthropology, the age of childhood ended at 10, or at the
outside, at 1 1. The more nearly the time approached for the coming into full force of the Factory Act, the fatal year
1836, the more wildly raged the mob of manufacturers. They managed, in fact, to intimidate the government to such
an extent that in 1835 it proposed to lower the limit of the age of childhood from 13 to 12. In the meantime the
pressure from without grew more threatening. Courage failed the House of Commons. It refused to throw children
of 13 under the Juggernaut Car of capital for more than 8 hours a day, and the Act of 1833 came into full operation.
It remained unaltered until June, 1844.

In the ten years during which it regulated factory work, first in part, and then entirely, the official reports of the
factory inspectors teem with complaints as to the impossibility of putting the Act into force. As the law of 1833 left
it optional with the lords of capital during the 15 hours, from 5.30 a.m. to 8.30 p.m., to make every "young person,"
and "every child" begin, break off, resume, or end his 12 or 8 hours at any moment they liked, and also permitted
them to assign to different persons, different times for meals, these gentlemen soon discovered a new "system of
relays," by which the labour-horses were not changed at fixed stations, but were constantly re-harnessed at
changing stations. We do not pause longer on the beauty of this system, as we shall have to return to it later. But
this much is clear at the first glance: that this system annulled the whole Factory Act, not only in the spirit, but in
the letter. How could factory inspectors, with this complex bookkeeping in respect to each individual child or young
person, enforce the legally determined work- time and the granting of the legal mealtimes? In a great many of the
factories, the old brutalities soon blossomed out again unpunished. In an interview with the Home Secretary (1844),
the factory inspectors demonstrated the impossibility of any control under the newly invented relay system. [1021 In
the meantime, however, circumstances had greatly changed. The factory hands, especially since 1838, had made the
Ten Hours' Bill their economic, as they had made the Charter their political, election-cry. Some of the
manufacturers, even, who had managed their factories in conformity with the Act of 1833, overwhelmed Parliament
with memorials on the immoral competition of their false brethren whom greater impudence, or more fortunate
local circumstances, enabled to break the law. Moreover, however much the individual manufacturer might give the
rein to his old lust for gain, the spokesmen and political leaders of the manufacturing class ordered a change of front
and of speech towards the workpeople. They had entered upon the contest for the repeal of the Corn Laws, and
needed the workers to help them to victory. They promised therefore, not only a double-sized loaf of bread, but the
enactment of the Ten Hours' Bill in the Free-trade millennium. [1031 Thus they still less dared to oppose a measure
intended only to make the law of 1833 a reality. Threatened in their holiest interest, the rent of land, the Tories
thundered with philanthropic indignation against the "nefarious practices" [1041 of their foes.

This was the origin of the additional Factory Act of June 7th, 1844. It came into effect on September 10th, 1844. It
places under protection a new category of workers, viz., the women over 18. They were placed in every respect on
the same footing as the young persons, their worktime limited to twelve hours, their night-labour forbidden, &c. For
the first time, legislation saw itself compelled to control directly and officially the labour of adults. In the Factory
Report of 1844-1845, it is said with irony: "No instances have come to my knowledge of adult women having
expressed any regret at their rights being thus far interfered with." [1051 The working-time of children under 13 was
reduced to 61, and in certain circumstances to 7 hours a-day. [1061

To get rid of the abuses of the "spurious relay system," the law established besides others the following important
regulations: — "That the hours of work of children and young persons shall be reckoned from the time when any
child or young person shall begin to work in the morning." So that if A, e.g., begins work at 8 in the morning, and
B at 10, B's work-day must nevertheless end at the same hour as A's. "The time shall be regulated by a public
clock," for example, the nearest railway clock, by which the factory clock is to be set. The occupier is to hang up a
"legible" printed notice stating the hours for the beginning and ending of work and the times allowed for the several
meals. Children beginning work before 12 noon may not be again employed after I p.m. The afternoon shift must

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (21 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

therefore consist of other children than those employed in the morning. Of the hour and a half for meal-times, "one
hour thereof at the least shall be given before three of the clock in the afternoon ... and at the same period of the
day. No child or young person shall be employed more than five hours before I p.m. without an interval for
meal-time of at least 30 minutes. No child or young person [or female] shall be employed or allowed to remain in
any room in which any manufacturing process is then [i.e., at mealtimes] carried on," &c.

It has been seen that these minutiae, which, with military uniformity, regulate by stroke of the clock the times,
limits, pauses of the work were not at all the products of Parliamentary fancy. They developed gradually out of
circumstances as natural laws of the modern mode of production. Their formulation, official recognition, and
proclamation by the State, were the result of a long struggle of classes. One of their first consequences was that in
practice the working-day of the adult males in factories became subject to the same limitations, since in most
processes of production the co-operation of the children, young persons, and women is indispensable. On the
whole, therefore, during the period from 1844 to 1847, the 12 hours' working-day became general and uniform in
all branches of industry under the Factory Act.

The manufacturers, however, did not allow this "progress" without a compensating "retrogression." At their
instigation the House of Commons reduced the minimum age for exploitable children from 9 to 8, in order to assure
that additional supply of factory children which is due to capitalists, according to divine and human law. [107]

The years 1846-47 are epoch-making in the economic history of England. The Repeal of the Corn Laws, and of the
duties on cotton and other raw material; Free-trade proclaimed as the guiding star of legislation; in a word, the
arrival of the millennium. On the other hand, in the same years, the Chartist movement and the 10 hours' agitation
reached their highest point. They found allies in the Tories panting for revenge. Despite the fanatical opposition of
the army of perjured Free-traders, with Bright and Cobden at their head, the Ten Hours' Bill, struggled for so long,
went through Parliament.

The new Factory Act of June 8th, 1847, enacted that on July 1st, 1847, there should be a preliminary shortening of
the working-day for "young persons" (from 13 to 18), and all females to 11 hours, but that on May 1st, 1848, there
should be a definite limitation of the working-day to 10 hours. In other respects, the Act only amended and
completed the Acts of 1833 and 1844.

Capital now entered upon a preliminary campaign in order to hinder the Act from coming into full force on May
1st, 1848. And the workers themselves, under the presence that they had been taught by experience, were to help in
the destruction of their own work. The moment was cleverly chosen. "It must be remembered, too, that there has
been more than two years of great suffering (in consequence of the terrible crisis of 1846-47) among the factory
operatives, from many mills having worked short time, and many being altogether closed. A considerable number
of the operatives must therefore be in very narrow circumstances many, it is to be feared, in debt; so that it might
fairly have been presumed that at the present time they would prefer working the longer time, in order to make up
for past losses, perhaps to pay off debts, or get their furniture out of pawn, or replace that sold, or to get a new
supply of clothes for themselves and their families." [108]

The manufacturers tried to aggravate the natural effect of these circumstances by a general reduction of wages by
10%. This was done so to say, to celebrate the inauguration of the new Free-trade era. Then followed a further
reduction of 8 1/3% as soon as the working-day was shortened to 1 1, and a reduction of double that amount as soon
as it was finally shortened to 10 hours. Wherever, therefore, circumstances allowed it, a reduction of wages of at
least 25% took place. [109] Under such favourably prepared conditions the agitation among the factory workers for
the repeal of the Act of 1847 was begun. Neither lies, bribery, nor threats were spared in this attempt. But all was in
vain. Concerning the half-dozen petitions in which workpeople were made to complain of "their oppression by the
Act," the petitioners themselves declared under oral examination, that their signatures had been extorted from them.
"They felt themselves oppressed, but not exactly by the Factory Act." [110] But if the manufacturers did not
succeed in making the workpeople speak as they wished, they themselves shrieked all the louder in press and
Parliament in the name of the workpeople. They denounced the Factory Inspectors as a kind of revolutionary

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (22 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

commissioners like those of the French National Convention ruthlessly sacrificing the unhappy factory workers to
their humanitarian crotchet. This maneuvre also failed. Factory Inspector Leonard Homer conducted in his own
person, and through his sub-inspectors, many examinations of witnesses in the factories of Lancashire. About 70%
of the workpeople examined declared in favour of 10 hours, a much smaller percentage in favour of 1 1, and an
altogether insignificant minority for the old 12 hours. [1111

Another "friendly" dodge was to make the adult males work 12 to 15 hours, and then to blazon abroad this fact as
the best proof of what the proletariat desired in its heart of hearts. But the "ruthless" Factory Inspector Leonard
Homer was again to the fore. The majority of the "over-times" declared: "They would much prefer working ten
hours for less wages, but that they had no choice; that so many were out of employment (so many spinners getting
very low wages by having to work as piecers, being unable to do better), that if they refused to work the longer
time, others would immediately get their places, so that it was a question with them of agreeing to work the longer
time, or of being thrown out of employment altogether." [1121

The preliminary campaign of capital thus came to grief, and the Ten Hours' Act came into force May 1st, 1848. But
meanwhile the fiasco of the Chartist party whose leaders were imprisoned, and whose organisation was
dismembered, had shaken the confidence of the English working-class in its own strength. Soon after this the June
insurrection in Paris and its bloody suppression united, in England as on the Continent, all fractions of the ruling
classes, landlords and capitalists, stock-exchange wolves and shop-keepers, Protectionists and Freetraders,
government and opposition, priests and freethinkers, young whores and old nuns, under the common cry for the
salvation of Property, Religion, the Family and Society. The working-class was everywhere proclaimed, placed
under a ban, under a virtual law of suspects. The manufacturers had no need any longer to restrain themselves. They
broke out in open revolt not only against the Ten Hours' Act, but against the whole of the legislation that since 1833
had aimed at restricting in some measure the "free" exploitation of labour-power. It was a pro-slavery rebellion in
miniature, carried on for over two years with a cynical recklessness, a terrorist energy all the cheaper because the
rebel capitalist risked nothing except the skin of his "hands."

To understand that which follows we must remember that the Factory Acts of 1833, 1844, and 1847 were all three
in force so far as the one did not amend the other: that not one of these limited the working-day of the male worker
over 18, and that since 1833 the 15 hours from 5.30 a.m. to 8.30 p.m. had remained the legal "day," within the
limits of which at first the 12, and later the 10 hours' labour of young persons and women had to be performed
under the prescribed conditions.

The manufacturers began by here and there discharging a part of, in many cases half of the young persons and
women employed by them, and then, for the adult males, restoring the almost obsolete night-work. The Ten Hours'
Act, they cried, leaves no other alternative. [1131

Their second step dealt with the legal pauses for meals. Let us hear the Factory Inspectors. "Since the restriction of
the hours of work to ten, the factory occupiers maintain, although they have not yet practically gone the whole
length, that supposing the hours of work to be from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. they fulfil the provisions of the statutes by
allowing an hour before 9 a.m. and half an hour after 7 p.m. [for meals]. In some cases they now allow an hour, or
half an hour for dinner, insisting at the same time, that they are not bound to allow any part of the hour and a half in
the course of the factory working-day." [1141 The manufacturers maintained therefore that the scrupulously strict
provisions of the Act of 1844 with regard to meal-times only gave the operatives permission to eat and drink before
coming into, and after leaving the factory — i.e., at home. And why should not the workpeople eat their dinner
before 9 in the morning? The crown lawyers, however, decided that the prescribed meal-times "must be in the
interval during the working-hours, and that it will not be lawful to work for 10 hours continuously, from 9 a.m. to 7
p.m., without any interval." [1151

After these pleasant demonstrations, Capital preluded its revolt by a step which agreed with the letter of the law of
1844, and was therefore legal.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (23 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

The Act of 1844 certainly prohibited the employment after 1 p.m. of such children, from 8 to 13, as had been
employed before noon. But it did not regulate in any way the 6 1/2 hours' work of the children whose work-time
began at 12 midday or later. Children of 8 might, if they began work at noon, be employed from 12 to 1, 1 hour;
from 2 to 4 in the afternoon, 2 hours; from 5 to 8.30 in the evening, 3 1/2 hours; in all, the legal 6 1/2 hours. Or
better still. In order to make their work coincide with that of the adult male labourers up to 8.30 p.m., the
manufacturers only had to give them no work till 2 in the afternoon, they could then keep them in the factory
without intermission till 8.30 in the evening. "And it is now expressly admitted that the practice exists in England
from the desire of mill-owners to have their machinery at work for more than 10 hours a-day, to keep the children at
work with male adults after all the young persons and women have left, and until 8.30 p.m. if the factory-owners
choose." [1161 Workmen and factory inspectors protested on hygienic and moral grounds, but Capital answered:

"My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond."

In fact, according to statistics laid before the House of Commons on July 26th, 1850, in spite of all protests, on July
15th, 1850, 3,742 children were subjected to this "practice" in 257 factories. [1171 Still, this was not enough. The
Lynx eye of Capital discovered that the Act of 1844 did not allow 5 hours' work before mid-day without a pause of
at least 30 minutes for refreshment, but prescribed nothing of the kind for work after mid-day. Therefore, it claimed
and obtained the enjoyment not only of making children of 8 drudge without intermission from 2 to 8.30 p.m., but
also of making them hunger during that time.

"Ay, his heart.
So says the bond."

This Shy lock-clinging [1181 to the letter of the law of 1844, so far as it regulated children's labour, was but to lead
up to an open revolt against the same law, so far as it regulated the labour of "young persons and women." It will be
remembered that the abolition of the "false relay system" was the chief aim and object of that law. The masters
began their revolt with the simple declaration that the sections of the Act of 1844 which prohibited the ad libitum
use of young persons and women in such short fractions of the day of 15 hours as the employer chose, were
"comparatively harmless" so long as the work-time was fixed at 12 hours. But under the Ten Hours' Act they were a
"grievous hardship." [1191 They informed the inspectors in the coolest manner that they should place themselves
above the letter of the law, and re-introduce the old system on their own account. [1201 They were acting in the
interests of the ill-advised operatives themselves, "in order to be able to pay them higher wages." "This was the only
possible plan by which to maintain, under the Ten Hours' Act, the industrial supremacy of Great Britain." "Perhaps
it may be a little difficult to detect irregularities under the relay system; but what of that? Is the great manufacturing
interest of this country to be treated as a secondary matter in order to save some little trouble to Inspectors and
Sub-Inspectors of Factories?" [1211

All these shifts naturally were of no avail. The Factory Inspectors appealed to the Law Courts. But soon such a
cloud of dust in the way of petitions from the masters overwhelmed the Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, that in a
circular of August 5th, 1848, he recommends the inspectors not "to lay informations against mill-owners for a
breach of the letter of the Act, or for employment of young persons by relays in cases in which there is no reason to
believe that such young persons have been actually employed for a longer period than that sanctioned by law."
Hereupon, Factory Inspector J. Stuart allowed the so-called relay system during the 15 hours of the factory day
throughout Scotland, where it soon flourished again as of old. The English Factory Inspectors, on the other hand,
declared that the Home Secretary had no power dictatorially to suspend the law, and continued their legal
proceedings against the pro-slavery rebellion.

But what was the good of summoning the capitalists when the Courts in this case the country magistrates —
Cobbett's "Great Unpaid" — acquitted them? In these tribunals, the masters sat in judgment on themselves An
example. One Eskrigge, cotton-spinner, of the firm of Kershaw, Leese, & Co., had laid before the Factory Inspector
of his district the scheme of a relay system intended for his mill. Receiving a refusal, he at first kept quiet. A few

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (24 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

months later, an individual named Robinson, also a cotton- spinner, and if not his Man Friday, at all events related to
Eskrigge, appeared before the borough magistrates of Stockport on a charge of introducing the identical plan of
relays invented by Eskrigge. Four Justices sat, among them three cottonspinners, at their head this same inevitable
Eskrigge. Eskrigge acquitted Robinson, and now was of opinion that what was right for Robinson was fair for
Eskrigge. Supported by his own legal decision, he introduced the system at once into his own factory. [1221 Of
course, the composition of this tribunal was in itself a violation of the law. [1231 These judicial farces, exclaims
Inspector Howell, "urgently call for a remedy — either that the law should be so altered as to be made to conform to
these decisions, or that it should be administered by a less fallible tribunal, whose decisions would conform to the
law ... when these cases are brought forward. I long for a stipendiary magistrate." [1241

The crown lawyers declared the masters' interpretation of the Act of 1848 absurd. But the Saviours of Society
would not allow themselves to be turned from their purpose. Leonard Homer reports, "Having endeavoured to
enforce the Act ... by ten prosecutions in seven magisterial divisions, and having been supported by the magistrates
in one case only ... I considered it useless to prosecute more for this evasion of the law. That part of the Act of 1848
which was framed for securing uniformity in the hours of work, ... is thus no longer in force in my district
(Lancashire). Neither have the sub-inspectors or myself any means of satisfying ourselves, when we inspect a mill
working by shifts, that the young persons and women are not working more than 10 hours a-day.... In a return of the
30th April, ... of millowners working by shifts, the number amounts to 1 14, and has been for some time rapidly
increasing. In general, the time of working the mill is extended to 13 1/2 hours' from 6 a.m. to 7 1/2 p.m., .... in
some instances it amounts to 15 hours, from 5 1/2 a.m. to 8 1/2 p.m." [1251 Already, in December, 1848, Leonard
Homer had a list of 65 manufacturers and 29 overlookers who unanimously declared that no system of supervision
could, under this relay system, prevent enormous over-work. [1261 Now, the same children and young persons were
shifted from the spinning-room to the weaving -room, now, during 15 hours, from one factory to another. [1271 How
was it possible to control a system which, "under the guise of relays, is some one of the many plans for shuffling
'the hands' about in endless variety, and shifting the hours of work and of rest for different individuals throughout
the day, so that you may never have one complete set of hands working together in the same room at the same
time." £128]

But altogether independently of actual over-work, this so-called relay system was an offspring of capitalistic
fantasy, such as Fourier, in his humorous sketches of "Courses Seances," has never surpassed, except that the
"attraction of labour" was changed into the attraction of capital. Look, for example, at those schemes of the masters
which the "respectable" press praised as models of "what a reasonable degree of care and method can accomplish."
The personnel of the workpeople was sometimes divided into from 12 to 14 categories, which themselves
constantly changed and recharged their constituent parts. During the 15 hours of the factory day, capital dragged in
the labourer now for 30 minutes, now for an hour, and then pushed him out again, to drag him into the factory and
to thrust him out afresh, hounding him hither and thither, in scattered shreds of time, without ever losing hold of
him until the full 10 hours' work was done. As on the stage, the same persons had to appear in turns in the different
scenes of the different acts. But as an actor during the whole course of the play belongs to the stage, so the
operatives, during 15 hours, belonged to the factory, without reckoning the time for going and coming. Thus the
hours of rest were turned into hours of enforced idleness, which drove the youths to the pot-house, and the girls to
the brothel. At every new trick that the capitalist, from day to day, hit upon for keeping his machinery going 12 or
15 hours without increasing the number of his hands, the worker had to swallow his meals now in this fragment of
time, now in that. At the time of the 10 hours' agitation, the masters cried out that the working mob petitioned in the
hope of obtaining 12 hours' wages for 10 hours' work. Now they reversed the medal. They paid 10 hours' wages for
12 or 15 hours' lordship over labour-power. [1291 This was the gist of the matter, this the masters' interpretation of
the 10 hours' law! These were the same unctuous Free-traders, perspiring with the love of humanity, who for full 10
years, during the Anti-Corn Law agitation, had preached to the operatives, by a reckoning of pounds, shillings, and
pence, that with free importation of corn, and with the means possessed by English industry, 10 hours' labour would
be quite enough to enrich the capitalists. [1301 This revolt of capital, after two years was at last crowned with
victory by a decision of one of the four highest Courts of Justice in England, the Court of Exchequer, which in a

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (25 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

case brought before it on February 8th, 1850, decided that the manufacturers were certainly acting against the sense
of the Act of 1844, but that this Act itself contained certain words that rendered it meaningless. "By this decision,
the Ten Hours' Act was abolished." [1311 A crowd of masters, who until then had been afraid of using the relay
system for young persons and women, now took it up heart and soul. [1321

But on this apparently decisive victory of capital, followed at once a revulsion. The workpeople had hitherto offered
a passive, although inflexible and unremitting resistance. They now protested in Lancashire and Yorkshire in
threatening meetings. The pretended Ten Hours' Act was thus simple humbug, parliamentary cheating, had never
existed! The Factory Inspectors urgently warned the Government that the antagonism of classes had arrived at an
incredible tension. Some of the masters themselves murmured: "On account of the contradictory decisions of the
magistrates, a condition of things altogether abnormal and anarchical obtains. One law holds in Yorkshire, another
in Lancashire, one law in one parish of Lancashire, another in its immediate neighbourhood. The manufacturer in
large towns could evade the law, the manufacturer in country districts could not find the people necessary for the
relay system, still less for the shifting of hands from one factory to another," &c. And the first birthright of capital is
equal exploitation of labour-power by all capitalists.

Under these circumstances a compromise between masters and men was effected that received the seal of
Parliament in the additional Factory Act of August 5th, 1850. The working-day for "young persons and women,"
was raised from 10 to 10 — hours for the first five days of the week, and shortened to 7 1/2 on the Saturday. The
work was to go on between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m., [1331 with pauses of not less than 1 1/2 hours for meal-times, these
meal-times to be allowed at one and the same time for all, and conformably to the conditions of 1844. By this an
end was put to the relay system once for all. [1341 For children's labour, the Act of 1844 remained in force.

One set of masters, this time as before, secured to itself special seigneurial rights over the children of the proletariat.
These were the silk manufacturers. In 1833 they had howled out in threatening fashion, "if the liberty of working
children of any age for 10 hours a day were taken away, it would stop their works." [1351 It would be impossible
for them to buy a sufficient number of children over 13. They extorted the privilege they desired. The pretext was
shown on subsequent investigation to be a deliberate lie. [1361 It did not, however, prevent them, during 10 years,
from spinning silk 10 hours a day out of the blood of little children who had to be placed upon stools for the
performance of their work. [1371 The Act of 1844 certainly "robbed" them of the "liberty" of employing children
under 1 1 longer than 6 1/2 hours a day. But it secured to them, on the other hand, the privilege of working children
between 11 and 13, 10 hours a day, and of annulling in their case the education made compulsory for all other
factory children. This time the pretext was "the delicate texture of the fabric in which they were employed,
requiring a lightness of touch, only to be acquired by their early introduction to these factories." [1381 The children
were slaughtered out-and-out for the sake of their delicate fingers, as in Southern Russia the horned cattle for the
sake of their hide and tallow. At length, in 1850, the privilege granted in 1844, was limited to the departments of
silk- twisting and silk- winding. But here, to make amends to capital bereft of its "freedom," the work-lime for
children from 11 to 13 was raised from 10 to 10 1/2 hours. Pretext: "Labour in silk mills was lighter than in mills

for other fabrics, and less likely in other respects also to be prejudicial to health." [1391 Official medical inquiries
proved afterwards that, on the contrary, "the average death-rate is exceedingly high in the silk districts and amongst
the female part of the population is higher even than it is in the cotton districts of Lancashire." [1401 Despite the
protests of the Factory Inspector, renewed every 6 months, the mischief continues to this hour. [1411

The Act of 1850 changed the 15 hours' time from 6 a.m. to 8.30 p.m., into the 12 hours from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. for
"young persons and women" only. It did not, therefore, affect children who could always be employed for half an
hour before and 2 1/2 hours after this period, provided the whole of their labour did not exceed 6 1/2 hours. Whilst
the bill was under discussion, the Factory Inspectors laid before Parliament statistics of the infamous abuses due to
this anomaly. To no purpose. In the background lurked the intention of screwing up, during prosperous years, the
working-day of adult males to 15 hours by the aid of the children. The experience of the three following years
showed that such an attempt must come to grief against the resistance of the adult male operatives. The Act of 1850

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (26 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

was therefore finally completed in 1853 by forbidding the "employment of children in the morning before and in
the evening after young persons and women." Henceforth with a few exceptions the Factory Act of 1850 regulated
the working-day of all workers in the branches of industry that come under it. [1421 Since the passing of the first
Factory Act half a century had elapsed. [1431

Factory legislation for the first time went beyond its original sphere in the "Printworks' Act of 1845." The
displeasure with which capital received this new "extravagance" speaks through every line of the Act. It limits the
working-day for children from 8 to 13, and for women to 16 hours, between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m., without any legal
pause for meal-times. It allows males over 13 to be worked at will day and night. [1441 It is a Parliamentary
abortion. [1451

However, the principle had triumphed with its victory in those great branches of industry which form the most
characteristic creation of the modern mode of production. Their wonderful development from 1853 to 1860,
hand-in-hand with the physical and moral regeneration of the factory workers, struck the most purblind. The
masters from whom the legal limitation and regulation had been wrung step by step after a civil war of half a
century, themselves referred ostentatiously to the contrast with the branches of exploitation still "free." [1461 The
Pharisees of "Political Economy" now proclaimed the discernment of the necessity of a legally fixed working-day
as a characteristic new discovery of their "science." [1471 It will be easily understood that after the factory
magnates had resigned themselves and become reconciled to the inevitable, the power of resistance of capital
gradually weakened, whilst at the same time the power of attack of the working-class grew with the number of its
allies in the classes of society not immediately interested in the question. Hence the comparatively rapid advance
since 1860.

The dye-works and bleach- works all came under the Factory Act of 1850 in 1860; [1481 lace and stocking
manufactures in 1861.

In consequence of the first report of the Commission on the employment of children (1863) the same fate was
shared by the manufacturers of all earthenwares (not merely pottery), Lucifer-matches, percussioncaps, cartridges,
carpets, fustian-cutting, and many processes included under the name of "finishing." In the year 1863 bleaching in
the open air [1491 and baking were placed under special Acts, by which, in the former, the labour of young persons
and women during the night-time (from 8 in the evening to 6 in the morning), and in the latter, the employment of
journeymen bakers under 18, between 9 in the evening and 5 in the morning were forbidden. We shall return to the
later proposals of the same Commission, which threatened to deprive of their "freedom" all the important branches
of English Industry, with the exception of agriculture, mines, and the means of transport. [1501



SECTION 7

THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY.

RE-ACTION OF THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS ON OTHER COUNTRIES



The reader will bear in mind that the production of surplus-value, or the extraction of surplus-labour, is the specific
end and aim, the sum and substance, of capitalist production, quite apart from any changes in the mode of
production, which may arise from the subordination of labour to capital. He will remember that as far as we have at
present gone only the independent labourer, and therefore only the labourer legally qualified to act for himself,
enters as a vendor of a commodity into a contract with the capitalist. If, therefore, in our historical sketch, on the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (27 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

one hand, modern industry, on the other, the labour of those who are physically and legally minors, play important
parts, the former was to us only a special department, and the latter only a specially striking example of labour
exploitation. Without, however, anticipating the subsequent development of our inquiry, from the mere connexion
of the historic facts before us it follows:

First. The passion of capital for an unlimited and reckless extension of the working-day, is first gratified in the
industries earliest revolutionised by water-power, steam, and machinery, in those first creations of the modern mode
of production, cotton, wool, flax, and silk spinning, and weaving. The changes in the material mode of production,
and the corresponding changes in the social relations of the producers [1511 gave rise first to an extravagance
beyond all bounds, and then in opposition to this, called forth a control on the part of Society which legally limits,
regulates, and makes uniform the working-day and its pauses. This control appears, therefore, during the first half
of the nineteenth century simply as exceptional legislation. [1521 As soon as this primitive dominion of the new
mode of production was conquered, it was found that, in the meantime, not only had many other branches of
production been made to adopt the same factory system, but that manufactures with more or less obsolete methods,
such as potteries, glass-making, &c, that old-fashioned handicrafts, like baking, and, finally, even that the so-called
domestic industries, such as nail-making, [1531 had long since fallen as completely under capitalist exploitation as
the factories themselves. Legislation was, therefore, compelled to gradually get rid of its exceptional character, or
where, as in England, it proceeds after the manner of the Roman Casuists, to declare any house in which work was
done to be a factory. [1541

Second. The history of the regulation of the working-day in certain branches of production, and the struggle still
going on in others in regard to this regulation, prove conclusively that the isolated labourer, the labourer as "free"
vendor of his labour-power, when capitalist production has once attained a certain stage, succumbs without any
power of resistance. The creation of a normal working-day is, therefore, the product of a protracted civil war, more
or less dissembled, between the capitalist class and the working-class. As the contest takes place in the arena of
modern industry, it first breaks out in the home of that industry — England. [1551 The English factory workers
were the champions, not only of the English, but of the modern working-class generally, as their theorists were the
first to throw down the gauntlet to the theory of capital. [1561 Hence, the philosopher of the Factory, Ure,
denounces as an ineffable disgrace to the English working-class that they inscribed "the slavery of the Factory
Acts" on the banner which they bore against capital, manfully striving for "perfect freedom of labour." [1571

France limps slowly behind England. The February revolution was necessary to bring into the world the 12 hours'
law, [1581 which is much more deficient than its English original. For all that, the French revolutionary method has
its special advantages. It once for all commands the same limit to the working-day in all shops and factories without
distinction, whilst English legislation reluctantly yields to the pressure of circumstances, now on this point, now on
that, and is getting lost in a hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments. [1591 On the other hand, the
French law proclaims as a principle that which in England was only won in the name of children, minors, and
women, and has been only recently for the first time claimed as a general right. [1601

In the United States of North America, every independent movement of the workers was paralysed so long as
slavery disfigured a part of the Republic. Labour cannot emancipate itself in the white skin where in the black it is
branded. But out of the death of slavery a new life at once arose. The first fruit of the Civil War was the eight hours'
agitation, that ran with the seven-leagued boots of the locomotive from the Atlantic to the Pacific, from New
England to California. The General Congress of labour at Baltimore (August 16th, 1866) declared: "The first and
great necessity of the present, to free the labour of this country from capitalistic slavery, is the passing of a law by
which eight hours shall be the normal working-day in all States of the American Union. We are resolved to put
forth all our strength until this glorious result is attained." [1611 At the same time, the Congress of the
International Working Men's Association at Geneva, on the proposition of the London General Council, resolved
that "the limitation of the working-day is a preliminary condition without which all further attempts at improvement
and emancipation must prove abortive... the Congress proposes eight hours as the legal limit of the working-day."



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (28 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

Thus the movement of the working-class on both sides of the Atlantic, that had grown instinctively out of the
conditions of production themselves, endorsed the words of the English Factory Inspector, R. J. Saunders "Further
steps towards a reformation of society can never be carried out with any hope of success, unless the hours of labour
be limited, and the prescribed limit strictly enforced." [1621

It must be acknowledged that our labourer comes out of the process of production other than he entered. In the
market he stood as owner of the commodity "labour-power" face to face with other owners of commodities, dealer
against dealer. The contract by which he sold to the capitalist his labour-power proved, so to say, in black and white
that he disposed of himself freely. The bargain concluded, it is discovered that he was no "free agent," that the time
for which he is free to sell his labour-power is the time for which he is forced to sell it, [1631 that in fact the
vampire will not lose its hold on him "so long as there is a muscle, a nerve, a drop of blood to be exploited." [1641
For "protection" against "the serpent of their agonies," the labourers must put their heads together, and, as a class,
compel the passing of a law, an all-powerful social barrier that shall prevent the very workers from selling, by
voluntary contract with capital, themselves and their families into slavery and death. [1651 In place of the pompous
catalogue of the "inalienable rights of man" comes the modest Magna Charta of a legally limited working-day,
which shall make clear "when the time which the worker sells is ended, and when his own begins." [1661 Quantum
mutatus ab illo !



Footnotes

fJJ "A day's labour is vague, it may be long or short." ("An Essay on Trade and Commerce, Containing
Observations on Taxes, &c." London. 1770, p. 73.)

[21 This question is far more important than the celebrated question of Sir Robert Peel to the Birmingham Chamber
of Commerce: What is a pound? A question that could only have been proposed, because Peel was as much in the
dark as to the nature of money as the "little shilling men" of Birmingham.

[31 "It is the aim of the capitalist to obtain with his expended capital the greatest possible quantity of labour
(d'obtenir du capital depense la plus forte somme de travail possible). J. G. Courcelle-Seneuil. "Traite theorique et
pratique des entreprises industrielles." 2nd ed. Paris, 1857, p. 63.

[41 "An hour's labour lost in a day is a prodigious injury to a commercial State.... There is a very great consumption
of luxuries among the labouring poor of this kingdom: particularly among the manufacturing populace, by which
they also consume their time, the most fatal of consumptions." "An Essay on Trade and Commerce, &c," p. 47, and
15 3.

[51 "Si le manouvrier libre prend un instant de repos, I'economie sordide qui le suit des yeux avec inquietude,
pretend qu'il la vole." N. Linguet, "Theorie des Lois Civiles. &c." London, 1767, t. II., p. 466.

[61 During the great strike of the London builders, 1860-61, for the reduction of the working-day to 9 hours, their
Committee published a manifesto that contained, to some extent, the plea of our worker. The manifesto alludes, not
without irony, to the fact, that the greatest profit-monger amongst the building masters, a certain Sir M. Peto, was in
the odour of sanctity (This same Peto, after 1867, came to an end a la Strousberg.)

[7] "Those who labour ... in reality feed both the pensioners ... [called the rich] and themselves." (Edmund Burke, 1.

c, p. 2.)

[81 Niebuhr in his "Roman History" says very naively: "It is evident that works like the Etruscan, which in their
ruins astound us, pre-suppose in little (!) states lords and vassals." Sismondi says far more to the purpose that



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (29 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
"Brussels lace" pre-supposes wage-lords and wage-slaves.

[91 "One cannot see these unfortunates (in the gold mines between Egypt, Ethiopia, and Arabia) who cannot even
have their bodies dean, or their nakedness clothed, without pitying their miserable lot. There is no indulgence, no
forbearance for the sick, the feeble, the aged, for woman's weakness. All must, forced by blows, work on until death
puts an end to their sufferings and their distress." ("Diod. Sic. Bibl. Hist.," lib. 2, c. 13.)

[101 That which follows refers to the situation in the Roumanian provinces before the change effected since the
Crimean war.

[Ill This holds likewise for Germany, and especially for Prussia east of the Elbe. In the 15th century the German
peasant was nearly everywhere a man, who, whilst subject to certain rents paid in produce and labour was otherwise
at least practically free. The German colonists in Brandenburg, Pomerania, Silesia, and Eastern Prussia, were even
legally acknowledged as free men. The victory of the nobility in the peasants' war put an end to that. Not only were
the conquered South German peasants again enslaved. From the middle of the 16th century the peasants of Eastern
Prussia, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and Silesia, and soon after the free peasants of Schleswig-Holstein were
degraded to the condition of serfs. (Maurer, Fronhofe iv. vol., — Meitzen, "Der Boden des preussischen Staats" —
Hanssen, vv Leibeigenschaft in Schleswig-Holstein." — F. E.)

[121 Further details are to be found in E. Regnault's "Histoire politique et sociale des Principautes Danubiennes,"
Paris, 1855.

[131 "In general and within certain limits, exceeding the medium size of their kind, is evidence of the prosperity of
organic beings. As to man, his bodily height lessens if his due growth is interfered with, either by physical or local
conditions. In all European countries in which the conscription holds, since its introduction, the medium height of
adult men, and generally their fitness for military service, has diminished. Before the revolution (1789), the
minimum for the infantry in France was 165 centimetres; in 1818 (law of March 10th), 157; by the law of March
21, 1832, 156 cm.; on the average in France more than half are rejected on account of deficient height or bodily
weakness. The military standard in Saxony was in 1780, 178 c. m. It is now 155. In Prussia it is 157. According to
the statement of Dr. Meyer in the Bavarian Gazette, May 9th, 1862, the result of an average of 9 years is, that in
Prussia out of 1,000 conscripts 716 were unfit for military service, 317 because of deficiency in height, and 399
because of bodily defects.... Berlin in 1858 could not provide its contingent of recruits, it was 156 men short." J.
von Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agrikultur und Physiologie. 1862," 7th Ed., vol. 1, pp. 1 17, 118.

[141 The history of the Factory Act of 1850 will be found in the course of this chapter.

[151 1 only touch here and there on the period from the beginning of modern industry in England to 1845. For this
period I refer the reader to "Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," von Friedrich Engels, Leipzig, 1845.
How completely Engels understood the nature of the capitalist mode of production is shown by the Factory Reports,
Reports on Mines, &c, that have appeared since 1845, and how wonderfully he painted the circumstances in detail
is seen on the most superficial comparison of his work with the off— cial reports of the Children's Employment
Commission, published 18 to 20 years later (1863-1867). These deal especially with the branches of industry in
which the Factory Acts had not, up to 1 862, been introduced, in fact are not yet introduced. Here, then, little or no
alteration had been enforced, by authority, in the conditions painted by Engels. I borrow my examples chiefly from
the Free-trade period after 1848, that age of paradise, of which the commercial travellers for the great firm of
Free-trade, blatant as ignorant, tell such fabulous tales. For the rest England figures here in the foreground because
she is the classic representative of capitalist production, and she alone has a continuous set of official ctatistics of
the thin~s we are considerinR.

[161 "Suggestions, &c. by Mr. L. Homer, Inspector of Factories," in Factories Regulation Acts. Ordered by the
House of Commons to be printed, 9th August, 1859, pp. 4, 5.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (30 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
[171 Reports of the Inspector of Factories for the half year. October, 1856, p. 35.

[18] Reports, &c, 30th April, 1858, p. 9.

£191 Reports, &c, 1. c, p. 10.

[201 Reports &c, 1. c, p. 25.

[211 Reports &c, for the half year ending 30th April, 1861. See Appendix No. 2; Reports, &c, 31st October, 1862,

pp. 7, 52, 53. The violations of the Acts became more numerous during the last half year 1863. Cf Reports, &c,
ending 31st October, 1863, p. 7.

[221 Reports, &c, October 31st, 1860, p. 23. With what fanaticism, according to the evidence of manufacturers
given in courts of law, their hands set themselves against every interruption in factory labour, the following curious
circumstance shows. In the beginning of June, 1836, information reached the magistrates of Dewsbury (Yorkshire)
that the owners of 8 large mills in the neighbourhood of Batley had violated the Factory Acts. Some of these
gentlemen were accused of having kept at work 5 boys between 12 and 15 years of age, from 6 a.m. on Friday to 4
p.m. on the following Saturday, not allowing them any respite except for meals and one hour for sleep at midnight.
And these children had to do this ceaseless labour of 30 hours in the "shoddyhole," as the hole is called, in which
the woollen rags are pulled in pieces, and where a dense atmosphere of dust, shreds, &c, forces even the adult
workman to cover his mouth continually with handkerchiefs for the protection of his lungs! The accused gentlemen
affirm in lieu of taking an oath — as quakers they were too scrupulously religious to take an oath — that they had,
in their great compassion for the unhappy children, allowed them four hours for sleep, but the obstinate children
absolutely would not go to bed. The quaker gentlemen were mulcted in £20. Dryden anticipated these gentry:

Fox full fraught in seeming sanctity,
That feared an oath, but like the devil would lie,
That look'd like Lent, and had the holy leer,
And durst not sin! before he said his prayer!"

[231 Rep., 31st Oct., 1856, p. 34.

T241 1. c, p. 35.

[25J I.e., p. 48.

[26J 1. c.,p. 48.

[2711. c, p. 48.

[28J I.e., p. 48.

[29J Report of the Insp. &c, 30th April 1860, p. 56.

[301 This is the official expression both in the factories and in the reports.

[311 "The cupidity of mill-owners whose cruelties in the pursuit of gain have hardly been exceeded by those
perpetrated by the Spaniards on the conquest of America in the pursuit of gold." John Wade, "History of the Middle
and Working Classes," 3rd Ed. London, 1835, p. 1 14. The theoretical part of this book, a kind of hand-book of
Political Economy, is, considering the time of its publication, original in some parts, e.g., on commercial crises. The
historical part is, to a great extent, a shameless plagiarism of Sir F. M. Eden's vv The State of the Poor," London,
1797.

[321 Daily Telegraph, 1 7th January, 1860.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (31 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
[331 Cf. F. Engels "Lage, etc." pp. 249-51.

[341 Children's Employment Commission. First report., etc., 1863. Evidence, pp. 16, 19, 18.

[35J Public Health, 3rd report, etc., pp. 102, 104, 105.

[36J Child. Empl. Comm. I. Report, p. 24.

[371 Children's Employment Commission, p. 22, and xi.

[381 1- c, p. xlviii.

[39J1. cp.liv.

[401 This is not to be taken in the same sense as our surplus-labour time. These gentlemen consider 10 1/2 hours of
labour as the normal working-day, which includes of course the normal surplus-labour. After this begins
"over-time" which is paid a little better. It will be seen later that the labour expended during the so-called normal
day is paid below its value, so that the over-time is simply a capitalist trick in order to extort more surplus-labour,
which it would still be, everi if the labour-power expended during the normal working-day were properly paid.

[4111. c, Evidence, pp. 123, 124, 125, 140, and 54.

[421 Alum finely powdered, or mixed with salt, is a normal article of commerce bearing the significant name of
"bakers' stuff."

[431 Soot is a well-known and very energetic form of carbon, and forms a manure that capitalistic chimney-sweeps
sell to English farmers. Now in 1862 the British juryman had in a law-suit to decide whether soot, with which,
unknown to the buyer, 90% of dust and sand are mixed, is genuine soot in the commercial sense or adulterated soot
in the legal sense. The "amis du commerce" decided it to be genuine commercial soot, and nonsuited the plaintiff
farmer, who had in addition to pay the costs of the suit.

[441 The French chemist, Chevallier, in his treatise on the "sophistications" of commodities, enumerates for many
of the 600 or more articles which he passes in review, 10, 20, 30 different methods of adulteration. He adds that he
does not know all the methods and does not mention all that he knows. He gives 6 kinds of adulteration of sugar, 9
of olive oil, 10 of butter, 12 of salt, 19 of milk, 20 of bread, 23 of brandy, 24 of meal, 28 of chocolate, 30 of wine,
32 of coffee, etc. Even God Almighty does not escape this fate. See Rouard de Card, "On the Falsifications of the
Materials of the Sacrament." ("De la falsification des substances sacramentelles," Paris, 1856.)

[451 "Report, &c, relative to the grievances complained of by the journeymen bakers, &c, London, 1862," and
"Second Report, &c, London, 1863."

[461 1- c, First Report, &c, p. vi.

[471 1. c, p. Ixxi.

[481 George Read, "The History of Baking," London, 1848, p. 16.

[491 Report (First) &c. Evidence of the "full-priced" baker Cheeseman, p. 108.

[501 George Read, 1. c. At the end of the 17th and the beginning of the 18th centuries the factors (agents) that
crowded into every possible trade were still denounced as "public nuisances." Thus the Grand Jury at the quarter
session of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Somerset, addressed a presentment to the Lower House which,
among other things, states, "that these factors of Blackwell Hall are a Public Nuisance and Prejudice to the Clothing
Trade, and ought to be put down as a Nuisance." "The Case of our English Wool., &c," London, 1685, pp. 6, 7.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (32 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
[51] First Report, &c.

[521 Report of Committee on the Baking Trade in Ireland for 1861.

[5311. c.

[541 Public meeting of agricultural labourers at Lasswade, near Edinburgh, January 5th, 1866. (See Workman's
Advocate, January 13th, 1866.) The formation since the close of 1865 of a Trades' Union among the agricultural
labourers at first in Scotland is a historic event. In one of the most oppressed agricultural districts of England,
Buckinghamshire, the labourers, in March, 1867, made a ueat strike for the raising of their weekly wage from 9-10
shillings to 12 shillings. (It will be seen from the preceding passage that the movement of the English agricultural
proletariat, entirely crushed since the suppression of its violent manifestations after 1830, and especially since the
introduction of the new Poor Laws, begins again in the sixties, until it becomes finally epoch-making in 1872. 1
return to this in the 2nd volume, as well as to the Blue books that have appeared since 1867 on the position of the
English land labourers. Addendum to the 3rd ea.)

[551 Reynolds' Newspaper, January, 1866. — Every week this same paper has, under the sensational headings,
"Fearful and fatal accidents," "Appalling tragedies," &c, a whole list of fresh railway catastrophes. On these an
employe on the North Staffordshire line comments: "Everyone knows the consequences that may occur if the driver
and fireman of a locomotive engine are not continually on the look-out. How can that be expected from a man who
has been at such work for 29 or 30 hours, exposed to the weather, and without rest. The following is an example
which is of very frequent occurrence: — One fireman commenced work on the Monday morning at a very early
hour. When he had finished what is called a day's work, he had been on duty 14 hours 50 minutes. Before he had
time to get his tea, he was again called on for duty.... The next time he finished he had been on duty 14 hours 25
minutes, making a total of 29 hours 15 minutes without intermission. The rest of the week's work was made up as
follows: — Wednesday. 15 hours: Thursday, 15 hours 35 minutes; Friday, 14 2 hours; Saturday, 14 hours 10
minutes, making a total for the week of 88 hours 40 minutes. Now, sir, fancy his astonishment on being paid 6 1/4
days for the whole. Thinking it was a mistake, he applied to the time-keeper,... and inquited what they considered a
day's work, and was told 13 hours for a goods man (i.e., 78 hours).... He then asked for what he had made over and
above the 78 hours per week, but was refused. However, he was at last told they would give him another quarter,
i.e., 10 d.," 1. c, 4th February. 1866.

[56J Cf F. Engels, 1. c, pp. 253, 254.

[571 Dr. Letheby, Consulting Physician of the Board of Health, declared: "The minimum of air for each adult ought
to be in a sleeping room 300, and in a dwelling room 500 cubic feet." Dr. Richardson, Senior Physician to one of
the London Hospitals: "With needlewomen of all kinds, including milliners, dressmakers, and ordinary
sempstresses, there are three miseries — over-work, deficient air, and either deficient food or deficient digestion....
Needlework, in the main, ... is infinitely better adapted to women than to men. But the mischiefs of the trade, in the
metropolis especially, are that it is monopolised by some twenty-six capitalists, who, under the advantages that
spring from capital, can bring in capital to force economy out of labour. This power tells throughout the whole
class. If a dressmaker can get a little circle of customers, such is the competition that, in her home, she must work to
the death to hold together, and this same over-work she must of necessity inflict on any who may assist her. If she
fail, or do not try independently, she must join an establishment, where her labour is oot less, but where her money
is safe. Placed thus, she becomes a mere slave, tossed about with the variations of society. Now at home, in one
room, starving, or near to it, then engaged 15, 16, aye, even 18 hours out of the 24, in an air that is scarcely
tolerable, and on food which, even if it be good, cannot be digested in the absence of pure air. On these victims,
consumption, which is purely a disease of bad air, feeds." Dr. Richardson: "Work and Over-work," in "Social
Science Review," 18th July, 1863.

[581 Morning Star, 23rd June, 1863. — The Times made useofthe circumstance to defend the American
slave-owners against Bright, &c. "Very many of us think," says a leader of July 2nd, 1863, "that, while we work our

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (33 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

own young women to death, using the scourge of starvation, instead of the crack of the whip, as the instrument of
compulsion, we have scarcely a right to hound on fire and slaughter against families who were born slave-owners,
and who, at least, feed their slaves well, and work them lightly." In the same manner, the Standard, a Tory organ,
fell foul of the Rev. Newman Hall: "He excommunicated the slave-owners, but prays with the fine folk who,
without remorse, make the omnibus drivers and conductors of London, &c, work 16 hours a-day for the wages of a
dog." Finally, spake the oracle, Thomas Carlyle, of whom I wrote, in 1850, "Zum Teufel ist der Genius, der Kultus
ist geblieben." In a short parable, he reduces the one great event of contemporary history, the American Civil War,
to this level, that the Peter of the North wants to break the head of the Paul of the South with all his might, because
the Peter of the North hires his labour by the day, and the Paul of the South hires his by the life. ("Macmillan's
Magazine." llias Americana in nuce. August, 1863.) Thus, the bubble of Tory sympathy for the urban workers —
by no means for the rural — has burst at last. The sum of all is — slavery!

[591 Dr. Richardson, 1. c.

[601 Children's Employment Commission. Third Report. London, 1864, pp. iv., v., vi.

[611 "Both in Staffordshire and in South Wales young girls and women are employed on the pit banks and on the
coke heaps, not only by day but also by night. This practice has been often noticed in Reports presented to
Parliament, as being attended with great and notorious evils. These females employed with the men, hardly
distinguished from them in their dress, and begrimed with dirt and smoke, are exposed to the deterioration of
character, arising from the loss of self-respect, which can hardly fail to follow from their unfeminine occupation."
(1. c, 194, p. xxvi. Cf. Fourth Report (1865), 61, p. xiii.) It is the same in glass-works.

[621 A steel manufacturer who employs children in night-labour remarked: "It seems but natural that boys who
work at night cannot sleep and get proper rest by day, but will be running about.' (1. c, Fourth Report, 63, p. xiii.)
On the importance of sunlight for the maintenance and growth of the body, a physician writes: "Light also acts upon
the tissues of the body directly in hardening them and supporting their elasticity. Tne muscles of animals, when
they are deprived of a proper amount of light, become sofl and inelastic, the nenous power loses its tone from
defective stimulation, and the daboration of all growth seems to be perverted.... In the case of children, constant
access to plenty of light during the day, and to the direct rays of the sun for a part of it, is most essential to health.
Light assists in the elaboration of good plastic blood, and hardens the fibre after it has been laid down. It also acts
as a stimulus upon the organs of sips, and by this means brings about more activity in the various cerebral
functions." Dr. W. Strange, Senior Physician of the Worcester General Hospital, from whose work on "Health"
(1864) this passage is taken, writes in a letter to Mr. White, one of the commissioners: "I have had opportunities
formerly, when in Lancashire, of observing the effects of nightwork upon children, and I have no hesitation in
saying, contrary to what some employers were fond of asserting, those children who were subjected to it soon
suffered in their health." (1. c, 284., p. 55.) That such a question should furnish the material of serious controversy,
shows plainly how capitalist production acts on the brain-functions of capitalists and their retainers.

[631 1- c, 57, p. xii.

[641 1- c. Fourth Report (1865). 58. p. xii.

T651 1. c.

[661 1. c, p. xiii. The degree of culture of these "labour-powers" must naturally be such as appears in the following
dialogues with one of the commissioners: Jeremiah Haynes, age 12 — "Four times four is 8; 4 fours are 16. A king
is him that has all the money and gold. We have aj king (told it is a Queen), they call her the Princess Alexandra.
Told that she married the Queen's son. The Queen's son is the Princess Alexandra. A Princess is a man " William
Turner, age 12 — "Don't live in England. Think it is a country, but didn't know before." John Morris, age 14 —
"Have heard say that God made the world, and that all the people was drowndedbut one, heard say that one was a
little bird." William Smith age 15 — "God made man, man made woman." Edward Taylor, age 15 — "Do not

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (34 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

know of London." Henry Matthewman, age 17 — "Had been to chapel, but missed a good many times lately. One
name that they preached about was Jesus Christ, but I cannot say any others, and I cannot te~l anything about him.
He was not killed, but died like other people. He was not the same as other people in some ways, because he was
religious in some ways and others isn't." (1. c, p. xv.) "The devil is a good person. I don't know where he lives." '
Christ was a wicked man." "This girl spelt God as dog, and did not know the name of the queen." ("Ch.
Employment Comm. V. Report, 1866 " p. 55, n. 278.) The same system obtains in the glass and paper works as in
the metallurgical, already cited. In the paper factories, where the paper is made by machinery, nips-work is the rule
for all processes, except rag-sorting. In some cases night-work, by relays, is carried on incessantly throup the whole
week, usually from Sunday nipt until midnipt of the following Saturday. Those who are on day-work work 5 days
of 12, and I day of 18 hours; those on nips-work 5 nipts of 12, and I of 6 hours in each week. In other cases each set
works 24 hours consecutively on alternate days, one set working 6 hours on Monday, and 18 on Saturday to make
up the 24 hours. In other cases an intermediate system prevails, by which all employed on the paper- making
machinery work 15 or 16 hours every day in the week. This system, says Commissioner Lord, "seems to combine
all the evils of both the 12 hours' and the 24 hours' relays." Children under 13, young persons under 18, and women,
work under this nipt system. Sometimes under the 12 hours' system they are obliged, on account of the
non-appearance of those that oupt to relieve them, to work a double turn of 24 hours. The evidence proves that boys
and girls very often work overtime, which, not unfrequently, extends to 24 or even 36 hours of uninterrupted toil. In
the continuous and unvarying process of glazing are found girls of 12 who work the whole month 14 hours a day,
"without any regular relief or cessation beyond 2 or, at most, 3 breaks of half an hour each for meals." In some
mills, where regular nips- work has been entirely given up, over- work goes on to a terrible extent, "and that often in
the dirtiest, and in the hottest, and in the most monotonous of the various processes." ("Ch. Employment Comm.
Report IV., 1865," p. xxxviii, and xxxix.)

[671 Fourth Report, &c. 1865, 79, p. xvi.

I6811.C, 80. p. xvi.

[69J1-C, 82. p. xvii.

[701 In our reflecting and reasoning age a man is not worth much who cannot give a good reason for everything, no
matter how bad or how crazy. Everything in the world that has been done wrong has been done wrong for the very
best of reasons. (Hegel, 1. c, p. 249 )

[711 1. c, 85, p. xvii. To similar tender scruples of the glass manufacturers that regular meal-times for the children
are impossible because as a consequence a certain quantity of heat, radiated by the furnaces, would be "a pure loss"
or "wasted," Commissioner White makes answer. His answer.is unlike that of Ure, Senior, &c, and their puny
German plagiarists. a la Roscher who are touched by the "abstinence," "self-denial," "saving," of the capitalists in
the expenditure of their gold, and by their Timur-Tamerlanish prodigality of human life! "A certain amount of heat
beyond what is usual at present might also be going to waste, if meal-times were secured in these cases, but it seems
likely not equal in money-value to the waste of animal power now going on in glass-houses throughout the
kingdom from growing boys not having enough quiet time to eat their meals at ease, with a little rest afterwards for
digestion." (1. c, p. xiv.) And this in the year of progress 1865! Without considering the expenditure of strength in
lifting and carrying, such a child, in the sheds where bottle and flint glass are made, walks during the performance
of his work 15-20 miles in every 6 hours! And the work often lasts 14 or 15 hours! In many of these glass works, as
in the Moscow spinning mills, the system of 6 hours' relays is in force. "During the working part of the week six
hours is the utmost unbroken period ever attained at any one time for rest, and out of this has to come the time spent
in coming and going to and from work, washing, dressing, and meals, leaving a very short period indeed for rest,
and none for fresh air and play, unless at the expense of the sleep necessary for young boys, especially at such hot
and fatiguing work.... Even the short sleep is obviously liable to be broken by a boy having to wake himself if it is
night, or by the noise, if it is day." Mr. White gives cases where a boy worked 36 consecutive hours; others
where,boys of 12 drudged on until 2 in the morning, and then slept in the works till 5 a.m. (3 hours!) only to resume



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (35 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

their work. "The amount of work," say Tremenheere and Tufnell, who drafted the general report, "done by boys,
youths, girls, and women, in the course of their daily or nightly spell of labour, is certainly extraordinary." (1. c,
xliii. and xliv.) Meanwhile, late by night, self-denying Mr. Glass-Capital, primed with port-wine, reels out of his
club homeward droning out idiotically. "Britons never, never shall be slaves!"

[721 In England even now occasionally in rural districts a labourer is condemned to imprisonment for desecrating
the Sabbath, by working in his front garden. The same labourer is punished for breach of contract if he remains
away from his metal, paper, or glass works on the Sunday, even if it be from a religious whim. The orthodox
Parliament will hear nothing of Sabbath-breaking if it occurs in the process of expanding capital. A memorial
(August 1863), in which the London day-labourers in fish and poultry shops asked for the abolition of Sunday
labour, states that their work lasts for the first 6 days of the week on an average 15 hours a-day, and on Sunday 8-10
hours. From this same memorial we learn also that the delicate gourmands among the aristocratic hypocrita of
Exeter Hall, especially encourage this "Sunday labour." These "holy ones," so zealous in cute curanda, show their
Christianity by the humility with which they bear the overwork, the privations, and the hunger of others.
Obsequium ventris istis (the labourers) perniciosius est.

[731 "We have given in our previous reports the statements of several experienced manufacturers to the effect that
over-hours ... certainly tend prematurely to exhaust the workine oower of the men." (1. c, 64. p. xiii.)

[741Cairnes, "The Slave Power," pp. 110. 111.

J75J John Ward: "The Borough of Stoke-upon-Trent," London, 1843, p. 42.

[761 Ferrand's Speech in the House of Commons, 27th April, 1863.

[771 Those were the very words used by the cotton manufacturers." 1. c.

[781 1- c. Mr. Villiers, despite the best of intentions on his part, was "legally" obliged to refuse the requests of the
manufacturers. These gentlemen, however, attained their end through the obliging nature of the local poor law
boards. Mr. A. Redgrave, Inspector of Factories, asserts that this time the system under which orphans and pauper
children were treated "legally" as apprentices "was not accompanied with the old abuses" (on these "abuses" see
Engels, 1. c), although in one case there certainly was "abuse of this system in respect to a number of girls and
young women brought from the agricultural districts of Scotland into Lancashire and Cheshire." Under this system
the manufacturer entered into a contract with the workhouse authorities for a certain period. He fed, clothed and
lodged the children, and gave them a small allowance of money. A remark of Mr. Redgrave to be quoted directly
seems strange, especially if we consider that even among the years of prosperity of the English cotton trade, the
year 1860 stands unparalleled, and that, besides, wages were exceptionally high. For this extraordinary demand for
work had to contend with the depopulation of Ireland, with unexampled emigration from the English and Scotch
agricultural districts to Australia and America, with an actual diminution of the population in some of the English
agricultural districts, in cons'equence partly of an actual breakdown of the vital force of the labourers, partly of the
already effected dispersion of the disposable population through the dealers in human flesh. Despite all this Mr.
Redgrave says: "This kind of labour, however, would only be sought after when none other could be procured, for it
is a high-priced labour. The ordinary wages of a boy of 13 would be about 4s. per week, but to lodge, to clothe, to
feed, and to provide medical attendance and proper superintendence for 50 or 100 of these boys, and to set aside
some remuneration for them, could not be accomplished for 4s. a- head per week." (Report of the Inspector of
Factories for 30th April, 1860, p. 27.) Mr. Redgrave forgets to tell us how the labourer himself can do all this for his
children out of their 4s. a-week wages, when the manufacturer cannot do it for the 50 or 100 children lodged,
boarded, superintended all together. To guard against false conclusions from the text, I ought here to remark that the
English cotton industry, since it was placed under the Factory Act of 1850 with its regulations of labour- time, &c,
must be regarded as the model industry of England. The English cotton operative is in every respect better off than
his Continental companion in misery. "The Prussian factory operative labours at least ten hours per week more than
his English competitor, and if employed at his own loom in his bwn house, his labour is not restricted to even those

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (36 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

additional hours. ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1855, p. 103.) Redgrave, the Factory Inspector mentioned
above, after the Industrial Exhibition in 1851, travelled on the Continent, especially in France and Germany, for the
purpose of inquiring into the conditions of the factories. Of the Prussian operative he says: "He receives a
remuneration sufficient to procure the simple fare, and to supply the slender comforts to which he has been
accustomed ... he lives upon his coarse fare, and works hard, wherein his position is subordinate to that of the
English operative." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact." 31st Oct., 1855, p. 85.)

[791 The over-worked "die off with strange rapidity; but the places of those who perish are instantly filled, and a
frequent change of persons makes no alteration in the scene." ("England and America." London, 1833, vol. I, p. 55.
By E. G. Wakefield.)

[801 See "Public Health. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council, 1863." Published in London
1864. This report deals especially with the agricultural labourers. "Sutherland ... is commonly represented as a
highly improved county ... but ... recent inquiry has discovered that even there, in districts once famous for fine men
and gallant soldiers, the inhabitants have degenerated into a meagre and stunted race. In the healthiest situations, on
hill sides fronting the sea, the faces of their famished children are as pale as they could be in the foul atmosphere of
a London alley." (W. Th. Thornton. "Overpopulation and its Remedy." 1. c, pp. 74, 75.) They resemble in fact the
30,000 "gallant Highlanders" whom Glasgow pigs together in its wynds and closes, with prostitutes and thieves.

[811 "But though the health of a population is so important a fact of the national capital, we are afraid it must be
said that the class of employers of labour have not been the most forward to guard and cherish this treasure.... The
consideration of the health of the operatives was forced upon the mill-owners." (Times, November 5th, 1861.) "The
men of the West Riding became the clothiers of mankind ... the health of the workpeople was sacnficed, and the
lace in a few generations must have degenerated. But a reaction set in. Lord Shaftesbury's Bill limited the hours of
children's labour," &c. ("Report of the Registrar-General," for October 1861.)

[821 We, therefore, find, e.g., that in the beginning of 1863, 26 firms owning extensive potteries in Staffordshire,
amongst others, Josiah Wedgwood, & Sons, petition in a memorial for "some legislative enactment." Competition
with other capitalists permits them no voluntary timitation of working-ti me for children, &c. "Much as we deplore
the evils before mentioned, it would not be possible to prevent them by any scheme of agreement between the
manufacturers.-.. Taking all these points into consideration, we have come to the conviction that some legislative
enactment is wanted." ("Children's Employment Comm." Rep. I, 1863, p. 322.) Most recently a much more striking
example offers. The rise in the price of cotton during a period of feverish activity, had induced the manufacturers in
Blackburn to shorten, by mutual consent, the working-time in their mills during a certain fixed period. This period
terminated about the end of November, 1871. Meanwhile, the wealthier manufacturers, who combined spinning
with weaving, used the diminution of production resulting from this agreement, to extend their own business and
thus to make great profits at the expense of the small employers. The latter thereupon turned in their extremity to
the operatives, urged them earnestly to agitate for the 9 hours' system, and promised contributions in money to this
end.

[831 The labour Statutes, the like of which were enacted at the same time in France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere,
were first formally repealed in England in 1813, long after the changes in n~ethods of production had rendered
them obsolete.

[841 "No child under 12 years of age shall be employed in any manufacturing establishment more than 10 hours in
one day." General Statutes of Massachusetts, 63, ch. 12. (The various Statutes were passed between 1836 and
1858.) "Labour performed during a period of 10 hours on any day in all cotton, woollen, silk, paper, glass, and flax
factories, or in manufactories of iron and brass, shall be considered a legal day's labour. And be it enacted, that
hereafter no minor engaged in any factory shall be holden or required to work more than 10 hours in any day, or 60
hours in any week; and that hereafter no minor shall be admitted as a worker under the age of 10 years in any
factory within this State." State of New Jersey. An Act to limit the hours of labour, ULc, § I and 2. (Law of 18th
March, 1851.) "No minor who has attained the age of 12 years, and is under the age of 15 years, shall be employed

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (37 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

in any manufacturing atablishment more than 1 1 hours in any one day, nor before 5 o'clock in the morning, nor
after 7.30 in the evening." ("Revised Statutes of the State of Rhode Island," &c, ch. 139, § 23, 1st July, 1857.)

[851 "Sophisms of Free Trade." 7th Ed. London, 1850, p. 205, 9th Ed., p. 253. This same Tory, moreover, admits
that "Acts of Parliament regulating wages, but against the labourer and in favour of the master, lasted for the long
period of 464 years. Population grew. These laws were then found, and really became, unnecessary and
burdensome." (1. c, p. 206.)

[861 In reference to this statute, J. Wade with truth remarks: "From the statement above (i.e., with regard to the
statute) it appears that in 1496 the diet was considered equivalent to one-third of the income of an artificer and
one-half the income of a labourer, which indicates a greater degree of independence among the working-classes
than prevails at present; for the board, both of labourers and artificers, would now be reckoned at a much higher
proportion of their wages." (J. Wade, "History of the Middle and Working Classes, ' pp. 24, 25, and 577.) The
opinion that this difference is due to the difference in the pricerelations between food and clothing then and now is
refuted by the most cursory glance at "Chronicon Preciosum, Ice." By Bishop Fleetwood. 1st Ed., London, 1707;
2nd Ed., London, 1 745.

[871 W. Petty. ""Political Anatomy of Ireland, Verbum Sapienti," 1672, Ed. 1691, p. 10.

[881 "A Discourse on the necessity of encouraging Mechanick Industry," London, 1690, p. 13. Macaulay, who has
falsified English history in the interests of the Whigs and the bourgeoisie, declares as follows: "The practice of
setting children prematurely to work ... prevailed in the 17th century to an extent which, when compared with the
extent of the manufacturing system, seems almost incredible. At Norwich, the chief seat of the clothing trade, a
little creature of six years old was thought fit for labour. Several writers of that time, and among them some who
were considered as eminently benevokot, mention with exultation the fact that in that single city, boys and girls of
very tender age create wealth exceeding what was necessary for their own subsistence by twelve thousand pounds a
year. The more carefully we examine the history of the past, the more reason shall we find to dissent from those
who imagine that our age has been fruitful of new social evils.... That which is new is the intelligence and the
humanity which remedies them." ("History of England," vol. 1., p. 417.) Macaulay might have reported further that
"extremely welldisposed" amfs du commerce in the 17th century, narrate with "exultation" how in a poorhouse in
Holland a child of four was employed, and that this example of "vertu m~se en praflque" passes muster in all the
humanitarian works, d la Macaulay, to the time of Adam Smith. It is true that with the substitution of manufacture
for handicrafts, traces of the exploitation of children begin to appear. This exploitation existed always to a certain
extent among peasants, and was the more dkvdoped, the heavier the yoke pressing on the husbandman. The
tendency of capital is there unmistakably; but the facts themselves are still as isolated as the phenomena of
two-headed children. Hence they were noted "with exultation" as especially worthy of remark and as wonders by
the far-seeing "amds du commerce, " and recommended as modds for their own time and for posterity. This same
Scotch sycophant and fine talker, Macaulay, says: "We hear to-day only of retrogression and see only progress."
What eyes, and especially what ears !

[891 Among the accusers of the workpeopk, the most angry is the anonymous author quoted in the text of "An
Essay on Trade and Commerce, containing Observations on Taxes, &c," London, 1770. He had already dealt with
this subject in his earlier work: "Considerations on Taxes." London, 1765. Gn the same side follows Polonius
Arthur Young, the unutterable statistical prattler. Among the defenders of the working-classes the foremost are:
Jacob Vanderlint, in: "Money Answers all Things." London, 1734 the Rev. Nathaniel Forster, D. D., in "An Enquiry
into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions,,' London, 1767; Dr. Price, and especially Postlethwayt, as
well in the supplement to his ""Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce," as in his "Great Bntain's
Commercial Interest explained and improved." 2nd Edition, 1755. The facts themselves are confirmed by many
other writers of the time, among others by Josiah Tucker

[901 Postlethwayt, 1. c, "First Preliminary Discourse," p. 14.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (38 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

[911 "An Essay," &c. He himself relates on p. 96 wherein the "happiness" of the English agricultural labourer
already in 1770 consisted. "Their powers are always upon the stretch, they cannot live cheaper than they do, nor
work harder."

[921 Protestantism, by changing almost all the traditional holidays into workdays, plays an important pan in the
genesis of capital.

[931 "An Essay," 4c, pp. 15, 41, 96, 97, 55, 57, 69. — Jacob Vanderlint, as early as 1734, declared that the secret of
the out-cry of the capitalists as to the laziness of the working people was simply that they claimed for the same
wages 6 days' labour instead of 4.

£9411. c, p. 242.

[951 1. c. "The French," he says, "laugh at our enthusiastic ideas of liberty." 1. c, p. 78.

[961 "They especially objected to work beyond the 12 hours per day, because the law which fixed those hours, is the
only good which remains to them of the legislation of the Republic." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact.", 31 st October, 1856,
p. 80.) The French Twelve Hours' Bill of September 5th, 1850, a bourgeois edition of the decree of the Provisional
Government of March 2nd, 1848, holds in all workshops without exceptions. Before this law the working-day in
France was without definite limit. It lasted in the factories 14, 15, or more hours. See &'Des classes ouvrieres en
France, pendant l'annee 1848. Par M. Blanqui." M. Blanqui the economist, not the Revolutionist, had been entrusted
by the Government with an inquiry into the condition of the working-class.

[971 Belgium is the model bourgeois state in regard to the regulation of the working-day. Lord Howard of Welden,
English Plenipotentiary at Brussels, reports to the Foreign Office May 12th, 1862: "M. Rogier, the minister,
informed me that children's labour is limited neither by a general law nor by any local regulations; that the
Government, during the last three years, intended in every session to propose a bill on the subject, but always found
an insuperable obstacle in the jealous opposition to any legislation in contradiction with the principle of perfect
freedom of labour."

[981 It is certainly much to be regretted that any class of persons should toil 12 hours a day, which, including the
time for their meals and for going to and returning from their work, amounts, in fact, to 14 of the 24 hours....
Without entering into the question of health, no one will hesitate, I think, to admit that, in a moral point of view, so
entire an absorption of the time of the working-classes, without intermission, from the early age of 13, and in trades
not subject to restriction, much younger, must be extremely prejudicial, and is an evil greatly to be deplored.... For
the sake, therefore, of public morals, of bringing up an orderly population, and of giving the great body of the
people a reasonable enjoyment of life, it is much to be desired that in all trades some portion of every working-day
should be reserved for rest and leisure." (Leonard Homer in vv Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Dec, 1841.")

[991 See "Judgment of Mr. J. H. Otway, Belfast. Hilary Sessions, County Antrim, 1860."

[1001 It is very characteristic of the regime of Louis Philippe, the bourgeois king, that the one Factory Act passed
during his reign, that of March 22nd, 1841, was never put in force. And this law only dealt with child-labour. It
fixed 8 hours a day for children between 8 and 12, 12 hours for children between 12 and 16, &c, with many
exceptions which allow night- work even for children 8 years old. The supervision and enforcement of this law are,
in a country where every mouse is under police administration, left to the good-will of the amis du commerce. Only
since 1853, in one single department — the Departement du Nord — has a paid government inspector been
appointed. Not less characteristic of the development of French society, generally, is the fact, that Louis Philippe~s
law stood solitary among the all-embracing mass of French laws, till the Revolution of 1848.

riOll Report of Insn. of Fact." 30th April, 1860, p. 50.

ri021 "Rept. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1849, p. 6.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (39 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

[103] "Rept. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1848, p. 98.

[1041 Leonard Homer uses the expression "nefarious practices" in his official reports. ("Report of Insp. of Fact.,"
31st October, 1859, p. 7.)

ri051 "Rept.," &c, 30th Sept., 1844, p. 15.

[1061 The Act allows children to be employed for 10 hours if they do not work day after day, but only on alternate
days. In the main, this clause remained inoperative.

[1071 "As a reduction in their hours of work would cause a larger number (of children) to be employed, it was
thought that the additional supply of children from 8 to 9 years oi age would meet the increased demand" (1. c, p.
13).

ri081 "Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1848, p. 16.

[1091 "I found that men who had been getting 10s. a week, had had Is. taken off for a reduction in the rate of 10 per
cent, and Is. 6d. off the remaining 9s. for the reduction in time, together 2s. 6d.. and notwithstanding this, many of
them said they would rather work 10 hours." 1. c.

[1101 "Though I signed it [the petition!, I said at the time I was putting my hand to a wrong thing.' 'Then why did
you put your hand to it?' 'Because I should have been turned off if I had refused.' Whence it would appear that this
petitioner felt himself 'oppressed,' but not exactly by the Factory Act." 1. c, p. 102.

[1111 P- 17, 1. c. In Mr. Homer's district 10,270 adult male labourers were thus examined in 181 factories. Their
evidence is to be found in the appendix to the Factory Reports for the half-year ending October 1848. These
examinations furnish valuable material in other connexions also.

[1121 1- c. See the evidence collected by Leonard Homer himself, Nos. 69, 70, 71, 72, 92, 93, and that collected by
Sub-Inspector A., Nos. 51, 52, 58, 59, 62, 70, of the Appendix. One manufacturer, too, tells the plain truth. See No.
14, and No. 265, 1. c.

fl 131 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, pp. 133, 134.

ri!41 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1848, p. 47.

ri!51 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 130.

[1161 Reports, &c, 1. c, p. 142.

fl 171 Reports &c, for 31st October, 1850, pp. 5, 6.

[1181 The nature of capital remains the same in its developed as in its undeveloped form. In the code which the
influence of the slave-owners, shortly before the outbreak of the American Civil War, imposed on the territory of
New Mexico, it is said that the labourer, in as much as the capitalist has bought his labour-power, "is his (the
capitalist's) money." The same view was current among the Roman patricians. The money they had advanced to the
plebeian debtor had been transformed via the means of subsistence into the flesh and blood of the debtor. This
"flesh and blood" were, therefore, "their money." Hence, the Shylock-law of the Ten Tables. Linguet's hypothesis
that the patrician creditors from time to time prepared, beyond the Tiber, bunquets of debtors' flesh, may remain as
undecided as that of Daumer on the Christian Euchanst.

ri!91 Reports, &c. for 30th April, 1848, p. 28.

[1201 Thus, among others, Philanthropist Ashworth to Leonard Homer, in a disgusting Quaker letter. (Reports, &c,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (40 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
April, 1849, p. 4.)

121] I.e., p. 140.



owner of a cotton- spinning or weaving mill, or the father, son, or brother of such owner, to act as Justice of the
Peace in any inquiries that concerned the Factory Act.

1241 1. c



Inspectors Howell and Saunders, in "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848." See also the petition to the Queen from
the clergy of Ashton and vicinity, in the spring of 1849, against the shift system."

1301 Cf. for example, v The Factory Question and the Ten Hours' gill.', By R. H. Greg, 1837.



1221 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, pp. 21, 22. Cf like examples ibid., pp. 4. 5.



1231 By I. and II. Will. IV., ch. 24, s. 10, known as Sir John Wobhouse's Factory Act, it was forbidden to any



1251 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. S.



1261 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1849, p. 6.



1271 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 21.



1281 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 95.



1291 See Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 6, and the detailed explanation of the "shifting system," by Factory



1311 F. Engels: 'The English Ten Hours' Bill." (In the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-oekonomische Revue."



Edited by K. Marx. April number, 1850, p. 13.) The same "high" Court of Justice discovered, during the American
Civil War, a verbal ambiguity which exactly reversed the meaning of the law against the arming of pirate ships.

1321 Rep., &c, for 30th April, 1850.



1331 In winter, from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. may be substituted.



1341 "The present law (of 1850) was a compromise whereby the employed surrendered the benefit of the Ten



Hours' Act for the advantage of one uniform period for the commencement and termination of the labour of those
whose labour is restricted." (Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1852, p. 14.)

1351 Repons, &c, for Sept., 1844, p. 13.



136J I.e.



137] I.e.



1381 "Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1846," p. 20.



1391 Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1861, p. 26.



1401 1- c.,p. 27. On the whole the working population, subject to the Factory Act, has greatly improved physically.



All medical testimony agrees on this point, and personal obsenation at different times has convinced me of it.
Nevertheless, and exclusive of the terrible death-rate of children in the first years of their life, the official reports of
Dr. Greenhow show the unfavourable health condition of the manufacturing districts as compared with "agricultural
districts of normal health." As evidence, take the following table from his 1861 report: —



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (41 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten



Pecentage of

Adult

Males

Engaged

in

Manufactures


14.9


42.6


37.3


41.9


31.0


14.9


36.6


30.4


—


Death-rate

from

Pulmonary

Affections

per 100,000

Males


598


708


547


611


691


588


721


726


305


Name of
District


Wigan


Blackburn


Halifax


Bradford


Maccles-
field


Leek


Stoke-
upon-Trent


Woolstanton


Eight
healthy
agricultural
districts


Death-rate

from

Pulmonary

Affections

per 100,000

Females


644


734


564


603


804


705


665


727


340


Pecentage of

Adult

Females

Engaged

in

Manufactures


18.0


34.9


20.4


30.0


26.0


17.2


19.3


13.9


—


Kind of
Female
Occupation


Cotton


Do.


Worsted


Do.


Silk


Do.


Earthenware


Do.


—



[1411 It is well known with what reluctance the English "Free-traders," gave up the protective duty on the silk
manufacture. Instead of the protection against French importation, the absence of protection to English factory
children now senes their turn.

[1421 During 1859 and 1860, the zenith years of the English cotton industry, some manufactured tried, by the
decoy bait of higher wages forover-time,to reconcile the adult male operatives to an extension of the working-day.
The hand-mule spinners and self-actor mincers put an end to the experiment by a petition to their employers in
which they say, "Plainly speaking, our lives are to us a burthen; and, while we are confined to the mills nearly two
days a week more than the other operatives of the country, we feel like helots in the land, and that we are
perpetuating a system injurious to ourselves and future generations.... This, therefore, is to give you most respectful
notice that when we commence work again after the Christmas and New Year's holidays, we shall work 60 hours
per week, and no more, or from six to six, with one hour and a half out." (Reports, &rc, for 30th April, 1860, p.
30.)

[1431 On the means that the wording of this Act afforded for its violation cf the Parliamentary Return "Factories
Regulation Act" (6th August, 1859), and in it Leonard Homer's "Suggestions for amending the Factory Acts to
enable the Inspectors to prevent illegal working, now becoming very prevalent."



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (42 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

[1441 "Children of the age of 8 years and upwards, have, indeed, been employed from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. during the
last half year in my district." (Reports, &c., for 31st October, 1857, p. 39.)

[1451 "The Printworks' Act is admitted to be a failure both with reference to its educational and protective
provisions." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, p. 52.)

[1461 Thus, e.g., E. Potter in a letter to the Times of March 24th, 1863. The Times reminded him of the
maoufacturers' revolt against the Ten Hours' Bill.

[1471 Thus, among others, Mr. W. Newmarch, collaborator and editor of Tooke's "History of Prices." Is it a
scientific advance to make cowardly concessions to public opinion?

[1481 The Act passed in 1860, determined that, in regard to dye and bleachworks, the working-day should be fixed
on August 1st, 1861, provisionally at 12 hours, and definitely on August 1st, 1862, at 10 hours, i.e., at 10 1/2 hours
for ordinary days, and 7 1/2 for Saturday. Now, when the fatal year, 1862, came, the old farce was repeated.
Besides, the manufacturers petitioned Parliament to allow the employment of young persons and women for 12
hours during one year longer. "In the existing condition of the trade (the time of the cotton famine), it was ueatly to
the advantage of the operatives to work 12 hours per day, and make wages when they could." A bill to this effect
had been brought in, "and it was mainly due to the action of the operative bleachers in Scotland that the bill was
abandoned." (Reports, &:c, for 31st October, 1862, pp. 14-15.) Thus defeated by -the very workpeople, in whose
name it pretended to speak Capital discovered, with the help of lawyer spectacles, that the Act of 1860, drawn up,
I;ke all the Acts of Parliament for the "protection of labour," in equivocal phrases, gave them a pretext to exclude
from its working the calenderers and finishers. English jurisprudence, ever the faithful servant of capital, sanctioned
in the COun of Common Pleas this piece of pettifogging. "The operatives have been greatly disappointed ... they
have comphined of over-work, and it is greatly to be regretted that the clear intention of the legislature should have
failed by reason of a faulty definition." (1. c, p. 18.)

[1491 The "open-air bleachers" had evaded the law of 1860, by means of the lie that no women worked at it in the
night. The lie was exposed by the Fwtory Inspectors, and at the same time Parliament was, by petitions ffom the
operatives, bereft of its notions as to the cool meadow-fragrance, in which bleaching in the open-air was reported to
take place. In this aerial bleaching, drying-rooms were used at temperatures of from 90° to 100° Fahrenheit, in
which the work was done for the most part by girls. "Cooling" is the technical expression for their occasional
escape from the drying-rooms into the fresh air. "Fifteen girls in stoves. Heat from 80° to 90° for linens, and 100°
and upwards for cambrics. Twelve girls ironing and doing-up in a small room about 10 feet square, in the centre of
which is a close stove. The girls stand round the stove, which throws out a terrific heat, and dries the cambrics
rapidly for the ironers. The hours of work for these hands are unlimited. If busy, they work till 9 or 12 at night for
successive nights." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, p. 56.) A medical man states: "No special hours are
allowed for cooling, but if the temperature gets too high, or the workers' hands get soiled from perspiration, they are
allowed to go out for a few minutes.... My experience, which is considerable, in treating the diseases of stove
workers, compels me to express the opinion that their sanitary condition is by no means so high as that of the
operatives in a spinning factory (and Capital, in its memorials to Parliament, had painted them as floridly healthy
after the manner of Rubens.) The diseases most observable amongst them are phthisis, bronchitis, irregularity of
uterine functions, hysteria in its most aggravated forms, and rheumatism. All of these, I believe, are either directly
or indirectly induced by the impure, overheated air of the apartments in which the hands are employed and the want
of sufficient comfortable clothing to protect them from the cold, damp atmosphere, in winter, when going to their
homes." (1. c, pp. 56-57.) The Factory Inspectors remarked on the supplementary law of 1860, torn from these
open-air bleachers: "The Act has not only failed to afford that protection to the workers which it appears to offer,
but contains a clause ... apparently so worded that, unless persons are detected working after 8 o'clock at night they
appear to come under no protective provisions at all, and if they do so work the mode of proof is so doubtful that a
conviction can scarcely follow." (1. c, p. 52.) "To all intents and purposes, therefore, as an Act for any benevolent
or educational purpose, it is a failure; since it can scarcely be called benevolent to permit, which is tantamount to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (43 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten

compelling, women and children to work 14 hours a day with or without meals, as the case may be, and perhaps for
longer hours than these, without limit as to age, without reference to sex, and without regard to the social habits of
the families of the neighbourhood, in which such works (bleaching and dyeing) are situated." (Reports, &c, for
30th April, 1863, p. 40.)

[1501 Note to the 2nd Ed. Since 1866, when I wrote the above passages, a reaction has again set in.

[1511 "The conduct of each of these classes (capitalists and workmen) has been the result of the relative situatico in
which they have been placed." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 113.)

[1521 "The employments, placed under restriction, were connected with the manufacture of textile fabrics by the aid
of steam or water-power There were two conditions to which an employment must be subject to cause it to be
inspected, viz., the use of steam or waterpower, and the manufacture of certain specified fibr=." (Reports, &c, f.or
31st October, 1864, p. 8.)

[1531 On the condition of so-called domestic industries, specially valuable materials are to be found in the latfft
reports of the Children's Employment Commission.

[1541 "The Acts of last Session (1864) ... embrace a diversity of occupations, the customs in which differ greatly,
and the use of mechanical power to give motion to machinery is no longer one of the elements necessary, as
formerly, to constitute, in legal phrase, a 'Factory.'" (Reports, &c, for 31st Octaber, 1864, p. 8.)

[1551 Belgium, the paradise of Continental Liberalism, shows no trace of this movement. Even in the coal and
metal mines labourers of both sexes, and all ages, are consumed, in perfect "freedom" at any period and through any
length of time. Of every 1,000 persons employed there, 733 are men, 88 women. 135 boys, and 44 girls under 16; in
the blast furnaces, &c, of every 1,000, 668 are men, 149 women, 98 boys, and 85 girls under 16. Add to this the
low wages for the enormous exploitafion of mature and immature labour-power. The average daily pay for a man is
2s. 8d.. for a woman, Is. 8d.. for a boy. Is. 2 1/2 d. As a result, Belgium had in 1863, as compared with 1850,
nearly doubled both the amount and the value of its exports of coal, iron, &c.

[1561 Robert Owen, soon after 1810, not only maintained the necessity of a limitation of the working-day in theory,
but actually introduced the 10 hours' day into his factory at New Lanark. This was laughed at as a communistic
Utopia; so were his "Combination of children s education with productive labour and the Co-operative Societies of
workingmen. first called into being by him. To-day. the first Utopia is a Factory Act, the second figures as an
official phrase in all Factory Acts, the third is already being used as a cloak for reactionary humbug.

[1571 Ure: "French translation, Philosophic des Manufactures." Paris, 1836, Vol. II, pp. 39, 40, 67, 77, &c.

[1581 In the Compte Rendu of the International Statistical Congress at Paris, 1855, it is stated: "The French law,
which limits the length of daily labour in factories and workshops to 12 hours, does not confine this work to definite
fixed hours. For children's labour only the work-time is prescabed as between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. Therefore, some of
the masters use the nght which this fatal silence gives them to keep their works going, without intermission, day in,
day out, possibly with the exception of Sunday. For this purpose they use two different sets of workers, of whom
neither is in the workshop more than 12 hours at a time, but the work of the establishment lasts day and night. The
law is satisfied, but is humanity?" Besides "the destructive influence or night-labour on the human organism," stress
is also laid upon "the fatal influence of the association of the two sexes by night in the same badly-lighted
workshops."

[1591 "For instance, there is within my district one occupier who, within the same curtilage, is at the same time a
bleacher and dyer under the Bleaching and Dyeing Works Act, a printer under the Print Works Act, and a finisher
under the Factory Act." (Repon of Mr. Baker, in Reports, lie, for October 31st, 1861, p. 20.) Afler enumerating the
different provisions of these Acts, and the complications arising from them, Mr. Baker says: "It will hence appear
that it must be very difficult to secure the execution of these three Acts of Parliament where the occupier chooses to

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (44 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Ten
evade the law." But what is assured to the lawyers by this is law-suits.

[1601 Thus the Factory Inspectors at last venture to say: "These objections (of capital to the legal limitation of the
working-day) must succumb before the broad principle of the rights of labour.... There is a time when the master's
right in his workman's labour ceases, and his time becomes his own, even if there were no exhaustion in the
question." (Reports, 8cc, for 31 st Oct., 1862, p. 54.)

[1611 "We, the workers of Dunkirk, declare that the length of time of labour required under the present system is
too great, and that, far from leaving the worker time for rest and educatioo, it plunges him into a coodition of
servitude but little better than slavery. That is why we decide that 8 hours are enough for a working-day, and ought
to be legally recognised as enough; why we call to our help that powerful lever, the press; ... and why we shall
consider all those that refuse us this help as enemies of the reform of labour and of the rights of the labourer."
(Resolution of the Working Men of Dunkirk, New York State, 1866.)

ri621 Reports, &c, for Oct., 1848, p. 112.

[1631 "The proceedings (the manoeuvres of capital, e.g., from 1848-50) have afforded, moreover, incontrovertible
proof of the fallacy of the assertion so often advanced, that operatives need no protection, but may be considered as
free agents in the disposal of the only property which they possess — the labour of their hands and the sweat of
their brows." (Reports, &c, for April 30th, 1850, p. 45.) "Free labour (if so it may be termed) even in a free
country, requires the strong arm of the law to protect it." (Reports, &c, f orOctober3 1 st, 1864, p. 34.) "To permit,
which is tantamount to compelling ... to work 14 hours a day with or without meals," &c. (Repts., &c, for April
30th, 1863, p. 40.)

[1641 Friedrich Engels, 1. c, p. 5.

[1651 The 10 Hours' Act has, in the branches of industry that come under it, "put an end to the premature
decrepitude of the former long-hour workers." (Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1859, p. 47.) "Capital (in factories) can
never be employed in keeping the machinery in motion beyond a limited time, without certain injury to the health
and morals of the labourers employed; and they are not in a position to protect themselves." 1. c, p. 8)

[1661 "A still greater boon is the distinction at last made clear between the worker's own time and his master's. The
worker knows now when that which he sells is ended, and when his own begins; and by possessing a sure
foreknowledge of this, is enabled to prearrange his own minutes for his own purposes." (1. c, p. 52.) "By making
them masters of their own time (the Factory Acts) have given them a moral energy which is directing them to the
eventual possession of political power" (1. c, p. 47). With suppressed irony, and in very well weighed words, the
Factory Inspectors hint that the actual law also frees the capitalist from some of the brutality natural to a man who is
a mere embodiment of capital, and that it has given him time for a little "culture." "Formerly the master had no time
for anything but money; the servant had no time for anything but labour" (1. c, p. 48).



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Eleven: Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm (45 of 45) [23/08/2000 16:16:44]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute

Surplus-Value



CHAPTER ELEVEN:

RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS VALUE



In this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, and therefore the part of the workingday necessary
for the reproduction or maintenance of that labour-power, are supposed to be given, constant magnitudes.

This premised, with the rate, the mass is at the same time given of the surplusvalue that the individual
labourer furnishes to the capitalist in a definite period of time. If, e.g., the necessary labour amounts to 6
hours daily, expressed in a quantum of gold = 3 shillings, then 3s. is the daily value of one labour-power
or the value of the capital advanced in the buying of one labour-power. If, further, the rate of
surplusvalue be = 100%, this variable capital of 3s. produces a mass of surplusvalue of 3s., or the
labourer supplies daily a mass of surpluslabour equal to 6 hours.

But the variable capital of a capitalist is the expression in money of the total value of all the
labour-powers that he employs simultaneously. Its value is, therefore, equal to the average value of one
labour-power, multiplied by the number of labour-powers employed. With a given value of
labour-power, therefore, the magnitude of the variable capital varies directly as the number of labourers
employed simultaneously. If the daily value of one labour-power = 3s., then a capital of 300s. must be
advanced in order to exploit daily 100 labour-powers, of n times 3s., in order to exploit daily n
labour-powers.

In the same way, if a variable capital of 3s., being the daily value of one labour-power, produce a daily
surplusvalue of 3s., a variable capital of 300s. will produce a daily surplusvalue of 300s., and one of n
times 3s. a daily surplusvalue of n x 3s. The mass of the surplusvalue produced is therefore equal to the
surplusvalue which the workingday of one labourer supplies multiplied by the number of labourers
employed. But as further the mass of surplusvalue which a single labourer produces, the value of
labour-power being given, is determined by the rate of the surplusvalue, this law follows: the mass of the
surplusvalue produced is equal to the amount of the variable capital advanced, multiplied by the rate of
surplusvalue, in other words: it is determined by the compound ratio between the number of
labour-powers exploited simultaneously by the same capitalist and the degree of exploitation of each
individual labour-power.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

Let the mass of the surplusvalue be S, the surplusvalue supplied by the individual labourer in the
average day s the variable capital daily advanced in the purchase of one individual labour-power v, the
sum total of the variable capital V, the value of an average labour-power P, its degree of exploitation



a' (surplus-labour)



a (necessary-labour)
and the number of labourers employed n; we have:



/ s

— x V

V



S =



a'
P x — x n .

\ a

It is always supposed, not only that the value of an average labour-power is constant, but that the
labourers employed by a capitalist are reduced to average labourers. There are exceptional cases in which
the surplusvalue produced does not increase in proportion to the number of labourers exploited, but then
the value of the labour-power does not remain constant.

In the production of a definite mass of surplusvalue, therefore the decrease of one factor may be
compensated by the increase of the other. If the variable capital diminishes, and at the same time the rate
of surplusvalue increases in the same ratio, the mass of surplusvalue produced remains unaltered. If on
our earlier assumption the capitalist must advance 300s., in order to exploit 100 labourers a day, and if
the rate of surplusvalue amounts to 50%, this variable capital of 300s. yields a surplusvalue of 150s. or of
100 x 3 workinghours. If the rate of surplusvalue doubles, or the workingday, instead of being extended
from 6 to 9, is extended from 6 to 12 hours and at the same time variable capital is lessened by half, and
reduced to 150s., it yields also a surplus-value of 150s. or 50 x 6 workinghours. Diminution of the
variable capital may therefore be compensated by a proportionate rise in the degree of exploitation of
labour-power, or the decrease in the number of the labourers employed by a proportionate extension of
the workingday. Within certain limits therefore the supply of labour exploitable by capital is independent
of the supply of labourers. £1} On the contrary, a fall in the rate of surplusvalue leaves unaltered the mass
of the surplus-value produced, if the amount of the variable capital, or number of the labourers
employed, increases in the same proportion.

Nevertheless, the compensation of a decrease in the number of labourers employed, or of the amount of
variable capital advanced by a rise in the rate of surplusvalue. or by the lengthening of the working-day,
has impassable limits. Whatever the value of labour-power may be, whether the workingtime necessary
for the maintenance of the labourer is 2 or 10 hours, the total value that a labourer can produce, day in,
day out, is always less than the value in which 24 hours of labour are embodied, less than 12s., if 12s. is
the money expression for 24 hours of realised labour. In our former assumption, according to which 6
workinghours are daily necessary in order to reproduce the labour-power itself or to replace the value of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

the capital advanced in its purchase, a variable capital of 1,500s., that employs 500 labourers at a rate of
surplusvalue of 100% with a 12 hours' workingday, produces daily a surplusvalue of 1,500s. or of 6 x
500 workinghours. A capital of 300s. that employs 100 labourers a day with a rate of surplusvalue of
200% or with a workingday of 18 hours, produces only a mass of surplusvalue of 600s. or 12 x 100
workinghours; and its total value-product, the equivalent of the variable capital advanced plus the
surplus-value, can, day in, day out, never reach the sum of 1,200s. or 24 x 100 workinghours. The
absolute limit of the average workingday — this being by nature always less than 24 hours — sets an
absolute limit to the compensation of a reduction of variable capital by a higher rate of surplusvalue, or
of the decrease of the number of labourers exploited by a higher degree of exploitation of labour-power.
This palpable law is of importance for the clearing up of many phenomena, arising from a tendency (to
be worked out later on) of capital to reduce as much as possible the number of labourers employed by it,
or its variable constituent transformed into labour-power, in contradiction to its other tendency to
produce the greatest possible mass of surplusvalue. On the other hand, if the mass of labour-power
employed, or the amount of variable capital, increases, but not in proportion to the fall in the rate of
surplusvalue, the mass of the surplusvalue produced, falls.

A third law results from the determination, of the mass of the surplus-value produced, by the two
factors: rate of surplusvalue and amount of variable capital advanced. The rate of surplusvalue, or the
degree of exploitation of labour-power, and the value of labour-power, or the amount of necessary
workingtime being given, it is selfevident that the greater the variable capital, the greater would be the
mass of the value produced and of the surplusvalue. If the limit of the working-day is given, and also the
limit of its necessary constituent, the mass of value and surplusvalue that an individual capitalist
produces, is clearly exclusively dependent on the mass of labour that he sets in motion. But this, under
the conditions supposed above, depends on the mass of labour-power, or the number of labourers whom
he exploits, and this number in its turn is determined by the amount of the variable capital advanced.
With a given rate of surplusvalue, and a given value of labour-power, therefore, the masses of
surplusvalue produced vary directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advanced. Now we know that
the capitalist divides his capital into two parts. One part he lays out in means of production. This is the
constant part of his capital. The other part he lays out in living labour-power. This part forms his variable
capital. On the basis of the same mode of social production, the division of capital into constant and
variable differs in different branches of production, and within the same branch of production, too, this
relation changes with changes in the technical conditions and in the social combinations of the processes
of production. But in whatever proportion a given capital breaks up into a constant and a variable part,
whether the latter is to the former as 1 :2 or 1 : 10 or 1 :x, the law just laid down is not affected by this. For,
according to our previous analysis, the value of the constant capital reappears in the value of the product,
but does not enter into the newly produced value, the newly created valueproduct. To employ 1 ,000
spinners, more raw material, spindles, &c, are, of course, required, than to employ 100. The value of
these additional means of production however may rise, fall, remain unaltered, be large or small; it has
no influence on the process of creation of surplusvalue by means of the labour-powers that put them in
motion. The law demonstrated above now, therefore, takes this form: the masses of value and of
surplusvalue produced by different capitals — the value of labour-power being given and its degree of
exploitation being equal — vary directly as the amounts of the variable constituents of these capitals, i.e.,
as their constituents transformed into living labour-power.

This law clearly contradicts all experience based on appearance. Everyone knows that a cotton spinner,
who, reckoning the percentage on the whole of his applied capital, employs much constant and little



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

variable capital, does not, on account of this, pocket less profit or surplusvalue than a baker, who
relatively sets in motion much variable and little constant capital. For the solution of this apparent
contradiction, many intermediate terms are as yet wanted, as from the standpoint of elementary algebra
many intermediate terms are wanted to understand that 0/0 may represent an actual magnitude. Classical
economy, although not formulating the law, holds instinctively to it, because it is a necessary
consequence of the general law of value. It tries to rescue the law from collision with contradictory
phenomena by a violent abstraction. It will be seen later £2£ how the school of Ricardo has come to grief
over this stumblingblock. Vulgar economy which, indeed, "has really learnt nothing," here as everywhere
sticks to appearances in opposition to the law which regulates and explains them. In opposition to
Spinoza, it believes that "ignorance is a sufficient reason."

The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a society, day in, day out, may be regarded as a
single collective workingday. If, e.g., the number of labourers is a million, and the average working-day
of a labourer is 10 hours, the social workingday consists of ten million hours. With a given length of this
workingday, whether its limits are fixed physically or socially, the mass of surplusvalue can only be
increased by increasing the number of labourers, i.e., of the labouring population. The growth of
population here forms the mathematical limit to the production of surplusvalue by the total social capital.
On the contrary, with a given amount of population, this limit is formed by the possible lengthening of
the workingday. £31 It will, however, be seen in the following chapter that this law only holds for the
form of surplusvalue dealt with up to the present.

From the treatment of the production of surplusvalue, so far, it follows that not every sum of money, or
of value, is at pleasure transformable into capital. To effect this transformation, in fact, a certain
minimum of money or of exchangevalue must be presupposed in the hands of the individual possessor of
money or commodities. The minimum of variable capital is the cost price of a single labour-power,
employed the whole year through, day in, day out, for the production of surplusvalue. If this labourer
were in possession of his own means of production, and were satisfied to live as a labourer, he need not
work beyond the time necessary for the reproduction of his means of subsistence, say 8 hours a day. He
would, besides, only require the means of production sufficient for 8 workinghours. The capitalist, on the
other hand, who makes him do, besides these 8 hours, say 4 hours' surplus-labour, requires an additional
sum of money for furnishing the additional means of production. On our supposition, however, he would
have to employ two labourers in order to live, on the surplusvalue appropriated daily, as well as, and no
better than a labourer, i.e., to be able to satisfy his necessary wants. In this case the mere maintenance of
life would be the end of his production, not the increase of wealth; but this latter is implied in capitalist
production. That he may live only twice as well as an ordinary labourer, and besides turn half of the
surplusvalue produced into capital, he would have to raise, with the number of labourers, the minimum
of the capital advanced 8 times. Of course he can, like his labourer, take to work himself, participate
directly in the process of production, but he is then only a hybrid between capitalist and labourer, a
"small master." A certain stage of capitalist production necessitates that the capitalist be able to devote
the whole of the time during which he functions as a capitalist, i.e., as personified capital, to the
appropriation and therefore control of the labour of others, and to the selling of the products of this
labour. £4J The guilds of the middle ages therefore tried to prevent by force the transformation of the
master of a trade into a capitalist, by limiting the number of labourers that could be employed by one
master within a very small maximum. The possessor of money or commodities actually turns into a
capitalist in such cases only where the minimum sum advanced for production greatly exceeds the
maximum of the middle ages. Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law discovered

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

by Hegel (in his "Logic"), that merely quantitative differences beyond a certain point pass into qualitative
changes. [5]

The minimum of the sum of value that the individual possessor of money or commodities must
command, in order to metamorphose himself into a capitalist, changes with the different stages of
development of capitalist production, and is at given stages different in different spheres of production,
according to their special and technical conditions. Certain spheres of production demand, even at the
very outset of capitalist production, a minimum of capital that is not as yet found in the hands of single
individuals. This gives rise partly to state subsidies to private persons, as in France in the time of
Clobber, and as in many German states up to our own epoch, partly to the formation of societies with
legal monopoly for the exploitation of certain branches of industry and commerce, the forerunners of our
modern jointstock companies. \6]

Within the process of production, as we have seen, capital acquired the command over labour, i.e., over
functioning labour-power or the labourer himself. Personified capital, the capitalist takes care that the
labourer does his work regularly and with the proper degree of intensity.

Capital further developed into a coercive relation, which compels the workingclass to do more work
than the narrow round of its own lifewants prescribes. As a producer of the activity of others, as a
pumper-out of surpluslabour and exploiter of labour-power, it surpasses in energy, disregard of bounds,
recklessness and efficiency, all earlier systems of production based on directly compulsory labour.

At first, capital subordinates labour on the basis of the technical conditions in which it historically finds
it. It does not, therefore, change immediately the mode of production. The production of surplusvalue —
in the form hitherto considered by us — by means of simple extension of the workingday, proved,
therefore, to be independent of any change in the mode of production itself. It was not less active in the
oldfashioned bakeries than in the modern cotton factories.

If we consider the process of production from the point of view of the simple labourprocess, the labourer
stands in relation to the means of production, not in their quality as capital, but as the mere means and
material of his own intelligent productive activity. In tanning, e.g., he deals with the skins as his simple
object of labour. It is not the capitalist whose skin he tans. But it is different as soon as we deal with the
process of production from the point of view of the process of creation of surplusvalue. The means of
production are at once changed into means for the absorption of the labour of others. It is now no longer
the labourer that employs the means of production, but the means of production that employ the labourer.
Instead of being consumed by him as material elements of his productive activity, they consume him as
the ferment necessary to their own lifeprocess, and the lifeprocess of capital consists only in its
movement as value constantly expanding, constantly multiplying itself. Furnaces and workshops that
stand idle by night, and absorb no living labour, are "a mere loss" to the capitalist. Hence, furnaces and
workshops constitute lawful claims upon the nightlabour of the work-people. The simple transformation
of money into the material factors of the process of production, into means of production, transforms the
latter into a title and a right to the labour and surpluslabour of others. An example will show, in
conclusion, how this sophistication, peculiar to and characteristic of capitalist production, this complete
inversion of the relation between dead and living labour, between value and the force that creates value,
mirrors itself in the consciousness of capitalists. During the revolt of the English factory lords between
1848 and 1850, "the head of one of the oldest and most respectable houses in the West of Scotland,
Messrs. Carlile Sons & Co., of the linen and cotton thread factory at Paisley, a company which has now



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

existed for about a century, which was in operation in 1752, and four generations of the same family
have conducted it" ... this "very intelligent gentleman" then wrote a letter [71 in the Glasgow Daily Mail
of April 25th, 1849, with the title, "The relay system," in which among other things the following
grotesquely naive passage occurs: "Let us now ... see what evils will attend the limiting to 10 hours the
working of the factory.... They amount to the most serious damage to the millowner's prospects and
property. If he (i.e., his "hands") worked 12 hours before,and is limited to 10, then every 12 machines or
spindles in his establishment shrink to 10, and should the works be disposed of, they will be valued only
as 10, so that a sixth part would thus be deducted from the value of every factory in the country." [81

To this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, inheriting the accumulated capitalistic qualities of "four
generations." the value of the means of production, spindles, &c, is so inseparably mixed up with their
property, as capital, to expand their own value, and to swallow up daily a definite quantity of the unpaid
labour of others, that the head of the firm of Carlile & Co. actually imagines that if he sells his factory,
not only will the value of the spindles be paid to him, but, in addition, their power of annexing
surplusvalue, not only the labour which is embodied in them, and is necessary to the production of
spindles of this kind, but also the surpluslabour which they help to pump out daily from the brave Scots
of Paisley, and for that very reason he thinks that with the shortening of the workingday by 2 hours, the
sellingprice of 12 spinning machines dwindles to that of 10!



Footnotes

T 1 1 This elementary law appears to be unknown to the vulgar economists, who, upside-down
Archimedes, in the determination of the market-price of labour by supply and demand, imagine they
have found the fulcrum by means of which, not to move the world, but to stop its motion.

\2] Further particulars will be given in Book IV.

[31 "The Labour, that is the economic time, of society, is a given portion, say ten hours a day of a million
of people, or ten million hours.... Capital has its boundary of increase. This boundary may, at any given
period, be attained in the actual extent of economic time employed." ("An Essay on the Political
Economy of Nations." London, 1821, pp. 47, 49.)

[4J "The farmer cannot rely on his own labour, and if he does, I will maintain that he is a loser by it. His
employment should be a general attention to the whole: his thresher must be watched, or he will soon
lose his wages in corn not threshed out, his mowers reapers, &c, must be looked after; he must
constantly go round his fences; he must see there is no neglect; which would be the case if he was
confined to any one spot." ( ,v An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and
the Size of Farms, &c. By a Farmer." London, 1773, p. 12.) This book is very interesting. In it the
genesis of the "capitalist farmer" or "merchant farmer," as he is explicitly called, may be studied, and his
selfglorification at the expense of the small farmer who has only to do with bare subsistence, be noted.
"The class of capitalists are from the first partially, and they become ultimately completely, discharged
from the necessity of the manual labour." ("Textbook of Lectures on the Political Economy of Nations.
By the Rev. Richard Jones." Hertford 1852. Lecture III., p. 39.)

[51 The molecular theory of modern chemistry first scientifically worked out by Laurent and Gerhardt

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eleven

rests on no other law. (Addition to 3rd Edition.) For the explanation of this statement, which is not very
clear to nonchemists, we remark that the author speaks here of the homologous series of carbon
compounds, first so named by C. Gerhardt in 1843, each series of which has its own general algebraic
formula. Thus the series of paraffins: CnH2n+2, that of the normal alcohols: CnH2n+20; of the normal
fatty acids: CnH2n02 and many others. In the above examples, by the simply quantitative addition of
CH2 to the molecular formula, a qualitatively different body is each time formed. On the share
(overestimated by Marx) of Laurent and Gerhardt in the determination of this important fact see Kopp,
"Entwicklung der Chemie." Munchen, 1873, pp. 709, 716, and Schorkmmer, 'The Rise and Development
of Organic Chemistry." London, 1879, p. 54. — F. E.

[61 Martin Luther calls these kinds of institutions: "The Company Monopolia."

[71 Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 30th, 1849, p. 59.

[81 1. c, p. 60. Factory Inspector Stuart, himself a Scotchman, and in contrast to the English Factory
Inspectors, quite taken captive by the capitalistic method of thinking, remarks expressly on this letter
which he incorporates in his report that it is "the most useful of the communications which any of the
factoryowners working with relays have given to those engaged in the same trade, and which is the most
calculated to remove the prejudices of such of them as have scruples respecting any change of the
arrangement of the hours of work."



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Twelve: The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch11.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part IV:

Production of Relative Surplus Value



CHAPTER TWELVE:

THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE



That portion of the working-day which merely produces an equivalent for the value paid by the capitalist
for his labour-power, has, up to this point, been treated by us as a constant magnitude, and such in fact it
is, under given conditions of production and at a given stage in the economic development of society.
Beyond this, his necessary labour-time, the labourer, we saw, could continue to work for 2, 3, 4, 6, &c,
hours. The rate of surplus-value and the length of the working-day depended on the magnitude of this
prolongation. Though the necessary labour-time was constant, we saw, on the other hand, that the total
working-day was variable. Now suppose we have a working-day whose length, and whose
apportionment between necessary labour and surplus-labour, are given. Let the whole line a c, abc
represent, for example, a working-day of 12 hours; the portion of a b 10 hours of necessary labour, and
the portion b c 2 hours of surplus-labour. How now can the production of surplus-value be increased, i.e.,
how can the surplus-labour be prolonged, without, or independently of, any prolongation of a c?

Although the length of a c is given, b c appears to be capable of prolongation, if not by extension beyond
its end c, which is also the end of the working-day a c, yet, at all events, by pushing back its
starting-point b in the direction of a. Assume that b'b in the line ab'bc is equal to half of b c or to one
hour's labour-time. If now, in a c, the working-day of 12 hours, we move the point b to b', b c becomes b'
c; the surplus-labour increases by one half, from 2 hours to 3 hours, although the working-day remains as
before at 12 hours. This extension of the surplus labour-time from b c to b' c, from 2 hours to 3 hours, is,
however, evidently impossible, without a simultaneous contraction of the necessary labour-time from a b
into a b', from 10 hours to 9 hours. The prolongation of the surplus-labour would correspond to a
shortening of the necessary labour; or a portion of the labour-time previously consumed, in reality, for
the labourer's own benefit, would be converted into labour-time for the benefit of the capitalist. There
would be an alteration, not in the length of the working-day, but in its division into necessary labour-time
and surplus labour- time.

On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of the surplus-labour is given, when the length of the
working-day, and the value of labour-power, are given. The value of labour-power, i.e., the labour-time
requisite to produce labour-power, determines the labour-time necessary for the reproduction of that
value. If one working-hour be embodied in sixpence, and the value of a day's labour-power be five



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

shillings, the labourer must work 10 hours a day, in order to replace the value paid by capital for his
labour-power, or to produce an equivalent for the value of his daily necessary means of subsistence.
Given the value of these means of subsistence, the value of his labour-power is given; £1} and given the
value of his labour-power, the duration of his necessary labour-time is given. The duration of the
surplus-labour, however, is arrived at, by subtracting the necessary labour-time from the total
working-day. Ten hours subtracted from twelve, leave two, and it is not easy to see, how, under the given
conditions, the surplus-labour can possibly be prolonged beyond two hours. No doubt, the capitalist can,
instead of five shillings, pay the labourer four shillings and sixpence or even less. For the reproduction of
this value of four shillings and sixpence, nine hours' labour-time would suffice; and consequently three
hours of surplus-labour, instead of two, would accrue to the capitalist, and the surplus-value would rise
from one shilling to eighteen-pence. This result, however, would be obtained only by lowering the wages
of the labourer below the value of his labour-power. With the four shillings and sixpence which he
produces in nine hours, he commands one-tenth less of the necessaries of life than before, and
consequently the proper reproduction of his labour-power is crippled. The surplus-labour would in this
case be prolonged only by an overstepping of its normal limits; its domain would be extended only by a
usurpation of part of the domain of necessary labour-time. Despite the important part which this method
plays in actual practice, we are excluded from considering it in this place, by our assumption, that all
commodities, including labour-power, are bought and sold at their full value. Granted this, it follows that
the labour-time necessary for the production of labour-power, or for the reproduction of its value, cannot
be lessened by a fall in the labourer's wages below the value of his labour-power, but only by a fall in this
value itself. Given the length of the working-day, the prolongation of the surplus-labour must of
necessity originate in the curtailment of the necessary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from the
former. In the example we have taken, it is necessary that the value of labour-power should actually fall
by one-tenth, in order that the necessary labour-time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.e., from ten hours
to nine, and in order that the surplus labour may consequently be prolonged from two hours to three.

Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, that the same necessaries of life which were
formerly produced in ten hours, can now be produced in nine hours. But this is impossible without an
increase in the productiveness of labour. For example, suppose a shoe-maker, with given tools, makes in
one working-day of twelve hours, one pair of boots. If he must make two pairs in the same time, the
productiveness of his labour must be doubled; and this cannot be done, except by an alteration in his
tools or in his mode of working, or in both. Hence, the conditions of production, i.e., his mode of
production, and the labour-process itself, must be revolutionised. By increase in the productiveness of
labour, we mean, generally, an alteration in the labour-process, of such a kind as to shorten the
labour-time socially necessary for the production of a commodity, and to endow a given quantity of
labour with the power of producing a greater quantity of use- value. [2] Hitherto in treating of
surplus-value, arising from a simple prolongation of the working-day, we have assumed the mode of
production to be given and invariable. But when surplus-value has to be produced by the conversion of
necessary labour into surplus-labour, it by no means suffices for capital to take over the labour-process in
the form under which it has been historically handed down, and then simply to prolong the duration of
that process. The technical and social conditions of the process, and consequently the very mode of
production must be revolutionised, before the productiveness of labour can be increased. By that means
alone can the value of labour-power be made to sink, and the portion of the working-day necessary for
the reproduction of that value, be shortened.

The surplus-value produced by prolongation of the working-day, I call absolute surplus-value. On the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

other hand, the surplus-value arising from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and from the
corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of the two components of the working-day, I call
relative surplus-value.

In order to effect a fall in the value of labour-power, the increase in the productiveness of labour must
seize upon those branches of industry whose products determine the value of labour-power, and
consequently either belong to the class of customary means of subsistence, or are capable of supplying
the place of those means. But the value of a commodity is determined, not only by the quantity of labour
which the labourer directly bestows upon that commodity, but also by the labour contained in the means
of production. For instance, the value of a pair of boots depends not only on the cobbler's labour, but also
on the value of the leather, wax, thread, &c. Hence, a fall in the value of labour-power is also brought
about by an increase in the productiveness of labour, and by a corresponding cheapening of commodities
in those industries which supply the instruments of labour and the raw material, that form the material
elements of the constant capital required for producing the necessaries of life. But an increase in the
productiveness of labour in those branches of industry which supply neither the necessaries of life, nor
the means of production for such necessaries, leaves the value of labour-power undisturbed.

The cheapened commodity, of course, causes only a pro tanto fall in the value of labour-power, a fall
proportional to the extent of that commodity's employment in the reproduction of labour-power. Shirts,
for instance, are a necessary means of subsistence, but are only one out of many. The totality of the
necessaries of life consists, however, of various commodities, each the product of a distinct industry; and
the value of each of those commodities enters as a component part into the value of labour-power. This
latter value decreases with the decrease of the labour-time necessary for its reproduction; the total
decrease being the sum of all the different curtailments of labour-time effected in those various and
distinct industries. This general result is treated, here, as if it were the immediate result directly aimed at
in each individual case. Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, by increasing the
productiveness of labour he by no means necessarily aims at reducing the value of labour-power and
shortening, pro tanto<300> the necessary labour-time. But it is only in so far as he ultimately contributes
to this result, that he assists in raising the general rate of surplus- value. [3J The general and necessary
tendencies of capital must be distinguished from their forms of manifestation.

It is not our intention to consider, here, the way in which the laws, immanent in capitalist production,
manifest themselves in the movements of individual masses of capital, where they assert themselves as
coercive laws of competition, and are brought home to the mind and consciousness of the individual
capitalist as the directing motives of his operations. But this much is clear; a scientific analysis of
competition is not possible, before we have a conception of the inner nature of capital, just as the
apparent motions of the heavenly bodies are not intelligible to any but him, who is acquainted with their
real motions, motions which are not directly perceptible by the senses. Nevertheless, for the better
comprehension of the production of relative surplus-value, we may add the following remarks, in which
we assume nothing more than the results we have already obtained.

If one hour's labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six shillings will be produced in a working-day
of 12 hours. Suppose, that with the prevailing productiveness of labour, 12 articles are produced in these
12 hours. Let the value of the means of production used up in each article be sixpence. Under these
circumstances, each article costs one shilling: sixpence for the value of the means of production, and
sixpence for the value newly added in working with those means. Now let some one capitalist contrive to
double the productiveness of labour, and to produce in the working-day of 12 hours, 24 instead of 12

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

such articles. The value of the means of production remaining the same, the value of each article will fall
to ninepence, made up of sixpence for the value of the means of production and threepence for the value
newly added by the labour. Despite the doubled productiveness of labour, the day's labour creates, as
before, a new value of six shillings and no more, which, however, is now spread over twice as many
articles. Of this value each article now has embodied in it l/24th, instead of l/12th, threepence instead of
sixpence; or, what amounts to the same thing, only half an hour's instead of a whole hour's labour-time, is
now added to the means of production while they are being transformed into each article. The individual
value of these articles is now below their social value; in other words, they have cost less labour-time
than the great bulk of the same article produced under the average social conditions. Each article costs,
on an average, one shilling, and represents 2 hours of social labour; but under the altered mode of
production it costs only ninepence, or contains only IV2 hours' labour. The real value of a commodity is,
however, not its individual value, but its social value; that is to say, the real value is not measured by the
labour-time that the article in each individual case costs the producer, but by the labour-time socially
required for its production. If therefore, the capitalist who applies the new method, sells his commodity
at its social value of one shilling, he sells it for threepence above its individual value, and thus realises an
extra surplus-value of threepence. On the other hand, the working-day of 12 hours is, as regards him,
now represented by 24 articles instead of 12. Hence, in order to get rid of the product of one
working-day, the demand must be double what it was, i.e., the market must become twice as extensive.
Other things being equal, his commodities can command a more extended market only by a diminution
of their prices. He will therefore sell them above their individual but under their social value, say at
tenpence each. By this means he still squeezes an extra surplus-value of one penny out of each. This
augmentation of surplus-value is pocketed by him, whether his commodities belong or not to the class of
necessary means of subsistence that participate in determining the general value of labour-power. Hence,
independently of this latter circumstance, there is a motive for each individual capitalist to cheapen his
commodities, by increasing the productiveness of labour.

Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of surplus-value arises from the curtailment of
the necessary labour-time, and from the corresponding prolongation of the surplus-labour. [4J Let the

necessary labour-time amount to 10 hours, the value of a day's labour-power to five shillings, the surplus
labour-time to 2 hours, and the daily surplus-value to one shilling. But the capitalist now produces 24
articles, which he sells at tenpence a-piece, making twenty shillings in all. Since the value of the means
of production is twelve shillings, 14 2/5 of these articles merely replace the constant capital advanced.
The labour of the 12 hours' working-day is represented by the remaining 9 3/5 articles. Since the price of
the labour-power is five shillings, 6 articles represent the necessary labour-time, and 3 3/5 articles the
surplus-labour. The ratio of the necessary labour to the surplus-labour, which under average social
conditions was 5: 1, is now only 5:3. The same result may be arrived at in the following way. The value
of the product of the working-day of 12 hours is twenty shillings. Of this sum, twelve shillings belong to
the value of the means of production, a value that merely re-appears. There remain eight shillings, which
are the expression in money, of the value newly created during the working-day. This sum is greater than
the sum in which average social labour of the same kind is expressed: twelve hours of the latter labour
are expressed by six shillings only. The exceptionally productive labour operates as intensified labour; it
creates in equal periods of time greater values than average social labour of the same kind. (See Ch. I.
Sect 2. p. 44.) But our capitalist still continues to pay as before only five shillings as the value of a day's
labour-power. Hence, instead of 10 hours, the labourer need now work only IV2 hours, in order to
reproduce this value. His surplus-labour is, therefore, increased by 2Vi hours, and the surplus-value he
produces grows from one, into three shillings. Hence, the capitalist who applies the improved method of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch12.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:16:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Twelve

production, appropriates to surplus-labour a greater portion of the working-day, than the other capitalists
in the same trade. He does individually, what the whole body of capitalists engaged in producing relative
surplus-value, do collectively. On the other hand, however, this extra surplus-value vanishes, so soon as
the new method of production has become general, and has consequently caused the difference between
the individual value of the cheapened commodity and its social value to vanish. The law of the
determination of value by labour-time, a law which brings under its sway the individual capitalist who
applies the new method of production, by compelling him to sell his goods under their social value, this
same law, acting as a coercive law of competition, forces his competitors to adopt the new method. [5\
The general rate of surplus-value is, therefore, ultimately affected by the whole process, only when the
increase in the productiveness of labour, has seized upon those branches of production that are connected
with, and has cheapened those commodities that form part of, the necessary means of subsistence, and
are therefore elements of the value of labour-power.

The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the productiveness of labour. And so, too, is the value of
labour-power, because it depends on the values of commodities. Relative surplus-value is, on the
contrary, directly proportional to that productiveness. It rises with rising and falls with falling
productiveness. The value of money being assumed to be constant, an average social working-day of 12
hours always produces the same new value, six shillings, no matter how this sum may be apportioned
between surplus-value and wages. But if, in consequence of increased productiveness, the value of the
necessaries of life fall, and the value of a day's labour-power be thereby reduced from five shillings to
three, the surplus-value increases from one shilling to three. Ten hours were necessary for the
reproduction of the value of the labour-power; now only six are required. Four hours have been set free,
and can be annexed to the domain of surplus-labour. Hence there is immanent in capital an inclination
and constant tendency, to heighten the productiveness of labour, in order to cheapen commodities, and by
such cheapening to cheapen the labourer himself. £61


They had come to the desolation that lay before Mordor: the lasting monument to the dark labour of its slaves that should endure when all their purposes were made void; a land defiled, diseased beyond all healing - unless the Great Sea should enter in and wash it with oblivion. `I feel sick,' said Sam. Frodo did not speak.

For a while they stood there, like men on the edge of a sleep where nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they can only come to morning through the shadows. The light broadened and hardened. The gasping pits and poisonous mounds grew hideously clear. The sun was up, walking among clouds and long flags of smoke, but even the sunlight was defiled. The hobbits had no welcome for that light; unfriendly it seemed, revealing them in their helplessness - little squeaking ghosts that wandered among the ash-heaps of the Dark Lord.

Too weary to go further they sought for some place where they could rest. For a while they sat without speaking under the shadow of a mound of slag; but foul fumes leaked out of it, catching their throats and choking them. Gollum was the first to get up. Spluttering and cursing he rose, and without a word or a glance at the hobbits he crawled away on all fours. Frodo and Sam crawled after him, until they came to a wide almost circular pit, high-banked upon the west. It was cold and dead, and a foul sump of oily many-coloured ooze lay at its bottom. In this evil hole they cowered, hoping in its shadow to escape the attention of the Eye.

The day passed slowly. A great thirst troubled them, but they drank only a few drops from their bottles-last filled in the gully, which now as they looked back in thought seemed to them a place of peace and beauty. The hobbits took it in turn to watch. At first, tired as they were, neither of them could sleep at all; but as the sun far away was climbing down into slow moving cloud, Sam dozed. It was Frodo's turn to be on guard. He lay back on the slope of the pit, but that did not ease the sense of burden that was on him. He looked up at the smoke-streaked sky and saw strange phantoms, dark riding shapes, and faces out of the past. He lost count of time, hovering between sleep and waking, until forgetfulness came over him.

Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that he heard his master calling. It was evening. Frodo could not have called, for he had fallen asleep, and had slid down nearly to the bottom of the pit. Gollum was by him. For a moment Sam thought that he was trying to rouse Frodo; then he saw that it was not so. Gollum was talking to himself. Sméagol was holding a debate with some other thought that used the same voice but made it squeak and hiss. A pale light and a green light alternated in his eyes as he spoke.

`Sméagol promised,' said the first thought.

`Yes, yes, my precious,' came the answer, 'we promised: to save our Precious, not to let Him have it - never. But it's going to Him yes, nearer every step. What's the hobbit going to do with it, we wonders, yes we wonders.'

`I don't know. I can't help it. Master's got it. Sméagol promised to help the master.'

`Yes, yes, to help the master: the master of the Precious. But if we was master, then we could help ourselfs, yes, and still keep promises.'

`But Sméagol said he would be very very good. Nice hobbit! He took cruel rope off Sméagol's leg. He speaks nicely to me.'

'Very very good, eh, my precious? Let's be good, good as fish, sweet one, but to ourselfs. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no, no.'

`But the Precious holds the promise,' the voice of Sméagol objected.

`Then take it,' said the other, `and let's hold it ourselfs! Then we shall be master, gollum! Make the other hobbit, the nasty suspicious hobbit, make him crawl, yes, gollum!'

`But not the nice hobbit? '

`Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my precious, yes, a Baggins. A Baggins stole it. He found it and he said nothing, nothing. We hates Bagginses.'

'No, not this Baggins.'

'Yes, every Baggins. All peoples that keep the Precious. We must have it! '

`But He'll see, He'll know. He'll take it from us! '

'He sees. He knows. He heard us make silly promises - against His orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take it.'

'Not for Him! '

'No, sweet one. See, my precious: if we has it, then we can escape, even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grows very strong, stronger than Wraiths. Lord Sméagol? Gollum the Great? The Gollum! Eat fish every day, three times a day; fresh from the sea. Most Precious Gollum! Must have it. We wants it, we wants it, we wants it! '

'But there's two of them. They'll wake too quick and kill us,' whined Sméagol in a last effort. `Not now. Not yet.'

'We wants it! But' - and here there was a long pause, as if a new thought had wakened. `Not yet, eh? Perhaps not. She might help. She might, yes.'

`No, no! Not that way! ' wailed Sméagol.

`Yes! We wants it! We wants it! '

Each time that the second thought spoke, Gollum's long hand crept out slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back with a jerk as Sméagol spoke again. Finally both arms, with long fingers flexed and twitching, clawed towards his neck.

Sam had lain still, fascinated by this debate, but watching every move that Gollum made from under his half-closed eye-lids. To his simple mind ordinary hunger, the desire to eat hobbits, had seemed the chief danger in Gollum. He realized now that it was not so: Gollum was feeling the terrible call of the Ring. The Dark Lord was He, of course; but Sam wondered who She was. One of the nasty friends the little wretch had made in his wanderings, he supposed. Then he forgot the point, for things had plainly gone far enough, and were getting dangerous. A great heaviness was in all his limbs, but he roused himself with an effort and sat up. Something warned him to be careful and not to reveal that he had overheard the debate. He let out a loud sigh and gave a huge yawn.

`What's the time? ' he said sleepily.

Gollum sent out a long hiss through his teeth. He stood up for a moment, tense and menacing; and then he collapsed, falling forward on to all fours and crawling up the bank of the pit. 'Nice hobbits! Nice Sam! ' he said. 'Sleepy heads, yes, sleepy heads! Leave good Sméagol to watch! But it's evening. Dusk is creeping. Time to go.'

`High time! ' thought Sam. 'And time we parted, too.' Yet it crossed his mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous turned loose as kept with them. 'Curse him! I wish he was choked!' he muttered. He stumbled down the bank and roused his master.

Strangely enough, Frodo felt refreshed. He had been dreaming. The dark shadow had passed, and a fair vision had visited him in this land of disease. Nothing remained of it in his memory, yet because of it he felt glad and lighter of heart. His burden was less heavy on him. Gollum welcomed him with dog-like delight. He chuckled and chattered, cracking his long fingers, and pawing at Frodo's knees. Frodo smiled at him.

'Come! ' he said. `You have guided us well and faithfully. This is the last stage. Bring us to the Gate, and then I will not ask you to go further. Bring us to the Gate, and you may go where you wish - only not to our enemies.'

'To the Gate, eh?' Gollum squeaked, seeming surprised and frightened. 'To the Gate, master says! Yes, he says so. And good Sméagol does what he asks, O yes. But when we gets closer, we'll see perhaps we'll see then. It won't look nice at all. O no! O no!'

'Go on with you! ' said Sam. `Let's get it over! '

In the falling dusk they scrambled out of the pit and slowly threaded their way through the dead land. They had not gone far before they felt once more the fear that had fallen on them when the winged shape swept over the marshes. They halted, cowering on the evil-smelling ground; but they saw nothing in the gloomy evening sky above, and soon the menace passed, high overhead, going maybe on some swift errand from Barad-dûr. After a while Gollum got up and crept forward again, muttering and shaking.

About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time, but it now seemed more remote, as if it were passing far above the clouds, rushing with terrible speed into the West. Gollum, however, was helpless with terror, and was convinced that they were being hunted, that their approach was known.

`Three times! ' he whimpered. 'Three times is a threat. They feel us here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We cannot go any further this way, no. It's no use, no use! '

Pleading and kind words were no longer of any avail. It was not until Frodo commanded him angrily and laid a hand on his sword-hilt that Gollum would get up again. Then at last he rose with a snarl, and went before them like a beaten dog.

So they stumbled on through the weary end of the night, and until the coming of another day of fear they walked in silence with bowed heads, seeing nothing, and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in their ears.



Chapter 3
The Black Gate is Closed
Before the next day dawned their journey to Mordor was over. The marshes and the desert were behind them. Before them, darkling against a pallid sky, the great mountains reared their threatening heads.

Upon the west of Mordor marched the gloomy range of Ephel Dúath, the Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north the broken peaks and barren ridges of Ered Lithui, grey as ash. But as these ranges approached one another, being indeed but parts of one great wall about the mournful plains of Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the bitter inland sea of Núrnen amidmost, they swung out long arms northward; and between these arms there was a deep defile. This was Cirith Gorgor, the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the land of the Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward from its mouth were two sheer hills, black-boned and bare. Upon them stood the Teeth of Mordor, two towers strong and tall. In days long past they were built by the Men of Gondor in their pride and power, after the overthrow of Sauron and his flight, lest he should seek to return to his old realm. But the strength of Gondor failed, and men slept, and for long years the towers stood empty. Then Sauron returned. Now the watch-towers, which had fallen into decay, were repaired, and filled with arms, and garrisoned with ceaseless vigilance. Stony-faced they were, with dark window-holes staring north and east and west, and each window was full of sleepless eyes.

Across the mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff, the Dark Lord had built a rampart of stone. In it there was a single gate of iron, and upon its battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the hills on either side the rock was bored into a hundred caves and maggot-holes: there a host of orcs lurked, ready at a signal to issue forth like black ants going to war. None could pass the Teeth of Mordor and not feel their bite, unless they were summoned by Sauron, or knew the secret passwords that would open the Morannon, the black gate of his land.

The two hobbits gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even from a distance they could see in the dim light the movement of the black guards upon the wall, and the patrols before the gate. They lay now peering over the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the out-stretched shadow of the northmost buttress of Ephel Dúath. Winging the heavy air in a straight flight a crow, maybe, would have flown but a furlong from their hiding-place to the black summit of the nearer tower. A faint smoke curled above it, as if fire smouldered in the hill beneath.

Day came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless ridges of Ered Lithui. Then suddenly the cry of brazen-throated trumpets was heard: from the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden holds and outposts in the hills came answering calls; and further still, remote but deep and ominous, there echoed in the hollow land beyond the mighty horns and drums of Barad-dûr. Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor; and the night-guards were summoned to their dungeons and deep halls, and the day-guards, evil-eyed and fell, were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed dimly on the battlement.

`Well, here we are! ' said Sam. `Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as if that's about as far as we are ever going to get. My word, but the Gaffer would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now! Often said I'd come to a bad end, if I didn't watch my step, he did. But now I don't suppose I'll ever see the old fellow again. He'll miss his chance of I told'ee so, Sam: more's the pity. He could go on telling me as long as he'd got breath, if only I could see his old face again. But I'd have to get a wash first, or he wouldn't know me.

`I suppose it's no good asking "what way do we go now?" We can't go no further-unless we want to ask the orcs for a lift.'

`No, no! ' said Gollum. `No use. We can't go further. Sméagol said so. He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. And we do see. O yes. my precious, we do see. Sméagol knew hobbits could not go this way. O yes. Sméagol knew '

'Then what the plague did you bring us here for? ' said Sam, not feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable.

`Master said so. Master says: Bring us to the Gate. So good Sméagol does so. Master said so, wise master.'

'I did,' said Frodo. His face was grim and set. but resolute. He was filthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness, but he cowered no longer, and his eyes were clear. `I said so, because I purpose to enter Mordor, and I know no other way. Therefore I shall go this way. I do not ask anyone to go with me.'

`No, no, master! ' wailed Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great distress. `No use that way! No use! Don't take the Precious to Him! He'll eat us all, if He gets it, eat all the world. Keep it, nice master, and be kind to Sméagol. Don't let Him have it. Or go away. go to nice places, and give it back to little Sméagol. Yes, yes, master: give it back, eh? Sméagol will keep it safe; he will do lots of good, especially to nice hobbits. Hobbits go home. Don't go to the Gate! '

'I am commanded to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,' said Frodo. 'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after must come.'

Sam said nothing. The look on Frodo's face was enough for him he knew that words of his were useless. And after all he never had any real hope in the affair from the beginning; but being a cheerful hobbit he had not needed hope, as long as despair could be postponed. Now they were come to the bitter end. But he had stuck to his master all the way; that was what he had chiefly come for, and he would still stick to him. His master would not go to Mordor alone. Sam would go with him-and at any rate they would get rid of Gollum.

Gollum, however, did not intend to be got rid of, yet. He knelt at Frodo's feet, wringing his hands and squeaking. 'Not this way, master! ' he pleaded, 'There is another way. O yes indeed there is. Another way. darker, more difficult to find, more secret. But Sméagol knows it. Let Sméagol show you! '

'Another way! ' said Frodo doubtfully, looking down at Gollum with searching eyes.

'Yess! Yess indeed! There was another way. Sméagol found it. Let's go and see if it's still there! '

`You have not spoken of this before.'

`No. Master did not ask. Master did not say what he meant to do. He does not tell poor Sméagol. He says: Sméagol, take me to the Gate - and then good bye! Sméagol can run away and be good. But now he says: I purpose to enter Mordor this way. So Sméagol is very afraid. He does not want to lose nice master. And he promised, master made him promise, to save the Precious. But master is going to take it to Him, straight to the Black Hand, if master will go this way. So Sméagol must save them both, and he thinks of another way that there was, once upon a time. Nice master. Sméagol very good, always helps.'

Sam frowned. If he could have bored holes in Gollum with his eyes, he would have done. His mind was full of doubt. To all appearances Gollum was genuinely distressed and anxious to help Frodo. But Sam, remembering the overheard debate, found it hard to believe that the long submerged Sméagol had come out on top: that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the debate. Sam's guess was that the Sméagol and Gollum halves (or what in his own mind he called Slinker and Stinker) had made a truce and a temporary alliance: neither wanted the Enemy to get the Ring; both wished to keep Frodo from capture, and under their eye, as long as possible - at any rate as long as Stinker still had a chance of laying hands on his 'Precious'. Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted.

`And it's a good thing neither half of the old villain don't know what master means to do,' he thought. `If he knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put an end to his Precious for good and all, there'd be trouble pretty quick, I bet. Anyhow old Stinker is so frightened of the Enemy - and he's under orders of some kind from him, or was - that he'd give us away rather than be caught helping us; and rather than let his Precious be melted, maybe. At least that's my idea. And I hope the master will think it out carefully. He's as wise as any, but he's soft-hearted, that's what he is. It's beyond any Gamgee to guess what he'll do next.'

Frodo did not answer Gollum at once. While these doubts were passing through Sam's slow but shrewd mind, he stood gazing out towards the dark cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they had taken refuge was delved in the side of a low hill, at some little height above a long trenchlike valley that lay between it and the outer buttresses of the mountains. In the midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western watch-tower. By morning-light the roads that converged upon the Gate of Mordor could now be clearly seen, pale and dusty; one winding back northwards; another dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui; and a third that ran towards him. As it bent sharply round the tower, it entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where he stood. Westward, to his right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of the mountains, and went off southwards into the deep shadows that mantled all the western sides of Ephel Dúath; beyond his sight it journeyed on into the narrow land between the mountains and the Great River.

As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the march, though for the most part they were hidden by the reeks and fumes drifting from the fens and wastes beyond. But here and there he caught the gleam of spears and helmets; and over the levels beside the roads horsemen could be seen riding in many companies. He remembered his vision from afar upon Amon Hen, so few days before, though now it seemed many years ago. Then he knew that the hope that had for one wild moment stirred in his heart was vain. The trumpets had not rung in challenge but in greeting. This was no assault upon the Dark Lord by the men of Gondor, risen like avenging ghosts from the graves of valour long passed away. These were Men of other race, out of the wide Eastlands, gathering to the summons of their Overlord; armies that had encamped before his Gate by night and now marched in to swell his mounting power. As if suddenly made fully aware of the peril of their position, alone, in the growing light of day, so near to this vast menace, Frodo quickly drew his frail grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then he turned to Gollum.

`Sméagol,' he said, `I will trust you once more. lndeed it seems that I must do so, and that it is my fate to receive help from you. where I least looked for it, and your fate to help me whom you long pursued with evil purpose. So far you have deserved well of me and have kept your promise truly. Truly, I say and mean,' he added with a glance at Sam, 'for twice now we have been in your power, and you have done no harm to us. Nor have you tried to take from me what you once sought. May the third time prove the best! But I warn you, Sméagol, you are in danger.'

`Yes, yes, master! ' said Gollum. `Dreadful danger! Sméagol's bones shake to think of it. but he doesn't run away. He must help nice master.'

'I did not mean the danger that we all share,' said Frodo. 'I mean a danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious. Remember that! It will hold you to it; but it will seek a way to twist it to your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me just now, foolishly. Give it back to Sméagol you said. Do not say that again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will never get it back. But the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back. In the last need, Sméagol, I should put on the Precious; and the Precious mastered you long ago. If I, wearing it, were to command you, you would obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice or to cast yourself into the fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Sméagol!'

Sam looked at his master with approval, but also with surprise: there was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not known before. It had always been a notion of his that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was of such a high degree that it must imply a fair measure of blindness. Of course, he also firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the wisest person in the world (with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and of Gandalf). Gollum in his own way, and with much more excuse as his acquaintance was much briefer, may have _made a similar mistake, confusing kindness and blindness. At any rate this speech abashed and terrified him. He grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice master.

Frodo waited patiently for a while, then he spoke again less sternly. `Come now, Gollum or Sméagol if you wish, tell me of this other way, and show me, if you can, what hope there is in it, enough to justify me in turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.'

But Gollum was in a pitiable state, and Frodo's threat had quite unnerved him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `poor little Sméagol'. After a while he grew a little calmer, and Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if a traveller followed the road that turned west of Ephel Dúath, he would come in time to a crossing in a circle of dark trees. On the right a road went down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went on southwards.

`On, on, on,' said Gollum. `We never went that way, but they say it goes a hundred leagues, until you can see the Great Water that is never still. There are lots of fishes there, and big birds eat fishes: nice birds: but we never went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And further still there are more lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is very hot there, and there are seldom any clouds, and the men are fierce and have dark faces. We do not want to see that land.'

`No! ' said Frodo. `But do not wander from your road. What of the third turning? '

`O yes, O yes, there is a third way,' said Gollum. `That is the road to the left. At once it begins to climb up, up, winding and climbing back towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock, you'll see it. suddenly you'll see it above you, and you'll want to hide.'

`See it, see it? What will you see? '

`The old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used to hear tales from the South, when Sméagol was young, long ago. O yes. we used to tell lots of tales in the evening, sitting by the banks of the Great River, in the willow-lands, when the River was younger too, gollum, gollum.' He began to weep and mutter. The hobbits waited patiently.

`Tales out of the South,' Gollum went on again, `about the tall Men with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills of stone, and the silver crown of their King and his White Tree: wonderful tales. They built very tall towers, and one they raised was silver-white, and in it there was a stone like the Moon, and round it were great white walls. O yes, there were many tales about the Tower of the Moon.'

`That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built ' said Frodo. `It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy.'

`Yes, He has only four on the Black Hand, but they are enough,' said Gollum shuddering. 'And He hated Isildur's city.'

'What does he not hate? ' said Frodo. 'But what has the Tower of the Moon to do with us? '

'Well, master, there it was and there it is: the tall tower and the white houses and the wall; but not nice now, not beautiful. He conquered it long ago. It is a very terrible place now. Travellers shiver when they see it, they creep out of sight, they avoid its shadow. But master will have to go that way. That is the only other way, For the mountains are lower there, and the old road goes up and up, until it reaches a dark pass at the top, and then it goes down, down, again - to Gorgoroth.' His voice sank to a whisper and he shuddered.

`But how will that help us? ' asked Sam. `Surely the Enemy knows all about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as close as this? The tower isn't empty, is it? '

`O no, not empty! ' whispered Gollum. `It seems empty, but it isn't, O no! Very dreadful things live there. Orcs. yes always Orcs; but worse things, worse things live there too. The road climbs right under the shadow of the walls and passes the gate. Nothing moves on the road that they don't know about. The things inside know: the Silent Watchers.'

`So that's your advice is it,' said Sam, 'that we should go another long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one, when we get there, if we ever do? '

`No, no indeed,' said Gollum. `Hobbits must see, must try to understand. He does not expect attack that way. His Eye is all round, but it attends more to some places than to others. He can't see everything all at once, not yet. You see, He has conquered all the country west of the Shadowy Mountains down to the River, and He holds the bridges now. He thinks no one can come to the Moontower without fighting big battle at the bridges, or getting lots of boats which they cannot hide and He will know about.'

'You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and thinking,' said Sam. `Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? '

'Not nice hobbit, not sensible,' said Gollum, giving Sam an angry glance and turning to Frodo. 'Sméagol has talked to Orcs, yes of course, before he met master, and to many peoples: he has walked very far. And what he says now many peoples are saying. It's here in the North that the big danger is for Him, and for us. He will come out of the Black Gate one day, one day soon. That is the only way big armies can come. But away down west He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.'

`Just so! ' said Sam, not to be put off. `And so we are to walk up and knock at their gate and ask if we're on the right road for Mordor? Or are they too silent to answer? It's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and save ourselves a long tramp.'

'Don't make jokes about it,' hissed Gollum. `It isn't funny, O no! Not amusing. It's nut sense to try and get into Mordor at all. But if master says I must go or I will go, then he must try some way. But he must not go to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where Sméagol helps. nice Sméagol. though no one tells him what it is all about. Sméagol helps again. He found it. He knows it.'

'What did you find? ' asked Frodo.

Gollum crouched down and his voice sank to a whisper again. 'A little path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narrow stair, O yes, very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then' - his voice sank even lower - `a tunnel, a dark tunnel; and at last a little cleft, and a path high above the main pass. It was that way that Sméagol got out of the darkness. But it was years ago. The path may have vanished now; but perhaps not, perhaps not.'

`I don't like the sound of it at all,' said Sam. `Sounds too easy at any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it'll be guarded too. Wasn't it guarded, Gollum? ' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught a green gleam in Gollum's eye. Gollum muttered but did not reply.

'Is it not guarded? ' asked Frodo sternly. `And did you escape out of the darkness, Sméagol? Were you not rather permitted to depart upon an errand? That at least is w hat Aragorn thought, who found you by the Dead Marshes some years ago.'

'It's a lie! ' hissed Gollum, and an evil light came into his eyes at the naming of Aragorn. `He lied on me, yes he did. I did escape, all by my poor self. Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious; and I have searched and searched, of course I have. But not for the Black One. The Precious was ours, it was mine I tell you. I did escape.'

Frodo felt a strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once not so far from the truth as might be suspected; that he had somehow found a way out of Mordor, and at least believed that it was by his own cunning. For one thing, he noted that Gollum used I, and that seemed usually to be a sign, on its rare appearances. that some remnants of old truth and sincerity were for the moment on top. But even if Gollum could be trusted on this point, Frodo did not forget the wiles of the Enemy. The 'escape' may have been allowed or arranged, and well known in the Dark Tower. And in any case Gollum was plainly keeping a good deal back.

'I ask you again,' he said: `is not this secret way guarded? '

But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen mood. He had all the injured air of a liar suspected when for once he has told the truth. or part of it. He did not answer.

'Is it not guarded? ' Frodo repeated.

`Yes, yes, perhaps. No safe places in this country,' said Gollum sulkily. 'No safe places. But master must try it or go home. . No other way.' They could not get him to say more. The name of the perilous place and the high pass he could not tell, or would not.

Its name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful rumour. Aragorn could perhaps have told them that name and its significance: Gandalf would have warned them. But they were alone, and Aragorn was far away, and Gandalf stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with Saruman, delayed by treason. Yet even as he spoke his last words to Saruman, and the palantír crashed in fire upon the steps of Orthanc. his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise, over the long leagues his mind sought for them in hope and pity.

Maybe Frodo felt it, not knowing it, as he had upon Amon Hen, even though he believed that Gandalf was gone, gone for ever into the shadow in Moria far away. He sat upon the ground for a long while, silent, his head bowed, striving to recall all that Gandalf had said to him. But for this choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed Gandalf's guidance had been taken from them too soon, too soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away. How they should enter it at the last Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could not say. Into the stronghold of the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he had once ventured. But into Mordor, to the Mountain of Fire and to Barad-dûr, since the Dark Lord rose in power again, had he ever journeyed there? Frodo did not think so. And here he was a little halfling from the Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where the great ones could not go, or dared not go. It was an evil fate. But he had taken it on himself in his own sitting-room in the far-off spring of another year, so remote now that it was like a chapter in a story of the world's youth, when the Trees of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This was an evil choice. Which way should he choose? And if both led to terror and death, what good lay in choice?

The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little grey hollow where they lay, so near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence that could be felt, as if it were a thick veil that cut them off from all the world about them. Above them was a dome of pale sky barred with fleeting smoke, but it seemed high and far away. as if seen through great deeps of air heavy with brooding thought.

Not even an eagle poised against the sun would have marked the hobbits sitting there, under the weight of doom, silent, µ not moving, shrouded in their thin grey cloaks. For a moment he might have paused to consider Gollum, a tiny figure sprawling on the ground: there perhaps lay the famished skeleton of some child of Men, its ragged garment still clinging to it, its long arms and legs almost bone-white and bone-thin: no flesh worth a peck.

Frodo's head was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands behind his head, staring out of his hood at the empty sky. At least for a long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought he saw a dark bird-like figure wheel into the circle of his sight, and hover, and then wheel away again. Two more followed, and then a fourth. They were very small to look at, yet he knew, somehow, that they were huge, with a vast stretch of pinion, flying at a great height. He covered his eyes and bent forward, cowering. The same warning fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of the Black Riders, the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind and the shadow on the moon, though now it was not so crushing or compelling: the menace was more remote. But menace it was. Frodo felt it too. His thought was broken. He stirred and shivered, but he did not look up. Gollum huddled himself together like a cornered spider. The winged shapes wheeled, and stooped swiftly down, speeding back to Mordor.

Sam took a deep breath. `The Riders are about again, up in the air,' he said in a hoarse whisper. 'I saw them. Do you think they could see us? They were very high up. And if they are Black Riders same as before, then they can't see much by daylight, can they? '

'No, perhaps not,' said Frodo. `But their steeds could see. And these winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably see more than any other creature. They are like great carrion birds. They are looking for something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.'

The feeling of dread passed, but the enfolding silence was broken. For some time they had been cut off from the world, as if in an invisible island; now they were laid bare again, peril had returned. But still Frodo did not speak to Gollum or make his choice. His eyes were closed, as if he were dreaming, or looking inward into his heart and memory. At last he stirred and stood up, and it seemed that he was about to speak and to decide. But `hark!' he said. `What is that?'

A new fear was upon them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At first it seemed a long way off, but it drew nearer: it was coming towards them. It leaped into all their minds that the Black Wings had spied them and had sent armed soldiers to seize them: no speed seemed too great for these terrible servants of Sauron. They crouched, listening. The voices and the clink of weapons and harness were very close. Frodo and Sam loosened their small swords in their sheaths. Flight was impossible.

Gollum rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the lip of the hollow. Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch, until he could peer over it between two broken points of stone. He remained there without moving for some time, making no sound. Presently the voices began to recede again, and then they slowly faded away. Far off a horn blew on the ramparts of the Morannon. Then quietly Gollum drew back and slipped down into the hollow.

'More Men going to Mordor,' he said in a low voice. `Dark faces. We have not seen Men like these before, no, Sméagol has not. They are fierce. They have black eyes, and long black hair, and gold rings in their ears; yes, lots of beautiful gold. And some have red paint on their cheeks, and red cloaks; and their flags are red, and the tips of their spears; and they have round shields, yellow and black with big spikes. Not nice; very cruel wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as Orcs, and much bigger. Sméagol thinks they have come out of the South beyond the Great River's end: they came up that road. They have passed on to the Black Gate; but more may follow. Always more people coming to Mordor. One day all the peoples will be inside.'

`Were there any oliphaunts?' asked Sam, forgetting his fear in his eagerness for news of strange places.

`No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? ' said Gollum.

Sam stood up, putting his hands behind his back (as he always did when 'speaking poetry'), and began:

Grey as a mouse,

Big as a house.

Nose like a snake,

I make the earth shake,

As I tramp through the grass;

Trees crack as I pass.

With horns in my mouth

I walk in the South,

Flapping big ears.

Beyond count of years

I stump round and round,

Never lie on the ground,

Not even to die.

Oliphaunt am I,

Biggest of all,

Huge, old, and tall.

If ever you'd met me

You wouldn't forget me.

If you never do,

You won't think I'm true;

But old Oliphaunt am I,

And I never lie.

'That,' said Sam, when he had finished reciting, `that's a rhyme we have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have our tales too, and news out of the South, you know. In the old days hobbits used to go on their travels now and again. Not that many ever came back, and not that all they said was believed: news from Bree, and not sure as Shiretalk, as the sayings go. But I've heard tales of the big folk down away in the Sunlands. Swertings we call 'em in our tales; and they ride on oliphaunts, 'tis said, when they fight. They put houses and towers on the oliphauntses backs and all, and the oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So when you said "Men out of the South, all in red and gold;" I said "were there any oliphaunts? " For if there was, I was going to take a look, risk or no. But now I don't suppose I'll ever see an oliphaunt. Maybe there ain't no such a beast.' He sighed.

`No, no oliphaunts,' said Gollum again. 'Sméagol has not heard of them. He does not want to see them. He does not want them to be. Sméagol wants to go away from here and hide somewhere safer. Sméagol wants master to go. Nice master, won't he come with Sméagol? '

Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst of all his cares when Sam trotted out the old fireside rhyme of Oliphaunt, and the laugh had released him from hesitation. `I wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a white one at their head,' he said. `Then we'd break a way into this evil land, perhaps. But we've not; just our own tired legs, that's all. Well, Sméagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.'

'Good master, wise master, nice master!' cried Gollum in delight, patting Frodo's knees. `Good master! Then rest now, nice hobbits, under the shadow of the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie quiet, till the Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft and quick as shadows we must be!'



Chapter 4
Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit
For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into the shade as the sun moved, until at last the shadow of the western rim of their dell grew long, and darkness filled all the hollow. Then they ate a little, and drank sparingly. Gollum ate nothing, but he accepted water gladly.

`Soon get more now,' he said, licking his lips. `Good water runs down in streams to the Great River, nice water in the lands we are going to. Sméagol will get food there too, perhaps. He's very hungry, yes, gollum!' He set his two large flat hands on his shrunken belly, and a pale green light came into his eyes.

The dusk was deep when at length they set out, creeping over the westward rim of the dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken country on the borders of the road: The moon was now three nights from the full, but it did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight, and the early night was very dark. A single red light burned high up in the Towers of the Teeth, but otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch on the Morannon.

For many miles the red eye seemed to stare at them as they fled, stumbling through a barren stony country. They did not dare to take the road, but they kept it on their left, following its line as well as they could at a little distance. At last, when night was growing old and they were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest, the eye dwindled to a small fiery point and then vanished: they had turned the dark northern shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards.

With hearts strangely lightened they now rested again, but not for long. They were not going quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning it was nearly thirty leagues from the Morannon to the cross-roads above Osgiliath, and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys. So soon they struggled on once more, until the dawn began to spread slowly in the wide grey solitude. They had then walked almost eight leagues; and the hobbits could not have gone any further, even if they had dared.

The growing light revealed to them a land already, less barren and ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their left, but near at hand they could see the southward road, now bearing away from the black roots of the hills and slanting westwards. Beyond it were slopes covered with sombre trees like dark clouds. but all about them lay a tumbled heathland, grown with ling and broom and cornel, and other shrubs that they did not know. Here and there they saw knots of tall pine-trees. The hearts of the hobbits rose again a little in spite of weariness: the air was fresh and fragrant, and it reminded them of the uplands of the Northfarthing far away. It seemed good to be reprieved, to walk in a land that had only been for a few years under the dominion of the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen wholly into decay. But they did not forget their danger, nor the Black Gate that was still all too near, hidden though it was behind the gloomy heights. They looked about for a hiding-place where they could shelter from evil eyes while the light lasted.

The day passed uneasily. They lay deep in the heather and counted out the slow hours, in which there seemed little change; for they were still under the shadows of the Ephel Dúath, and the sun was veiled. Frodo slept at times, deeply and peacefully, either trusting Gollum or too tired to trouble about him; but Sam found it difficult to do more than doze, even when Gollum was plainly fast asleep, whiffling and twitching in his secret dreams. Hunger, perhaps, more than mistrust kept him wakeful: he had begun to long for a good homely meal, `something hot out of the pot'.

As soon as the land faded into a formless grey under coming night, they started out again. In a little while Gollum led them down on to the southward road; and after that they went on more quickly, though the danger was greater. Their ears were strained for the sound of hoof or foot on the road ahead, or following them from behind; but the night passed, and they heard no sound of walker or rider.

The road had been made in a long lost time: and for perhaps thirty miles below the Morannon it had been newly repaired, but as it went south the wild encroached upon it. The handiwork of Men of old could still be seen in its straight sure flight and level course: now and again it cut its way through hillside slopes, or leaped over a stream upon a wide shapely arch of enduring masonry; but at last all signs of stonework faded, save for a broken pillar here and there, peering out of bushes at the side, or old paving-stones still lurking amid weeds and moss. Heather and trees and bracken scrambled down and overhung the banks, or sprawled out over the surface. It dwindled at last to a country cart-road little used; but it did not wind: it held on its own sure course and guided them by the swiftest way.

So they passed into the northern marches of that land that Men once called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift-falling streams. The night became fine under star and round moon, and it seemed to the hobbits that the fragrance of the air grew as they went forward; and from the blowing and muttering of Gollum it seemed that he noticed it too, and did not relish it. At the first signs of day they halted again. They had come to the end of a long cutting, deep, and sheer-sided in the middle, by which the road clove its way through a stony ridge. Now they climbed up the westward bank and looked abroad.

Day was opening in the sky, and they saw that the mountains were now much further off, receding eastward in a long curve that was lost in the distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes ran down into dim hazes far below. All about them were small woods of resinous trees, fir and cedar and cypress. and other kinds unknown in the Shire, with wide glades among them; and everywhere there was a wealth of sweet-smelling herbs and shrubs. The long journey from Rivendell had brought them far south of their own land, but not until now in this more sheltered region had the hobbits felt the change of clime. Here Spring was already busy about them: fronds pierced moss and mould, larches were green-fingered, small flowers were opening in the turf, birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of Gondor now desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.

South and west it looked towards the warm lower vales of Anduin, shielded from the east by the Ephel Dúath and yet not under the mountain-shadow, protected from the north by the Emyn Muil, open to the southern airs and the moist winds from the Sea far away. Many great trees grew there, planted long ago, falling into untended age amid a riot of careless descendants; and groves and thickets there were of tamarisk and pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and there were junipers and myrtles; and thymes that grew in bushes, or with their woody creeping stems mantled in deep tapestries the hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue flowers, or red, or pale green; and marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys, and many herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots and rocky walls were already starred with saxifrages and stonecrops. Primeroles and anemones were awake in the filbert-brakes; and asphodel and many lily-flowers nodded their half-opened heads in the grass: deep green grass beside the pools, where falling streams halted in cool hollows on their journey down to Anduin.

The travellers turned their backs on the road and went downhill. As they walked, brushing their way through bush and herb, sweet odours rose about them. Gollum coughed and retched; but the hobbits breathed deep, and suddenly Sam laughed, for heart's ease not for jest. They followed a stream that went quickly down before them. Presently it brought them to a small clear lake in a shallow dell: it lay in the broken ruins of an ancient stone basin, the carven rim of which was almost wholly covered with mosses and rose-brambles; iris-swords stood in ranks about it. and water-lily leaves floated on its dark gently-rippling surface; but it was deep and fresh, and spilled ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end.

Here they washed themselves and drank their fill at the in-falling freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-place: for this land, fair-seeming still, was nonetheless now territory of the Enemy. They had not come very far from the road, and yet even in so short a space they had seen scars of the old wars, and the newer wounds made by the Orcs and other foul servants of the Dark Lord: a pit of uncovered filth and refuse; trees hewn down wantonly and left to die, with evil runes or the fell sign of the Eye cut in rude strokes on their bark.

Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake. smelling and touching the unfamiliar plants and trees, forgetful for the moment of Mordor, was reminded suddenly of their ever-present peril. He stumbled on a ring still scorched by fire, and in the midst of it he found a pile of charred and broken bones and skulls. The swift growth of the wild with briar and eglantine and trailing clematis was already drawing a veil over this place of dreadful feast and slaughter; but it was not ancient. He hurried back to his companions, but he said nothing: the bones were best left in peace and not pawed and routed by Gollum.

`Let's find a place to lie up in,' he said. 'Not lower down. Higher up for me.'

A little way back above the lake they found a deep brown bed of last year's fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved bay-trees climbing up a steep bank that was crowned with old cedars. Here they decided to rest and pass the day, which already promised to be bright and warm. A good day for strolling on their way along the groves and glades of Ithilien; but though Orcs may shun the sunlight. there were too many places here where they could lie hid and watch; and other evil eyes were abroad: Sauron had many servants. Gollum, in any case, would not move under the Yellow. Face. Soon it would look over the dark ridges of the Ephel Dúath, and he would faint and cower in the light and heat.

Sam had been giving earnest thought to food as they marched. Now that the despair of the impassable Gate was behind him, he did not feel so inclined as his master to take no thought for their livelihood beyond the end of their errand; and anyway it seemed wiser to him to save the waybread of the Elves for worse times ahead. Six days or more had passed since he reckoned that they had only a bare supply for three weeks.

'If we reach the Fire in that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! ' he thought. `And we might be wanting to get back. We might! '

Besides, at the end of a long night-march, and after bathing and drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper, or a breakfast, by the fire in the old kitchen at Bagshot Row was what he really wanted. An idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had just begun to sneak off on his own, and he was crawling away on all fours through the fern.

`Hi! Gollum! ' said Sam. `Where are you going? Hunting? Well see here, old noser, you don't like our food, and I'd not be sorry for a change myself. Your new motto's always ready to help. Could you find anything fit for a hungry hobbit? '

`Yes, perhaps, yes,' said Gollum. `Sméagol always helps, if they asks - if they asks nicely.'

`Right!' said Sam `I does ask. And if that isn't nice enough, I begs.'

Gollum disappeared. He was away some time, and Frodo after a few mouthfuls of lembas settled deep into the brown fern and went to sleep. Sam looked at him. The early daylight was only just creeping down into the shadows under the trees, but he saw his master's face very clearly, and his hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in the house of Elrond, after his deadly wound. Then as he had kept watch Sam had noticed that at times a light seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light was even clearer and stronger. Frodo's face was peaceful, the marks of fear and care had left it; but it looked old, old and beautiful, as if the chiselling of the shaping years was now revealed in many fine lines that had before been hidden, though the identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee put it that way to himself. He shook his head, as if finding words useless, and murmured: `I love him. He's like that, and sometimes it shines through, somehow. But I love him, whether or no.'

Gollum returned quietly and peered over Sam's shoulder. Looking at Frodo, he shut his eyes and crawled away without a sound. Sam came to him a moment later and found him chewing something and muttering to himself. On the ground beside him lay two small rabbits, which he was beginning to eye greedily.

'Sméagol always helps,' he said. `He has brought rabbits, nice rabbits. But master has gone to sleep, and perhaps Sam wants to sleep. Doesn't want rabbits now? Sméagol tries to help, but he can't catch things all in a minute.'

Sam, however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At least not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of course, can cook, for they begin to learn the art before their letters (which many never reach): but Sam was a good cook, even by hobbit reckoning, and he had done a good deal of the camp-cooking on their travels, when there was a chance. He still hopefully carried some of his gear in his pack: a small tinder-box, two small shallow pans, the smaller fitting into the larger; inside them a wooden spoon, a short two-pronged fork and some skewers were stowed; and hidden at the bottom of the pack in a flat wooden box a dwindling treasure, some salt. But he needed a fire, and other things besides. He thought for a bit, while he took out his knife, cleaned and whetted it, and began to dress the rabbits. He was not going to leave Frodo alone asleep even for a few minutes.

'Now, Gollum,' he said, 'I've another job for you. Go and fill these pans with water, and bring 'em back! '

'Sméagol will fetch water, yes,' said Gollum. 'But what does the hobbit want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.'

'Never you mind,' said Sam. `If you can't guess, you'll soon find out. And the sooner you fetch the water, the sooner you'll learn. Don't you damage one of my pans, or I'll carve you into mincemeat.'

While Gollum was away Sam took another look at Frodo. He was still sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck most by the leanness of his face and hands. 'Too thin and drawn he is,' he muttered. 'Not right for a hobbit. If I can get these coneys cooked, I'm going to wake him up.'

Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern, and then scrambled up the bank collecting a bundle of twigs and broken wood; the fallen branch of a cedar at the top gave him a good supply. He cut out some turves at the foot of the bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow hole and laid his fuel in it. Being handy with flint and tinder he soon had a small blaze going. It made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent. He was just stooping over his fire, shielding it and building it up with heavier wood, when Gollum returned, carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.

He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing. He gave a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened and angry. `Ach! Sss - no!' he cried. `No! Silly hobbits, foolish, yes foolish! They mustn't do it!'

`Mustn't do what?' asked Sam in surprise.

`Not make the nassty red tongues,' hissed Gollum. `Fire, fire! It's dangerous, yes it is. It burns, it kills. And it will bring enemies, yes it will.'

'I don't think so,' said Sam. `Don't see why it should, if you don't put wet stuff on it and make a smother. But if it does, it does. I'm going to risk it, anyhow. I'm going to stew these coneys.'

'Stew the rabbits!' squealed Gollum in dismay. `Spoil beautiful meat Sméagol saved for you, poor hungry Sméagol! What for? What for, silly hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat them, eat them!' He clawed at the nearest rabbit, already skinned and lying by the fire.

`Now, now! ' said Sam. `Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes you, and raw coney chokes me. If you give me a coney, the coney's mine, see, to cook, if I have a mind. And I have. You needn't watch me. Go and catch another and eat it as you fancy - somewhere private and out o' my sight. Then you won't see the fire, and I shan't see you, and we'll both be the happier. I'll see the fire don't smoke, if that's any comfort to you.'

Gollum withdrew grumbling, and crawled into the fern. Sam busied himself with his pans. `What a hobbit needs with coney,' he said to himself, `is some herbs and roots, especially taters - not to mention bread. Herbs we can manage, seemingly.'

`Gollum!' he called softly. `Third time pays for all. I want some herbs.' Gollum's head peeped out of the fern, but his looks were neither helpful nor friendly. `A few bay-leaves, some thyme and sage, will do - before the water boils,' said Sam.

`No! ' said Gollum. `Sméagol is not pleased. And Sméagol doesn't like smelly leaves. He doesn't eat grasses or roots, no precious, not till he's starving or very sick, poor Sméagol. '

`Sméagol'll get into real true hot water, when this water boils, if he don't do as he's asked,' growled Sam. `Sam'll put his head in it, yes precious. And I'd make him look for turnips and carrots, and taters too, if it was the time o' the year. I'll bet there's all sorts of good things running wild in this country. I'd give a lot for half a dozen taters.'

`Sméagol won't go, O no precious, not this time,' hissed Gollum. `He's frightened, and he's very tired, and this hobbit's not nice, not nice at all. Sméagol won't grub for roots and carrotses and - taters. What's taters, precious, eh, what's taters?

`Po-ta-toes,' said Sam. 'The Gaffer's delight, and rare good ballast for an empty belly. But you won't find any, so you needn't look. But be good Sméagol and fetch me the herbs, and I'll think better of you. What's more, if you turn over a new leaf, and keep it turned, I'll cook you some taters one of these days. I will: fried fish and chips served by S. Gamgee. You couldn't say no to that.'

`Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice fish, scorching it. Give me fish now, and keep nassty chips! '

`Oh you're hopeless,' said Sam. 'Go to sleep!'

In the end he had to find what he wanted for himself; but he did not have to go far, not out of sight of the place where his master lay, still sleeping. For a while Sam sat musing, and tending the fire till the water boiled. The daylight grew and the air became warm; the dew faded off turf and leaf. Soon the rabbits cut up lay simmering in their pans with the bunched herbs. Almost Sam fell asleep as the time went by. He let them stew for close on an hour, testing them now and again with his fork, and tasting the broth.

When he thought all was ready he lifted the pans off the fire, and crept along to Frodo. Frodo half opened his eyes as Sam stood over him, and then he wakened from his dreaming: another gentle, unrecoverable dream of peace.

`Hullo, Sam! ' he said. `Not resting? Is anything wrong? What is the time? '

`About a couple of hours after daybreak,' said Sam, `and nigh on half past eight by Shire clocks, maybe. But nothing's wrong. Though it ain't quite what I'd call right: no stock, no onions, no taters. I've got a bit of a stew for you, and some broth, Mr. Frodo. Do you good. You'll have to sup it in your mug; or straight from the pan, when it's cooled a bit. I haven't brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.'

Frodo yawned and stretched. 'You should have been resting Sam,' he said. 'And lighting a fire was dangerous in these parts. But I do feel hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? '

'A present from Sméagol,' said Sam: `a brace o' young coneys; though I fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nought to go with them but a few herbs.'

Sam and his master sat just within the fern-brake and ate their stew from the pans, sharing the old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast.

'Wheew! Gollum! ' Sam called and whistled softly. 'Come on! Still time to change your mind. There's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.' There was no answer.

`Oh well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll finish it,' said Sam.

`And then you must take some sleep,' said Frodo.

`Don't you drop off, while I'm nodding, Mr. Frodo. I don't feel too sure of him. There's a good deal of Stinker-the bad Gollum, if you understand me-in him still, and it's getting stronger again. Not but what I think he'd try to throttle me first now. We don't see eye to eye, and he's not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased at all.'

They finished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his gear. As he stood up to return, he looked back up the slope. At that moment he saw the sun rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or whatever it was, that lay ever to the east, and it sent its golden beams down upon the trees and glades about him. Then he noticed a thin spiral of blue-grey, smoke, plain to see as it caught the sunlight, rising from a thicket above him. With a shock he realized that this was the smoke from his little cooking-fire, which he had neglected to put out.

`That won't do! Never thought it would show like that! ' he muttered, and he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened. Had he heard a whistle or not? Or was it the call of some strange bird? If it was a whistle, it did not come from Frodo's direction. There it went again from another place! Sam began to run as well as he could uphill.

He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled some fern at the edge of the fire, and the fern blazing up had set the turves smouldering. Hastily he stamped out what was left of the fire, scattered the ashes, and laid the turves on the hole. Then he crept back to Frodo.

'Did you hear a whistle, and what sounded like an answer? ' he asked. `A few minutes back. I hope it was only a bird, but it didn't sound quite like that: more like somebody mimicking a bird-call, I thought. And I'm afraid my bit of fire's been smoking. Now if I've gone and brought trouble, I'll never forgive myself. Nor won't have a chance, maybe! '

`Hush! ' whispered Frodo. `I thought I heard voices.'

The two hobbits trussed their small packs, put them on ready for flight, and then crawled deeper into the fern. There they crouched listening.

There was no doubt of the voices. They were speaking low and furtively, but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly one spoke clearly close at hand.

`Here! Here is where the smoke came from! ' it said. `'Twill be nigh at hand. In the fern, no doubt. We shall have it like a coney in a trap. Then we shall learn what kind of thing it is.'

`Aye, and what it knows! ' said a second voice.

At once four men came striding through the fern from different directions. Since flight and hiding were no longer possible, Frodo and Sam sprang to their feet, putting back to back and whipping out their small swords.

If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even more astonished. Four tall Men stood there. Two had spears in their hands with broad bright heads. Two had great bows, almost of their own height, and great quivers of long green-feathered arrows. All had swords at their sides, and were clad in green and brown of varied hues, as if the better to walk unseen in the glades of Ithilien. Green gauntlets covered their hands, and their faces were hooded and masked with green, except for their eyes, which were very keen and bright. At once Frodo thought of Boromir, for these Men were like him in stature and bearing, and in their manner of speech.

`We have not found what we sought,' said one. `But what have we found? '

'Not Orcs,' said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he had seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo's hand.

`Elves? ' said a third, doubtfully.

`Nay! Not Elves,' said the fourth, the tallest, and as it appeared the chief among them. `Elves do not walk in Ithilien in these days. And Elves are wondrous fair to look upon, or so 'tis said.'

'Meaning we're not, I take you,' said Sam. `Thank you kindly. And when you've finished discussing us, perhaps you'll say who you are, and why you can't let two tired travellers rest.'

The tall green man laughed grimly. `I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,' he said. `But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the Dark Tower, or of the White.'

`But we are neither,' said Frodo. `And travellers we are, whatever Captain Faramir may say.'

'Then make haste to declare yourselves and your errand,' said Faramir. 'We have a work to do, and this is no time or place for riddling or parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? '

`The third? '

'Yes, the skulking fellow that we saw with his nose in the pool down yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of Orc, I guess, or a creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some fox-trick.'

'I do not know where he is,' said Frodo. 'He is only a chance companion met upon our road; and I am not answerable for him. If you come on him, spare him. Bring him or send him to us. He is only a wretched gangrel creature, but I have him under my care for a while. But as for us, we are Hobbits of the Shire, far to the North and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo son of Drogo is my name, and with me is Samwise son of Hamfast, a worthy hobbit in my service. We have come by long ways - out of Rivendell, or Imladris as some call it.' Here Faramir started and grew intent. 'Seven companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left at Parth Galen above Rauros: two of my kin; a Dwarf there was also, and an Elf, and two Men. They were Aragorn; and Boromir, who said that he came out of Minas Tirith, a city in the South.'

'Boromir! ' all the four men exclaimed.

'Boromir son of the Lord Denethor?' said Faramir, and a strange stern look came into his face. 'You came with him? That is news indeed, if it be true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir son of Denethor was High Warden of the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are you then, and what had you to do with him? Be swift, for the Sun is climbing!'

'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell? ' Frodo replied.

Seek for the Sword that was Broken.

In Imladris it dwells.

'The words are known indeed,' said Faramir in astonishment. `It is some token of your truth that you also know them.'

`Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,' said Frodo. 'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.'

`That I see,' said Faramir thoughtfully. `Or I see that it might be so. And what is Isildur's Bane? '

`That is hidden,' answered Frodo. `Doubtless it will be made clear in time.'

`We must learn more of this,' said Faramir, `and know what brings you so far east under the shadow of yonder-,' he pointed and said no name. 'But not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril. and you would not have gone far by field or road this day. There will be hard handstrokes nigh at hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will leave two to guard you, for your good and for mine. Wise man trusts not to chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with you.'

'Farewell!' said Frodo, bowing low. `Think what you will, I am a friend of all enemies of the One Enemy. We would go with you, if we halfling folk could hope to serve you, such doughty men and strong as you seem, and if my errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!'

'The Halflings are courteous folk, whatever else they be,' said Faramir. `Farewell!'

The hobbits sat down again, but they said nothing to one another of their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just under the dappling shadow of the dark bay-trees, two men remained on guard. They took off their masks now and again to cool them, as the day-heat grew, and Frodo saw that they were goodly men, pale-skinned, dark of hair, with grey eyes and faces sad and proud. They spoke together in soft voices, at first using the Common Speech, but after the manner of older days, and then changing to another language of their own. To his amazement, as he listened Frodo became aware that it was the Elven-tongue that they spoke, or one but little different; and he looked at them with wonder, for he knew then that they must be Dúnedain of the South, men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse.

After a while he spoke to them; but they were slow and cautious in answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor, and they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they were descended from folk who lived in Ithilien at one time, before it was overrun. From such men the Lord Denethor chose his forayers, who crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where, they would not say) to harry the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between the Ephel Dúath and the River.

`It is close on ten leagues hence to the east-shore of Anduin,' said Mablung, 'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! '

'Aye, curse the Southrons! ' said Damrod. ` 'Tis said that there were dealings of old between Gondor and the kingdoms of the Harad in the Far South; though there was never friendship. In those days our bounds were away south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and Umbar, the nearest of their realms, acknowledged our sway. But that is long since. 'Tis many lives of Men since any passed to or fro between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they were ever ready to His will-as have so many also in the East. I doubt not that the days of Gondor are numbered, and the walls of Minas Tirith are doomed, so great is His strength and malice.'

`But still we will not sit idle and let Him do all as He would,' said Mablung. `These cursed Southrons come now marching up the ancient roads to swell the hosts of the Dark Tower. Yea, up the very roads that craft of Gondor made. And they go ever more heedlessly, we learn, thinking that the power of their new master is great enough, so that the mere shadow of His hills will protect them. We come to teach them another lesson. Great strength of them was reported to us some days ago, marching north. One of their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on the road above, where it passes through the cloven way. The road may pass, but they shall not! Not while Faramir is Captain. He leads now in all perilous ventures. But his life is charmed, or fate spares him for some other end.'

Their talk died down into a listening silence. All seemed still and watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered out. With his keen hobbit-eyes he saw that many more Men were about. He could see them stealing up the slopes, singly or in long files, keeping always to the shade of grove or thicket, or crawling, hardly visible in their brown and green raiment, through grass and brake. All were hooded and masked, and had gauntlets on their hands, and were armed like Faramir and his companions. Before long they had all passed and vanished. The sun rose till it neared the South. The shadows shrank.

`I wonder where that dratted Gollum is? ' thought Sam, as he crawled back into deeper shade. `He stands a fair chance of being spitted for an Orc, or of being roasted by the Yellow Face. But I fancy he'll look after himself.' He lay down beside Frodo and began to doze.

He woke, thinking that he had heard horns blowing. He sat up. It was now high noon. The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow of the trees. Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond mistake from above, over the top of the slope. Sam thought that he heard cries and wild shouting also, but the sound was faint, as if it came out of some distant cave. Then presently the noise of fighting broke out near at hand, just above their hiding-place. He could hear plainly the ringing grate of steel on steel, the clang of sword on iron cap, the dull beat of blade on shield; men were yelling and screaming, and one clear loud voice was calling Gondor! Gondor!

`It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,' said Sam to Frodo. 'They're as near as I want them now.'

But the noise grew closer. `They are coming!' cried Damrod. `See! Some of the Southrons have broken from the trap and are flying from the road. There they go! Our men after them, and the Captain leading.'

Sam, eager to see more, went now and joined the guards. He scrambled a little way up into one of the larger of the bay-trees. For a moment he caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running down the slope some way off with green-clad warriors leaping after them, hewing them down as they fled. Arrows were thick in the air. Then suddenly straight over the rim of their sheltering bank, a man fell, crashing through the slender trees, nearly on top of them. He came to rest in the fern a few feet away, face downward, green arrow-feathers sticking from his neck below a golden collar. His scarlet robes were tattered, his corslet of overlapping brazen plates was rent and hewn, his black plaits of hair braided with gold were drenched with blood. His brown hand still clutched the hilt of a broken sword.

It was Sam's first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not like it much. He was glad that he could not see the dead face. He wondered what the man's name was and where he came from; and if he was really evil of heart, or what lies or threats had led him on the long march from his home; and if he would not really rather have stayed there in peace-all in a flash of thought which was quickly driven from his mind. For just as Mablung stepped towards the fallen body, there was a new noise. Great crying and shouting. Amidst it Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting. And then a great thudding and bumping. like huge rams dinning on the ground.

'Ware! Ware!' cried Damrod to his companion. 'May the Valar turn him aside! Mûmak! Mûmak!'

To his astonishment and terror, and lasting delight, Sam saw a vast shape crash out of the trees and come careering down the slope. Big as a house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad moving hill. Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit's eyes, but the Mûmak of Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and the like of him does not walk now in Middle-earth; his kin that live still in latter days are but memories of his girth and majesty. On he came, straight towards the watchers, and then swerved aside in the nick of time, passing only a few yards away, rocking the ground beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like ears spread out, long snout upraised like a huge serpent about to strike. his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands of gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of scarlet and gold flapped about him in wild tatters. The ruins of what seemed a very war-tower lay upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious passage through the woods; and high upon his neck still desperately clung a tiny figure-the body of a mighty warrior, a giant among the Swertings.

On the great beast thundered, blundering in blind wrath through pool and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about the triple hide of his flanks. Men of both sides fled before him, but many he overtook and crushed to the ground. Soon he was lost to view, still trumpeting and stamping far away. What became of him Sam never heard: whether he escaped to roam the wild for a time, until he perished far from his home or was trapped in some deep pit; or whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River and was swallowed up.

Sam drew a deep breath. 'An Oliphaunt it was!' he said. `So there are Oliphaunts, and I have seen one. What a life! But no one at home will ever believe me. Well, if that's over, I'll have a bit of sleep.'

'Sleep while you may,' said Mablung. `But the Captain will return, if he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall be pursued as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that will not be long.'

`Go quietly when you must!' said Sam. `No need to disturb my sleep. I was walking all night.'

Mablung laughed. `I do not think the Captain will leave you here, Master Samwise,' he said. 'But you shall see.'



Chapter 5
The Window on the West
It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he awoke to find that it was late afternoon and Faramir had come back. He had brought many men with him; indeed all the survivors of the foray were now gathered on the slope nearby, two or three hundred strong. They sat in a wide semicircle, between the arms of which Faramir was seated on the ground, while Frodo stood before him. It looked strangely like the trial of a prisoner.

Sam crept out from the fern, but no one paid any attention to him, and he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he could see and hear all that was going on. He watched and listened intently, ready to dash to his master's aid if needed. He could see Faramir's face, which was now unmasked: it was stern and commanding, and a keen wit lay behind his searching glance. Doubt was in the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo.

Sam soon became aware that the Captain was not satisfied with Frodo's account of himself at several points: what part he had to play in the Company that set out from Rivendell; why he had left Boromir; and where he was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur's Bane. Plainly he saw that Frodo was concealing from him some matter of great importance.

'But it was at the coming of the Halfling that Isildur's Bane should waken, or so one must read the words,' he insisted. `If then you are the Halfling that was named, doubtless you brought this thing, whatever it may be, to the Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it. Do you deny it? '

Frodo made no answer. 'So! ' said Faramir. `I wish then to learn from you more of it; for what concerns Boromir concerns me. An orc-arrow slew Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty, and the sight of one would not be taken as a sign of Doom by Boromir of Gondor. Had you this thing in keeping? It is hidden, you say; but is not that because you choose to hide it? '

'No, not because I choose,' answered Frodo. `It does not belong to me. It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any could claim it, it would be Aragorn son of Arathorn, whom I named, the leader of our Company from Moria to Rauros.'

'Why so, and not Boromir, prince of the City that the sons of Elendil founded? '

'Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father, from Isildur Elendil's son himself. And the sword that he bears was Elendil's sword.'

A murmur of astonishment ran through all the ring of men. Some cried aloud: 'The sword of Elendil! The sword of Elendil comes to Minas Tirith! Great tidings! ' But Faramir's face was unmoved.

`Maybe,' he said. `But so great a claim will need to be established and clear proofs will be required, should this Aragorn ever come to Minas Tirith. He had not come, nor any of your Company, when I set out six days ago.'

'Boromir was satisfied of that claim,' said Frodo. `Indeed, if Boromir were here, he would answer all your questions. And since he was already at Rauros many days back, and intended then to go straight to your city, if you return, you may soon learn the answers there. My part in the Company was known to him, as to all the others. for it was appointed to me by Elrond of Imladris himself before the whole Council. On that errand I came into this country, but it is not mine to reveal to any outside the Company. Yet those who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.'

Frodo's tone was proud, whatever he felt, and Sam approved of it; but it did not appease Faramir.

`So!' he said. `You bid me mind my own affairs, and get me back home, and let you be. Boromir will tell all, when he comes. When he comes, say you! Were you a friend of Boromir?'

Vividly before Frodo's mind came the memory of Boromir's assault upon him, and for a moment he hesitated. Faramir's eyes watching him grew harder. 'Boromir was a valiant member of our Company ' said Frodo at length. 'Yes, I was his friend, for my part.'

Faramir smiled grimly. `Then you would grieve to learn that Boromir is dead? '

'I would grieve indeed,' said Frodo. Then catching the look in Faramir's eyes, he faltered. 'Dead?' he said. `Do you mean that he is dead, and that you knew it? You have been trying to trap me in words, playing with me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?'

`I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,' said Faramir.

`How then did he die, and how do you know of it? Since you say that none of the Company had reached the city when you left.'

'As to the manner of his death, I had hoped that his friend and companion would tell me how it was.'

`But he was alive and strong when we parted. And he lives still for all that I know. Though surely there are many perils in the world.'

`Many indeed,' said Faramir, `and treachery not the least.'

Sam had been getting more and more impatient and angry at this conversation. These last words were more than he could bear, and bursting into the middle of the ring, he strode up to his master's side.

'Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he said, `but this has gone on long enough. He's no right to talk to you so. After all you've gone through, as much for his good and all these great Men as for anyone else.

'See here, Captain! ' He planted himself squarely in front of Faramir his hands on his hips, and a look on his face as if he was addressing a young hobbit who had offered him what he called `sauce' when questioned about visits to the orchard. There was some murmuring, but also some grins on the faces of the men looking on: the sight of their Captain sitting on the ground and eye to eye with a young hobbit, legs well apart, bristling with wrath, was one beyond their experience. `See here! ' he said. `What are you driving at? Let's come to the point before all the Orcs of Mordor come down on us! If you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away, you've got no sense; but say it, and have done! And then let us know what you mean to do about it. But it's a pity that folk as talk about fighting the Enemy can't let others do their bit in their own way without interfering. He'd be mighty pleased, if he could see you now. Think he'd got a new friend, he would.'

`Patience!' said Faramir, but without anger. `Do not speak before your master, whose wit is greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach me of our peril. Even so, I spare a brief time, in order to judge justly in a hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have slain you long ago. For I am commanded to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of the Lord of Gondor. But I do not slay man or beast needlessly, and not gladly even when it is needed. Neither do I talk in vain. So be comforted. Sit by your master, and be silent! '

Sam sat down heavily with a red face. Faramir turned to Frodo again: 'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of death have many wings. Night oft brings news to near kindred, 'tis said. Boromir was my brother.'

A shadow of sorrow passed over his face. `Do you remember aught of special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with him among his gear?'

Frodo thought for a moment, fearing some further trap, and wondering how this debate would turn in the end. He had hardly saved the Ring from the proud grasp of Boromir, and how he would fare now among so many men, warlike and strong, he did not know. Yet he felt in his heart that Faramir, though he was much like his brother in looks, was a man less self-regarding, both sterner and wiser. 'I remember that Boromir bore a horn,' he said at last.

`You remember well, and as one who has in truth seen him,' said Faramir. `Then maybe you can see it in your mind's eye: a great horn of the wild ox of the East, bound with silver, and written with ancient characters. That horn the eldest son of our house has borne for many generations; and it is said that if it be blown at need anywhere within the bounds of Gondor, as the realm was of old, its voice will not pass unheeded.

'Five days ere I set out on this venture, eleven days ago at about this hour of the day, I heard the blowing of that horn: from the northward it seemed, but dim, as if it were but an echo in the mind. A boding of ill we thought it, my father and I, for no tidings had we heard of Boromir since he went away, and no watcher on our borders had seen him pass. And on the third night after another and a stranger thing befell me.

'I sat at night by the waters of Anduin, in the grey dark under the young pale moon, watching the ever-moving stream; and the sad reeds were rustling. So do we ever watch the shores nigh Osgiliath, which our enemies now partly hold, and issue from it to harry our lands. But that night all the world slept at the midnight hour. Then I saw, or it seemed that I saw, a boat floating on the water, glimmering grey, a small boat of a strange fashion with a high prow. and there was none to row or steer it.

`An awe fell on me, for a pale light was round it. But I rose and went to the bank, and began to walk out into the stream, for I was drawn towards it. Then the boat turned towards me, and stayed its pace, and floated slowly by within my hand's reach, yet I durst not handle it. It waded deep, as if it were heavily burdened, and it seemed to me as it passed under my gaze that it was almost filled with clear water, from which came the light; and lapped in the water a warrior lay asleep.

`A broken sword was on his knee. I saw many wounds on him. It was Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his beloved face. One thing only I missed: his horn. One thing only I knew not: a fair belt, as it were of linked golden leaves, about his waist. Boromir! I cried. Where is thy horn? Whither goest thou? O Boromir! But he was gone. The boat turned into the stream and passed glimmering on into the night. Dreamlike it was. and yet no dream, for there was no waking. And I do not doubt that he is dead and has passed down the River to the Sea.'

'Alas!' said Frodo. 'That was indeed Boromir as I knew him. For the golden belt was given to him in Lothlórien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was that clothed us as you see us, in elven-grey. This brooch is of the same workmanship.' He touched the green and silver leaf that fastened his cloak beneath his throat.

Faramir looked closely at it. `It is beautiful,' he said. 'Yes, 'tis work of the same craft. So then you passed through the Land of Lórien? Laurelindórenan it was named of old, but long now it has lain beyond the knowledge of Men,' he added softly, regarding Frodo with a new wonder in his eyes. `Much that was strange about you I begin now to understand. Will you not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight of the land of his home.'

'No more can I say than I have said,' answered Frodo. `Though your tale fills me with foreboding. A vision it was that you saw, I think, and no more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have seen the faces of fair warriors of old laid in sleep beneath the pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so by his foul arts.'

'Nay, it was not so,' said Faramir. 'For his works fill the heart with loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.'

`Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? ' asked Frodo. 'For no boat could have been carried over the stony hills from Tol Brandir; and Boromir purposed to go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan. And yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in the boiling pools, though laden with water? '

'I know not,' said Faramir. 'But whence came the boat? '

`From Lórien,' said Frodo. 'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to the Falls. They also were of elven-work.'

'You passed through the Hidden Land,' said Faramir, `but it seems that you little understood its power. If Men have dealings with the Mistress of Magic who dwells in the Golden Wood, then they may look for strange things to follow. For it is perilous for mortal man to walk out of the world of this Sun, and few of old came thence unchanged, 'tis said.

`Boromir, O Boromir!' he cried. `What did she say to you, the Lady that dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why went you ever to Laurelindórenan, and came not by your own road, upon the horses of Rohan riding home in the morning?'

Then turning again to Frodo, he spoke in a quiet voice once more. 'To those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo son of Drogo. But not here or now. maybe. But lest you still should think my tale a vision, I will tell you this. The horn of Boromir at least returned in truth, and not in seeming. The horn came, but it was cloven in two, as it were by axe or sword. The shards came severally to shore: one was found among the reeds where watchers of Gondor lay, northwards below the infalls of the Entwash; the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an errand in the water. Strange chances, but murder will out, 'tis said.

'And now the horn of the elder son lies in two pieces upon the lap of Denethor, sitting in his high chair, waiting for news. And you can tell me nothing of the cleaving of the horn? '

'No, I did not know of it,' said Frodo. `But the day when you heard it blowing, if your reckoning is true, was the day when we parted, when I and my servant left the Company. And now your tale fills me with dread. For if Boromir was then in peril and was slain, I must fear that all my companions perished too. And they were my kindred and my friends.

`Will you not put aside your doubt of me and let me go? I am weary, and full of grief, and afraid. But I have a deed to do, or to attempt, before I too am slain. And the more need of haste, if we two halflings are all that remain of our fellowship.

'Go back, Faramir, valiant Captain of Gondor, and defend your city while you may, and let me go where my doom takes me.'

`For me there is no comfort in our speech together,' said Faramir; `but you surely draw from it more dread than need be. Unless the people of Lórien themselves came to him, who arrayed Boromir as for a funeral? Not Orcs or servants of the Nameless. Some of your Company, I guess, live still.

`But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no longer. If hard days have made me any judge of Men's words and faces, then I may make a guess at Halflings! Though,' and now he smiled, `there is something strange about you, Frodo, an elvish air, maybe. But more lies upon our words together than I thought at first. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith to answer there to Denethor, and my life will justly be forfeit, if I now choose a course that proves ill for my city. So I will not decide in haste what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.'

He sprang to his feet and issued some orders. At once the men who were gathered round him broke up into small groups, and went off this way and that, vanishing quickly into the shadows of the rocks and trees. Soon only Mablung and Damrod remained.

'Now you, Frodo and Samwise, will come with me and my guards,' said Faramir. `You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was your purpose. It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after this affray than it has been yet. And you cannot, I think, go far today in any case, for you are weary. And so are we. We are going now to a secret place we have, somewhat less than ten miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the Enemy have not found it yet, and if they did, we could hold it long even against many. There we may lie up and rest for a while, and you with us. In the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.'

There was nothing for Frodo to do but to fall in with this request, or order. It seemed in any case a wise course for the moment, since this foray of the men of Gondor had made a journey in Ithilien more dangerous than ever.

They set out at once: Mablung and Damrod a little ahead, and Faramir with Frodo and Sam behind. Skirting the hither side of the pool where the hobbits had bathed, they crossed the stream, climbed a long bank, and passed into green-shadowed woodlands that marched ever downwards and westwards. While they walked, as swiftly as the hobbits could go, they talked in hushed voices.

'I broke off our speech together,' said Faramir, 'not only because time pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because we were drawing near to matters that were better not debated openly before many men. It was for that reason that I turned rather to the matter of my brother and let be Isildur's Bane. You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.'

`I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,' said Frodo.

`I do not blame you,' said Faramir. 'You spoke with skill in a hard place, and wisely, it seemed to me. But I learned or guessed more from you than your words said. You were not friendly with Boromir, or you did not part in friendship. You, and Master Samwise, too, I guess have some grievance. Now I loved him dearly, and would gladly avenge his death, yet I knew him well. Isildur's Bane - I would hazard that Isildur's Bane lay between you and was a cause of contention in your Company. Clearly it is a mighty heirloom of some sort, and such things do not breed peace among confederates, not if aught may be learned from ancient tales. Do I not hit near the mark?'

`Near,' said Frodo, 'but not in the gold. There was no contention in our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we should take from the Emyn Muil. But be that as it may, ancient tales teach us also the peril of rash words concerning such things as - heirlooms.'

'Ah, then it is as I thought: your trouble was with Boromir alone. He wished this thing brought to Minas Tirith. Alas! it is a crooked fate that seals your lips who saw him last, and holds from me that which I long to know: what was in his heart and thought in his latest hours. Whether he erred or no, of this I am sure: he died well, achieving some good thing. His face was more beautiful even than in life.

`But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at first about Isildur's Bane. Forgive me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for thought. We had had a hard fight, and there was more than enough to fill my mind. But even as I spoke with you, I drew nearer to the mark, and so deliberately shot wider. For you must know that much is still preserved of ancient lore among the Rulers of the city that is not spread abroad. We of my house are not of the line of Elendil. though the blood of Númenor is in us. For we reckon back our line to Mardil, the good steward, who ruled in the king's stead when he went away to war. And that was King Eärnur, last of the line of Anárion, and childless, and he came never back. And the stewards have governed the city since that day, though it was many generations of Men ago.

'And this I remember of Boromir as a boy, when we together learned the tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always it displeased him that his father was not king. "How many hundreds of years needs it to make a steward a king, if the king returns not? " he asked. "Few years, maybe, in other places of less royalty," my father answered. "In Gondor ten thousand years would not suffice." Alas! poor Boromir. Does that not tell you something of him? '

'It does,' said Frodo. `Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.'

'I doubt it not,' said Faramir. `If he were satisfied of Aragorn's claim as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch has not yet come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become rivals in her wars.

`But I stray. We in the house of Denethor know much ancient lore by long tradition, and there are moreover in our treasuries many things preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments, yea, and on stone, and on leaves of silver and of gold, in divers characters. Some none can now read; and for the rest, few ever unlock them. I can read a little in them, for I have had teaching. It was these records that brought the Grey Pilgrim to us. I first saw him when I was a child, and he has been twice or thrice since then.'

'The Grey Pilgrim? ' said Frodo. 'Had he a name?'

'Mithrandir we called him in elf-fashion,' said Faramir, 'and he was content. Many are my names in many countries, he said. Mithrandir among the Elves, Tharkûn to the Dwarves; Olórin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten, in the South Incánus, in the North Gandalf; to the East I go not.'

'Gandalf!' said Frodo. 'I thought it was he. Gandalf the Grey dearest of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.'

'Mithrandir was lost! ' said Faramir. 'An evil fate seems to have pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one of so great wisdom, and of power - for many wonderful things he did among us - could perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of this, and that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? '

'Alas! yes,' said Frodo. `I saw him fall into the abyss.'

'I see that there is some great tale of dread in this.' said Faramir `which perhaps you may tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done in our time. Had he been among us to consult concerning the hard words of our dream, he could have made them clear to us without need of messenger. Yet, maybe, he would not have done so, and the journey of Boromir was doomed. Mithrandir never spoke to us of what was to be, nor did he reveal his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I do not know, to look at the secrets of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would teach (and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would question us above all else concerning the Great Battle that was fought upon Dagorlad in the beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not name was overthrown. And he was eager for stories of Isildur, though of him we had less to tell; for nothing certain was ever known among us of his end.'

Now Faramir's voice sank to a whisper. 'But this much I learned or guessed, and I have kept it ever secret in my heart since: that Isildur took somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed, ere he went away from Gondor, never to be seen among mortal men again. Here I thought was the answer to Mithrandir's questioning. But it seemed then a matter that concerned only the seekers after ancient learning. Nor when the riddling words of our dream were debated among us, did I think of Isildur's Bane as being this same thing. For Isildur was ambushed and slain by orc-arrows, according to the only legend that we knew, and Mithrandir had never told me more.

`What in truth this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom of power and peril it must be. A fell weapon, perchance, devised by the Dark Lord. If it were a thing that gave advantage in battle. I can well believe that Boromir, the proud and fearless, often rash, ever anxious for the victory of Minas Tirith (and his own glory therein), might desire such a thing and be allured by it. Alas that ever he went on that errand! I should have been chosen by my father and the elders but he put himself forward. as being the older and the hardier (both true), and he would not be stayed.

'But fear no more! I would not take this thing, if it lay by the highway. Not were Minas Tirith falling in ruin and I alone could save her, so, using the weapon of the Dark Lord for her good and my glory. No. I do not wish for such triumphs, Frodo son of Drogo.'

'Neither did the Council,' said Frodo. 'Nor do I. I would have nothing to do with such matters.'

`For myself,' said Faramir, 'I would see the White Tree in flower again in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, and Minas Tirith in peace: Minas Anor again as of old, full of light, high and fair, beautiful as a queen among other queens: not a mistress of many slaves, nay, not even a kind mistress of willing slaves. War must be, while we defend our lives against a destroyer who would devour all; but I do not love the bright sword for its sharpness, nor the arrow for its swiftness, nor the warrior for his glory. I love only that which they defend: the city of the Men of Númenor; and I would have her loved for her memory, her ancientry, her beauty, and her present wisdom. Not feared, save as men may fear the dignity of a man, old and wise.

'So fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me more. I do not even ask you to tell me whether I now speak nearer the mark. But if you will trust me, it may be that I can advise you in your present quest, whatever that be-yes, and even aid you.'

Frodo made no answer. Almost he yielded to the desire for help and counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words seemed so wise and fair, all that was in his mind. But something held him back. His heart was heavy with fear and sorrow: if he and Sam were indeed, as seemed likely, all that was now left of the Nine Walkers, then he was in sole command of the secret of their errand. Better mistrust undeserved than rash words. And the memory of Boromir, of the dreadful change that the lure of the Ring had worked in him, was very present to his mind, when he looked at Faramir and listened to his voice: unlike they were, and yet also much akin.

They walked on in silence for a while, passing like grey and green shadows under the old trees, their feet making no sound; above them many birds sang, and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark leaves in the evergreen woods of Ithilien.

Sam had taken no part in the conversation, though he had listened; and at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears to all the soft woodland noises about them. One thing he had noted, that in all the talk the name of Gollum had not once come up. He was glad, though he felt that it was too much to hope that he would never hear it again. He soon became aware also that though they walked alone, there were many men close at hand: not only Damrod and Mablung flitting in and out of the shadows ahead, but others on either side, all making their swift secret way to some appointed place.

Once, looking suddenly back, as if some prickle of the skin told him that he was watched from behind, he thought he caught a brief glimpse of a small dark shape slipping behind a tree-trunk. He opened his mouth to speak and shut it again. `I'm not sure of it,' he said to himself, 'and why should I remind them of the old villain, if they choose to forget him? I wish I could!'

So they passed on, until the woodlands grew thinner and the land began to fall more steeply. Then they turned aside again, to the right, and came quickly to a small river in a narrow gorge: it was the same stream that trickled far above out of the round pool, now grown to a swift torrent, leaping down over many stones in a deep-cloven bed, overhung with ilex and dark box-woods. Looking west they could see, below them in a haze of light, lowlands and broad meads, and glinting far off in the westering sun the wide waters of the Anduin.

'Here, alas! I must do you a discourtesy,' said Faramir. "I hope you will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way to courtesy as not to slay you or to bind you. But it is a command that no stranger, not even one of Rohan that fights with us, shall see the path we now go with open eyes. I must blindfold you.'

`As you will,' said Frodo. 'Even the Elves do likewise at need, and blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlórien. Gimli the dwarf took it ill, but the hobbits endured it.'

`It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,' said Faramir. 'But I am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.'

He called softly and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped out of the trees and came back to him. 'Blindfold these guests,' said Faramir. `Securely, but not so as to discomfort them. Do not tie their hands. They will give their word not to try and see. I could trust them to shut their eyes of their own accord, but eyes will blink, if the feet stumble. Lead them so that they do not falter.'

With green scarves the two guards now bound up the hobbits' eyes and drew their hoods down almost to their mouths; then quickly they took each one by the hand and went on their way. All that Frodo and Sam knew of this last mile of the road they learned from guessing in the dark. After a little they found that they were on a path descending steeply; soon it grew so narrow that they went in single file, brushing a stony wall on either side; their guards steered them from behind with hands laid firmly on their shoulders. Now and again they came to rough places and were lifted from their feet for a while, and then set down again. Always the noise of the running water was on their right hand, and it grew nearer and louder. At length they were halted. Quickly Mablung and Damrod turned them about, several times, and they lost all sense of direction. They climbed upwards a little: it seemed cold and the noise of the stream had become faint. Then they were picked up and carried down, down many steps, and round a corner. Suddenly they heard the water again, loud now, rushing and splashing. All round them it seemed, and they felt a fine rain on their hands and cheeks. At last they were set on their feet once more. For a moment they stood so, half fearful, blindfold, not knowing where they were; and no one spoke.

Then came the voice of Faramir close behind. `Let them see! ' he said. The scarves were removed and their hoods drawn back, and they blinked and gasped.

They stood on a wet floor of polished stone, the doorstep, as it were, of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But in front a thin veil of water was hung, so near that Frodo could have put an outstretched arm into it. It faced westward. The level shafts of the setting sun behind beat upon it, and the red light was broken into many flickering beams of ever-changing colour. It was as if they stood at the window of some elven-tower, curtained with threaded jewels of silver and gold, and ruby, sapphire and amethyst, all kindled with an unconsuming fire.

'At least by good chance we came at the right hour to reward you for your patience,' said Faramir. `This is the Window of the Sunset, Henneth Annûn, fairest of all the falls of Ithilien, land of many fountains. Few strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it. Enter now and see! '

Even as he spoke the sun sank, and the fire faded in the flowing water. They turned and passed under the low forbidding arch. At once they found themselves in a rock-chamber, wide and rough, with an uneven stooping roof. A few torches were kindled and cast a dim light on the glistening walls. Many men were already there. Others were still coming in by twos and threes through a dark narrow door on one side. As their eyes grew accustomed to the gloom the hobbits saw that the cave was larger than they had guessed and was filled with great store of arms and victuals.

'Well, here is our refuge,' said Faramir. `Not a place of great ease but here you may pass the night in peace. It is dry at least, and there is food, though no fire. At one time the water flowed down through this cave and out of the arch, but its course was changed further up the gorge, by workmen of old, and the stream sent down in a fall of doubled height over the rocks far above. All the ways into this grot were then sealed against the entry of water or aught else, all save one. There are now but two ways out: that passage yonder by which you entered blindfold, and through the Window-curtain into a deep bowl filled with knives of stone. Now rest a while, until the evening meal is set.'

The hobbits were taken to a corner and given a low bed to lie on, if they wished. Meanwhile men busied themselves about the cave, quietly and in orderly quickness. Light tables were taken from the walls and set up on trestles and laden with gear. This was plain and unadorned for the most part, but all well and fairly, made: round platters, bowls and dishes of glazed brown clay or turned box-wood, smooth and clean. Here and there was a cup or basin of polished bronze; and a goblet of plain silver was set by the Captain's seat in the middle of the inmost table.

Faramir went about among the men, questioning each as he came in, in a soft voice. Some came back from the pursuit of the Southrons; others, left behind as scouts near the road, came in latest. All the Southrons had been accounted for, save only the great mûmak: what happened to him none could say. Of the enemy no movement could be seen; not even an orc-spy was abroad.

'You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?' Faramir asked of the latest comer.

`Well, no, lord,' said the man. `No Orc at least. But I saw, or thought I saw, something a little strange. It was getting deep dusk, when the eyes make things greater than they should be. So perhaps it may have been no more than a squirrel.' Sam pricked up his ears at this. 'Yet if so, it was a black squirrel, and I saw no tail. 'Twas like a shadow on the ground, and it whisked behind a tree-trunk when I drew nigh and went up aloft as swift as any squirrel could. You will not have us slay wild beasts for no purpose, and it seemed no more, so I tried no arrow. It was too dark for sure shooting anyway, and the creature was gone into the gloom of the leaves in a twinkling. But I stayed for a while, for it seemed strange, and then I hastened back. I thought I heard the thing hiss at me from high above as I turned away. A large squirrel, maybe. Perhaps under the shadow of the Unnamed some of the beasts of Mirkwood are wandering hither to our woods. They have black squirrels there, 'tis said.'

`Perhaps,' said Faramir. `But that would be an ill omen, if it were so. We do not want the escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.' Sam fancied that he gave a swift glance towards the hobbits as he spoke; but Sam said nothing. For a while he and Frodo lay back and watched the torchlight, and the men moving to and fro speaking in hushed voices. Then suddenly Frodo fell asleep.

Sam struggled with himself, arguing this way and that. `He may be all right,' he thought, 'and then he may not. Fair speech may hide a foul heart.' He yawned. `I could sleep for a week, and I'd be better for it. And what can I do, if I do keep awake, me all alone, and all these great Men about? Nothing, Sam Gamgee; but you've got to keep awake all the same.' And somehow he managed it. The light faded from the cave door, and the grey veil of falling water grew dim and was lost in gathering shadow. Always the sound of the water went on, never changing its note, morning or evening or night. It murmured and whispered of sleep. Sam stuck his knuckles in his eyes.

Now more torches were being lit. A cask of wine was broached. Storage barrels were being opened. Men were fetching water from the fall. Some were laving their hands in basins. A wide copper bowl and a white cloth were brought to Faramir and he washed.

`Wake our guests,' he said, `and take them water. It is time to eat.'

Frodo sat up and yawned and stretched. Sam, not used to being waited on, looked with some surprise at the tall man who bowed, holding a basin of water before him.

'Put it on the ground, master, if you please! ' he said. 'Easier for me and you.' Then to the astonishment and amusement of the Men he plunged his head into the cold water and splashed his neck and ears.

'Is it the custom in your land to wash the head before supper? ' said the man who waited on the hobbits.

`No, before breakfast,' said Sam. `But if you're short of sleep cold water on the neck's like rain on a wilted lettuce. There! Now I can keep awake long enough to eat a bit.'

They were led then to seats beside Faramir: barrels covered with pelts and high enough above the benches of the Men for their convenience. Before they ate, Faramir and all his men turned and faced west in a moment of silence. Faramir signed to Frodo and Sam that they should do likewise.

'So we always do.' he said, as they sat down: `we look towards Númenor that was, and beyond to Elvenhome that is, and to that which is beyond Elvenhome and will ever be. Have you no such custom at meat? '

`No,' said Frodo, feeling strangely rustic and untutored. `But if we are guests, we bow to our host, and after we have eaten we rise and thank him.'

'That we do also,' said Faramir.

After so long journeying and camping, and days spent ¤n the lonely wild, the evening meal seemed a feast to the hobbits: to drink pale yellow wine, cool and fragrant, and eat bread and butter, and salted meats, and dried fruits, and good red cheese, with clean hands and clean knives and plates. Neither Frodo nor Sam refused anything that was offered, nor a second, nor indeed a third helping. The wine coursed in their veins and tired limbs, and they felt glad and easy of heart as they had not done since they left the land of Lórien.

When all was done Faramir led them to a recess at the back of the cave, partly screened by curtains; and a chair and two stools were brought there. A little earthenware lamp burned in a niche.

`You may soon desire to sleep,' he said, 'and especially good Samwise, who would not close his eyes before he ate - whether for fear of blunting the edge of a noble hunger, or for fear of me, I do not know. But it is not good to sleep too soon after meat, and that following a fast. Let us talk a while. On your journey from Rivendell there must have been many things to tell. And you, too, would perhaps wish to learn something of us and the lands where you now are. Tell me of Boromir my brother, and of old Mithrandir, and of the fair people of Lothlórien.'

Frodo no longer felt sleepy and he was willing to talk. But though the food and wine had put him at his ease, he had not lost all his caution. Sam was beaming and humming to himself, but when Frodo spoke he was at first content to listen, only occasionally venturing to make an exclamation of agreement.

Frodo told many tales, yet always he steered the matter away from the quest of the Company and from the Ring, enlarging rather on the valiant part Boromir had played in all their adventures. with the wolves of the wild, in the snows under Caradhras, and in the mines of Moria where Gandalf fell. Faramir was most moved by the story of the fight on the bridge.

`It must have irked Boromir to run from Orcs,' he said, `or even from the fell thing you name, the Balrog - even though he was the last to leave.'

`He was the last,' said Frodo, 'but Aragorn was forced to lead us. He alone knew the way after Gandalf's fall. But had there not been us lesser folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir would have fled.'

`Maybe, it would have been better had Boromir fallen there with Mithrandir,' said Faramir, `and not gone on to the fate that waited above the falls of Rauros.'

'Maybe. But tell me now of your own fortunes,' said Frodo, turning the matter aside once again. `For I would learn more of Minas Ithil and Osgiliath, and Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What hope have you for that city in your long war? '

'What hope have we? ' said Faramir. 'It is long since we had any hope. The sword of Elendil, if it returns indeed, may rekindle it, but I do not think that it will do more than put off the evil day, unless other help unlooked-for also comes, from Elves or Men. For the Enemy increases and we decrease. We are a failing people, a springless autumn.

`The Men of Númenor were settled far and wide on the shores and seaward regions of the Great Lands, but for the most part they fell into evils and follies. Many became enamoured of the Darkness and the black arts; some were given over wholly to idleness and ease, and some fought among themselves, until they were conquered in their weakness by the wild men.

`It is not said that evil arts were ever practised in Gondor, or that the Nameless One was ever named in honour there; and the old wisdom and beauty brought out of the West remained long in the realm of the sons of Elendil the Fair, and they linger there still. Yet even so it was Gondor that brought about its own decay, falling by degrees into dotage, and thinking that the Enemy was asleep, who was only banished not destroyed.

'Death was ever present, because the Númenoreans still, as they had in their old kingdom, and so lost it, hungered after endless life unchanging. Kings made tombs more splendid than houses of the living. and counted old names in the rolls of their descent dearer than the names of sons. Childless lords sat in aged halls musing on heraldry; in secret chambers withered men compounded strong elixirs, or in high cold towers asked questions of the stars. And the last king of the line of Anárion had no heir.

`But the stewards were wiser and more fortunate. Wiser, for they recruited the strength of our people from the sturdy folk of the sea-coast, and from the hardy mountaineers of Ered Nimrais. And they made a truce with the proud peoples of the North, who often had assailed us, men of fierce valour, but our kin from afar off, unlike the wild Easterlings or the cruel Haradrim.

'So it came to pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward (and my father is the sit and twentieth) that they rode to our aid and at the great Field of Celebrant they destroyed our enemies that had seized our northern provinces. These are the Rohirrim, as we name them, masters of horses, and we ceded to them the fields of Calenardhon that are since called Rohan; for that province had long been sparsely peopled. And they became our allies, and have ever proved true to us, aiding us at need, and guarding our northern marches and the Gap of Rohan.

`Of our lore and manners they have learned what they would, and their lords speak our speech at need; yet for the most part they hold by the ways of their own fathers and to their own memories, and they speak among themselves their own North tongue. And we love them: tall men and fair women, valiant both alike, golden-haired, bright-eyed, and strong; they remind us of the youth of Men, as they were in the Elder Days. Indeed it is said by our lore-masters that they have from of old this affinity with us that they are come from those same Three Houses of Men as were the Númenoreans in their beginning not from Hador the Goldenhaired, the Elf-friend, maybe, yet from such of his sons and people as went not over Sea into the West, refusing the call.

'For so we reckon Men in our lore, calling them the High, or Men of the West, which were Númenoreans; and the Middle Peoples, Men of the Twilight, such as are the Rohirrim and their kin that dwell still far in the North; and the Wild, the Men of Darkness.

`Yet now, if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to us, enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too have become more like to them, and can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle Men, of the Twilight, but with memory of other things. For as the Rohirrim do, we now love war and valour as things good in themselves, both a sport and an end; and though we still hold that a warrior should have more skills and knowledge than only the craft of weapons and slaying, we esteem a warrior, nonetheless, above men of other crafts. Such is the need of our days. So even was my brother, Boromir: a man of prowess, and for that he was accounted the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of Minas Tirith has for long years been so hardy in toil, so onward into battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.' Faramir sighed and fell silent for a while.

`You don't say much in all your tales about the Elves, sir,' said Sam, suddenly plucking up courage. He had noted that Faramir seemed to refer to Elves with reverence, and this even more than his courtesy, and his food and wine, had won Sam's respect and quieted his suspicions.

`No indeed, Master Samwise,' said Faramir, `for I am not learned in Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which we have changed, declining from Númenor to Middle-earth. For as you may know, if Mithrandir was your companion and you have spoken with Elrond, the Edain, the Fathers of the Númenoreans, fought beside the Elves in the first wars, and were rewarded by the gift of the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of Elvenhome. But in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days of darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time in which each kind walked further down their sundered roads. Men now fear and misdoubt the Elves, and yet know little of them. And we of Gondor grow like other Men, like the men of Rohan; for even they, who are the foes of the Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of the Golden Wood with dread.

`Yet there are among us still some who have dealings with the Elves when they may, and ever and anon one will go in secret to Lórien, seldom to return. Not I. For I deem it perilous now for mortal man wilfully to seek out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have spoken with the White Lady.'

`The Lady of Lórien! Galadriel!' cried Sam. `You should see her indeed you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening's my job at home, sir, if you understand me, and I'm not much good at poetry - not at making it: a bit of a comic rhyme, perhaps. now and again, you know, but not real poetry - so I can't tell you what I mean. It ought to be sung. You'd have to get Strider, Aragorn that is, or old Mr. Bilbo, for that. But I wish I could make a song about her. Beautiful she is, sir! Lovely! Sometimes like a great tree in flower, sometimes like a white daffadowndilly, small and slender like. Hard as di'monds, soft as moonlight. Warm as sunlight, cold as frost in the stars. Proud and far-off as a snow-mountain, and as merry as any lass I ever saw with daisies in her hair in springtime. But that's a lot o' nonsense, and all wide of my mark.'

'Then she must be lovely indeed,' said Faramir. `Perilously fair.'

`I don't know about perilous,' said Sam. `It strikes me that folk takes their peril with them into Lórien, and finds it there because they've brought it. But perhaps you could call her perilous, because she's so strong in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on a rock; or drownd yourself, like a hobbit in a river. But neither rock nor river would be to blame. Now Boro - ' He stopped and went red in the face.

`Yes? Now Boromir you would say? ' said Faramir. `What would you say? He took his peril with him? '

`Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a fine man as your brother was if I may say so. But you've been warm on the scent all along. Now I watched Boromir and listened to him, from Rivendell all down the road - looking after my master, as you'll understand, and not meaning any harm to Boromir - and it's my opinion that in Lórien he first saw clearly what I guessed sooner: what he wanted. From the moment he first saw it he wanted the Enemy's Ring! '

`Sam! ' cried Frodo aghast. He had fallen deep into his own thoughts for a while, and came out of them suddenly and too late.

'Save me! ' said Sam turning white, and then flushing scarlet. `There I go again! When ever you open your big mouth you put your foot in it the Gaffer used to say to me, and right enough. O dear, O dear!

`Now look here, sir! ' He turned, facing up to Faramir with all the courage that he could muster. `Don't you go taking advantage of my master because his servant's no better than a fool. You've spoken very handsome all along, put me off my guard, talking of Elves and all. But handsome is as handsome does we say. Now's a chance to show your quality.'

'So it seems,' said Faramir, slowly and very softly, with a strange smile. `So that is the answer to all the riddles! The One Ring that was thought to have perished from the world. And Boromir tried to take it by force? And you escaped? And ran all the way - to me! And here in the wild I have you: two halflings, and a host of men at my call, and the Ring of Rings. A pretty stroke of fortune! A chance for Faramir, Captain of Gondor, to show his quality! Ha!' He stood up, very tall and stern, his grey eyes glinting.

Frodo and Sam sprang from their stools and set themselves side by side with their backs to the wall, fumbling for their sword-hilts. There was a silence. All the men in the cave stopped talking and looked towards them in wonder. But Faramir sat down again in his chair and began to laugh quietly, and then suddenly became grave again.

'Alas for Boromir! It was too sore a trial! ' he said. `How you have increased my sorrow, you two strange wanderers from a far country, bearing the peril of Men! But you are less judges of Men than I of Halflings. We are truth-speakers, we men of Gondor. We boast seldom, and then perform, or die in the attempt. Not if I found it on the highway would I take it I said. Even if I were such a man as to desire this thing, and even though I knew not clearly what this thing was when I spoke, still I should take those words as a vow, and be held by them.

'But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough to know that there are some perils from which a man must flee. Sit at peace! And be comforted, Samwise. If you seem to have stumbled, think that it was fated to be so. Your heart is shrewd as well as faithful, and saw clearer than your eyes. For strange though it may seem, it was safe to declare this to me. It may even help the master that you love. It shall turn to his good, if it is in my power. So be comforted. But do not even name this thing again aloud. Once is enough.'

The hobbits came back to their seats and sat very quiet. Men turned back to their drink and their talk, perceiving that their captain had had some jest or other with the little guests, and that it was over.

'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,' said Faramir. 'If you took this thing on yourself, unwilling, at others' asking, then you have pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep it hid and not to use it. You are a new people and a new world to me. Are all your kin of like sort? Your land must be a realm of peace and content, and there must gardeners be in high honour.'

`Not all is well there,' said Frodo, `but certainly gardeners are honoured.'

`But folk must grow weary there, even in their gardens, as do all things under the Sun of this world. And you are far from home and wayworn. No more tonight. Sleep, both of you - in peace, if you can. Fear not! I do not wish to see it, or touch it, or know more of it than I know (which is enough), lest peril perchance waylay me and I fall lower in the test than Frodo son of Drogo. Go now to rest - but first tell me only, if you will, whither you wish to go, and what to do. For I must watch, and wait, and think. Time passes. In the morning we must each go swiftly on the ways appointed to us.'

Frodo had felt himself trembling as the first shock of fear passed. Now a great weariness came down on him like a cloud. He could dissemble and resist no longer.

'I was going to find a way into Mordor,' he said faintly. `I was going to Gorgoroth. I must find the Mountain of Fire and cast the thing into the gulf of Doom. Gandalf said so. I do not think I shall ever get there.'

Faramir stared at him for a moment in grave astonishment. Then suddenly he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carried him to the bed and laid him there, and covered him warmly. At once he fell into a deep sleep.

Another bed was set beside him for his servant. Sam hesitated for a moment, then bowing very low: `Good night, Captain, my lord,' he said. `You took the chance, sir.'

`Did I so?' said Faramir.

`Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.'

Faramir smiled. 'A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. Yet there was naught in this to praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.'

`Ah well, sir,' said Sam, `you said my master had an elvish air and that was good and true. But I can say this: you have an air too, sir, that reminds me of, of - well, Gandalf, of wizards.

'Maybe,' said Faramir. `Maybe you discern from far away the air of Númenor. Good night!'


'Then let us go to the forest,' said Aragorn.

It was not long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point, near the bank of the Entwash, he came upon footprints: hobbit-prints, but too light for much to be made of them. Then again beneath the bole of a great tree on the very edge of the wood more prints were discovered. The earth was bare and dry, and did not reveal much.

'One hobbit at least stood here for a while and looked back; and then he turned away into the forest,' said Aragorn.

'Then we must go in, too,' said Gimli. 'But I do not like the look of this Fangorn: and we were warned against it. I wish the chase had led anywhere else!'

'I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say,' said Legolas. He stood under the eaves of the forest, stooping forward, as if he were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows. 'No, it is not evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of dark places where the hearts of the trees are black. There is no malice near us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.'

'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,' said Gimli. 'I have done it no harm. '

'That is just as well,' said Legolas. 'But nonetheless it has suffered harm. There is something happening inside, or going to happen. Do you not feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.'

'I feel the air is stuffy,' said the Dwarf. 'This wood is lighter than Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.'

'It is old, very old,' said the Elf. 'So old that almost I feel young again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old and full of memory. I could have been happy here, if I had come in days of peace.'

'I dare say you could,' snorted Gimli. 'You are a Wood-elf, anyway, though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where you go, I will go. But keep your bow ready to hand, and I will keep my axe loose in my belt. Not for use on trees,' he added hastily, looking up at the tree under which they stood. 'I do not wish to meet that old man at unawares without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!'

With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for him to see. The floor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift of leaves; but guessing that the fugitives would stay near the water, he returned often to the banks of the stream. So it was that he came upon the place where Merry and Pippin had drunk and bathed their feet. There plain for all to see were the footprints of two hobbits, one somewhat smaller than the other.

'This is good tidings,' said Aragorn. 'Yet the marks are two days old And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water-side.'

'Then what shall we do now?' said Gimli. 'We cannot pursue them through the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do not find them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and show our friendship by starving together.'

'If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,' said Aragorn. 'Let us go on.'

They came at length to the steep abrupt end of Treebeard's Hill and looked up at the rock-wall with its rough steps leading to the high shelf. Gleams of sun were striking through the hurrying clouds, and the forest now looked less grey and drear.

'Let us go up and look about us!' said Legolas. 'I will feel my breath short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.'

The companions climbed up. Aragorn came last, moving slowly: he was scanning the steps and ledges closely.

'I am almost sure that the hobbits have been up here,' he said. 'But there are other marks, very strange marks, which I do not understand. I wonder if we can see anything from this ledge which will help us to guess which way they went next?'

He stood up and looked about, but he saw nothing that was of any use. The shelf faced southward and eastward; but only on the east was the view open. There he could see the heads of the trees descending in ranks towards the plain from which they had come.

'We have journeyed a long way round,' said Legolas. 'We could have all come here safe together, if we had left the Great River on the second or third day and struck west. Few can foresee whither their road will lead them, till they come to its end.'

'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,' said Gimli.

'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!'

'Look at what?' said Gimli.

'There in the trees.'

'Where? I have not elf-eyes.'

'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!' said Legolas pointing. 'Down in the wood, back in the Way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him, passing from tree to tree?'

'I see, I see now!' hissed Gimli. 'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you? There is the old man. All in dirty grey rags: that is why I could not see him at first.'

Aragorn looked and beheld a bent figure moving slowly. It was not far away. It looked like an old beggar-man, walking wearily, leaning on a rough staff. His head was bowed, and he did not look towards them. In other lands they would have greeted him with kind words; but now they stood silent, each feeling a strange expectancy: something was approaching that held a hidden power-or menace.

Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the figure drew nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he burst out: 'Your bow, Legolas! Bend it! Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or put a spell upon us! Shoot first!'

Legolas took his bow and bent it, slowly and as if some other will resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not fit it to the string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent.

'Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you?' said Gimli in a hissing whisper.

'Legolas is right,' said Aragorn quietly. 'We may not shoot an old man so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and wait!'

At that moment the old man quickened his pace and came with surprising speed to the foot of the rock-wall. Then suddenly he looked up, while they stood motionless looking down. There was no sound.

They could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he wore a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his features were over-shadowed, except for the end of his nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed to Aragorn that he caught the gleam of eyes keen and bright from within the shadow of the hooded brows.

At last the old man broke the silence. 'Well met indeed, my friends,' he said in a soft voice. 'I wish to speak to you. Will you come down or shall I come up?' Without waiting for an answer he began to climb.

'Now!' said Gimli. 'Stop him, Legolas!'

'Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?' said the old man. 'Put away that bow, Master Elf!'

The bow and arrow fell from Legolas' hands, and his arms hung loose at his sides.

'And you, Master Dwarf, pray take your hand from your axe-haft, till I am up! You will not need such arguments.'

Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a goat. All weariness seemed to have left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was a gleam, too brief for certainty, a quick glint of white, as if some garment shrouded by the grey rags had been for an instant revealed The intake of Gimli's breath could be heard as a loud hiss in the silence.

'Well met, I say again!' said the old man, coming towards them. When he was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with his head thrust forward, peering at them from under his hood. 'And what may you be doing in these parts? An Elf, a Man, and a Dwarf. all clad in elvish fashion. No doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind it all. Such things are not often seen here.'

'You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,' said Aragorn. 'Is that so?'

'Not well,' said the old man: 'that would be the study of many lives. But I come here now and again.'

'Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say to us?' said Aragorn. 'The morning passes, and we have an errand that will not wait.'

'As for what I wished to say, I have said it: What may you be doing, and what tale can you tell of yourselves? As for my name!' He broke off, laughing long and softly. Aragorn felt a shudder run through him at the sound, a strange cold thrill; and yet it was not fear or terror that he felt: rather it was like the sudden bite of a keen air, or the slap of a cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper.

'My name!' said the old man again. 'Have you not guessed it already? You have heard it before, I think. Yes, you have heard it before. But come now, what of your tale?'

The three companions stood silent and made no answer.

'There are some who would begin to doubt whether your errand is fit to tell,' said the old man. 'Happily I know something of it. You are tracking the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don't stare, as if you had never heard the strange name before. You have, and so have I. Well, they climbed up here the day before yesterday; and they met someone that they did not expect. Does that comfort you? And now you would like to know where they were taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news about that. But why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.'

The old man turned away and went towards a heap of fallen stones and rock at the foot of the cliff behind. Immediately, as if a spell had been removed, the others relaxed and stirred. Gimli's hand went at once to his axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his bow.

The old man took no notice, but stooped and sat himself on a low flat stone. Then his grey cloak drew apart, and they saw, beyond doubt, that he was clothed beneath all in white.

'Saruman!' cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand. 'speak! Tell us where you have hidden our friends! What have you done with them? Speak, or I will make a dint in your hat that even a wizard will find it hard to deal with!'

The old man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly tall, towering above them. His hood and his grey rags were flung away. His white garments shone. He lifted up his staff, and Gimli's axe leaped from his grasp and fell ringing on the ground. The sword of Aragorn, stiff in his motionless hand, blazed with a sudden fire. Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high into the air: it vanished in a flash of flame.

'Mithrandir!' he cried. 'Mithrandir!'

'Well met, I say to you again. Legolas!' said the old man.

They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in the sunshine; and gleaming white was his robe; the eyes under his deep brows were bright, piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between wonder, joy, and fear they stood and found no words to say.

At last Aragorn stirred. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'Beyond all hope you return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!' Gimli said nothing, hut sank to his knees, shading his eyes.

'Gandalf,' the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory a long disused word. 'Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.'

He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak wrapped it about him: it seemed as if the sun had been shining, but now was hid in cloud again. 'Yes, you may still call me Gandalf,' he said, and the voice was the voice of their old friend and guide. 'Get up, my good Gimli! No blame to you, and no harm done to me. Indeed my friends, none of you have any weapon that could hurt me. Be merry! We meet again. At the turn of the tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.'

He laid his hand on Gimli's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed suddenly. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'But you are all in white!'

'Yes, I am white now,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed I am Saruman, one might almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now, tell me of yourselves! I have passed through fire and deep water, since we parted. I have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had forgotten. I can see many things far off, but many things that are close at hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!'

'What do you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has happened since we parted on the bridge would be a long tale. Will you not first give us news of the hobbits? Did you find them, and are they safe?'

'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf. 'There was a darkness over the valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their captivity, until the eagle told me.'

'The eagle!' said Legolas. 'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.'

'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the River and gather tidings. His sight is keen, but he cannot see all that passes under hill and tree. Some things he has seen, and others I have seen myself. The Ring now has passed beyond my help, or the help of any of the Company that set out from Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to the Enemy, but it escaped. I had some part in that: for I sat in a high place, and I strove with the Dark Tower; and the Shadow passed. Then I was weary, very weary; and I walked long in dark thought.'

'Then you know about Frodo!' said Gimli. 'How do things go with him?'

'I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before him still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is all that I can say.'

'Not alone,' said Legolas. 'We think that Sam went with him.'

'Did he!' said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on his face. 'Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey.'

The companions sat on the ground at his feet, and Aragorn took up the tale. For a long while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no questions. His hands were spread upon his knees, and his eyes were closed. At last when Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of his last journey upon the Great River, the old man sighed.

'You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,' he said quietly. 'Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to him. It was a sore trial for such a man: a warrior, and a lord of men. Galadriel told me that he was in peril. But he escaped in the end. I am glad. It was not in vain that the young hobbits came with us, if only for Boromir's sake. But that is not the only part they have to play. They were brought to Fangorn, and their coming was like the falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains. Even as we talk here, I hear the first rumblings. Saruman had best not be caught away from home when the dam bursts!'

'In one thing you have not changed, dear friend,' said Aragorn: 'you still speak in riddles.'

'What? In riddles?' said Gandalf. 'No! For I was talking aloud to myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to speak to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.' He laughed, but the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam of sunshine.

'I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient Houses,' said Aragorn. 'Will you not open your mind more clearly to me?'

'What then shall I say?' said Gandalf, and paused for a while in thought. 'This in brief is how I see things at the moment, if you wish to have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of course, has long known that the Ring is abroad, and that it is borne by a hobbit. He knows now the number of our Company that set out from Rivendell, and the kind of each of us. But he does not yet perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes that we were all going to Minas Tirith; for that is what he would himself have done in our place. And according to his wisdom it would have been a heavy stroke against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what mighty one may suddenly appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with war, seeking to cast him down and take his place. That we should wish to cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought that occurs to his mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself has not yet entered into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you will see our good fortune and our hope. For imagining war he has let loose war, believing that he has no time to waste; for he that strikes the first blow, if he strikes it hard enough, may need to strike no more. So the forces that he has long been preparing he is now setting in motion, sooner than he intended. Wise fool. For if he had used all his power to guard Mordor, so that none could enter, and bent all his guild to the hunting of the Ring, then indeed hope would have faded: neither Ring nor Bearer could long have eluded him. But now his eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he looks towards Minas Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon it like a storm.

'For already he knows that the messengers that he sent to waylay the Company have failed again. They have not found the Ring. Neither have they brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they done even so much as that, it would have been a heavy blow to us, and it might have been fatal. But let us not darken our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the Dark Tower. For the Enemy has failed-so far. Thanks to Saruman:'

'Then is not Saruman a traitor?' said Gimli.

'Indeed yes,' said Gandalf. 'Doubly. And is not that strange? Nothing that we have endured of late has seemed so grievous as the treason of Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown very strong. He threatens the Men of Rohan and draws off their help from Minas Tirith, even as the main blow is approaching from the East. Yet a treacherous weapon is ever a danger to the hand. Saruman also had a mind to capture the Ring, for himself, or at least to snare some hobbits for his evil purposes. So between them our enemies have contrived only to bring Merry and Pippin with marvellous speed, and in the nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they would never have come at all!

'Also they have filled themselves with new doubts that disturb their plans. No tidings of the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to the horsemen of Rohan; but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were taken in the Emyn Muil and borne away towards Isengard against the will of his own servants. He now has Isengard to fear as well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls, it will go ill with Saruman.'

'It is a pity that our friends lie in between,' said Gimli. 'If no land divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could fight while we watched and waited.'

'The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from doubt,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard cannot fight Mordor, unless Saruman first obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril. There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on his messengers. But he came too late, for once, and the battle was over and beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not remain here long. I look into his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the field of battle; but he does not know whether the Orcs were bringing any prisoners or not. And he does not know of the quarrel between his servants and the Orcs of Mordor; nor does he know of the Winged Messenger.'

'The Winged Messenger!' cried Legolas. 'I shot at him with the bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky. He filled us all with fear. What new terror is this?'

'One that you cannot slay with arrows,' said Gandalf. 'You only slew his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again. For he was a Nazgûl, one of the Nine, who ride now upon winged steeds. Soon their terror will overshadow the last armies of our friends, cutting off the sun. But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and Saruman does not know of this new shape in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought is ever on the Ring. Was it present in the battle? Was it found? What if Théoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is the danger that he sees, and he has fled back to Isengard to double and treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close at hand, which he does not see, busy with his fiery thoughts. He has forgotten Treebeard.'

'Now you speak to yourself again,' said Aragorn with a smile. 'Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of Saruman's double treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn has served, save to give us a long and fruitless chase.'

'Wait a minute!' cried Gimli. 'There is another thing that I should like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?'

'You certainly did not see me,' answered Gandalf, 'therefore I must guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.'

'Good, good!' said Gimli. 'I am glad that it was not you.'

Gandalf laughed again. 'Yes, my good Dwarf,' he said, 'it is a comfort not to be mistaken at all points. Do I not know it only too well! But, of course, I never blamed you for your welcome of me. How could I do so, who have so often counselled my friends to suspect even their own hands when dealing with the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Glóin! Maybe you will see us both together one day and judge between us!'

'But the hobbits!' Legolas broke in. 'We have come far to seek them, and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?'

'With Treebeard and the Ents,' said Gandalf.

'The Ents!' exclaimed Aragorn. 'Then there is truth in the old legends about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the trees? Are there still Ents in the world? I thought they were only a memory of ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than a legend of Rohan.'

'A legend of Rohan!' cried Legolas. 'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us they are only a memory. If I were to meet one still walking in this world, then indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem to speak of a person. Who is this Treebeard?'

'Ah! now you are asking much,' said Gandalf. 'The little that I know of his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no time now. Treebeard is Fangorn, the guardian of the forest; he is the oldest of the Ents, the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the Sun upon this Middle-earth. I hope indeed, Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and Pippin have been fortunate: they met him here, even where we sit. For he came here two days ago and bore them away to his dwelling far off by the roots of the mountains. He often comes here, especially when his mind is uneasy, and rumours of the world outside trouble him. I saw him four days ago striding among the trees, and I think he saw me, for he paused; but I did not speak, for I was heavy with thought, and weary after my struggle with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.'

'Perhaps he also thought that you were Saruman,' said Gimli. 'But you speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.'

'Dangerous!' cried Gandalf. 'And so am I, very dangerous: more dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought alive before the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas is dangerous. You are beset with dangers, Gimli son of Glóin; for you are dangerous yourself, in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is perilous-not least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn himself, he is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled with it. The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: it will soon be running like a flood; but its tide is turned against Saruman and the axes of Isengard. A thing is about to happen which has not happened since the Elder Days: the Ents are going to wake up and find that they are strong.'

'What will they do?' asked Legolas in astonishment.

'I do not know,' said Gandalf. 'I do not think they know themselves. I wonder.' He fell silent, his head bowed in thought.

The others looked at him. A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell on his hands, which lay now upturned on his lap: they seemed to be filled with light as a cup is with water. At last he looked up and gazed straight at the sun.

'The morning is wearing away,' he said. 'Soon we must go.'

'Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard?' asked Aragorn.

'No,' said Gandalf. 'That is not the road that you must take. I have spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is upon us and all our friends, a war in which only the use of the Ring could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.'

He rose and gazed out eastward, shading his eyes, as if he saw things far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head. 'No,' he said in a soft voice, 'it has gone beyond our reach. Of that at least let us be glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring. We must go down to face a peril near despair, yet that deadly peril is removed.'

He turned. 'Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn!' he said. 'Do not regret your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil, nor call it a vain pursuit. You chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the choice was just, and it has been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who otherwise might have met too late. But the quest of your companions is over. Your next journey is marked by your given word. You must go to Edoras and seek out Théoden in his hall. For you are needed. The light of Andúril must now be uncovered in the battle for which it has so long waited. There is war in Rohan, and worse evil: it goes ill with Théoden.'

'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?' said Legolas.

'I did not say so,' said Gandalf. 'Who knows? Have patience. Go where you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.'

'It is a long way for a man to walk, young or old,' said Aragorn. 'I fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.'

'We shall see, we shall see,' said Gandalf. 'Will you come now with me?'

'Yes, we will set out together,' said Aragorn. 'But I do not doubt that you will come there before me, if you wish.' He rose and looked long at Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood there facing one another. The grey figure of the Man, Aragorn son of Arathorn, was tall, and stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of his sword; he looked as if some king out of the mists of the sea had stepped upon the shores of lesser men. Before him stooped the old figure, white; shining now as if with some light kindled within, bent, laden with years, but holding a power beyond the strength of kings.

'Do I not say truly, Gandalf,' said Aragorn at last, 'that you could go whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say: you are our captain and our banner. The Dark Lord has Nine. But we have One, mightier than they: the White Rider. He has passed through the fire and the abyss, and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.'

'Yes, together we will follow you,' said Legolas. 'But first, it would ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will you not tell us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?'

'I have stayed already too long,' answered Gandalf. 'Time is short. But if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.'

'Then tell us what you will, and time allows!' said Gimli. 'Come, Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!'

'Name him not!' said Gandalf, and for a moment it seemed that a cloud of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as death. 'Long time I fell,' he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back with difficulty. 'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then we plunged into the deep water and all was dark. Cold it was as the tide of death: almost it froze my heart.'

'Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin's Bridge, and none has measured it,' said Gimli.

'Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge,' said Gandalf. 'Thither I came at last, to the uttermost foundations of stone. He was with me still. His fire was quenched, but now he was a thing of slime, stronger than a strangling snake.

'We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted. Ever he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he fled into dark tunnels. They were not made by Durin's folk, Gimli son of Glóin. Far, far below the deepest delving of the Dwarves, the world is gnawed by nameless things. Even Sauron knows them not. They are older than he. Now I have walked there, but I will bring no report to darken the light of day. In that despair my enemy was my only hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel. Thus he brought me back at last to the secret ways of Khazad-dûm: too well he knew them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.'

'Long has that been lost,' said Gimli. 'Many have said that it was never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.'

'It was made, and it had not been destroyed,' said Gandalf. 'From the lowest dungeon to the highest peak it climbed. ascending in unbroken spiral in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in Durin's Tower carved in the living rock of Zirak-zigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine.

'There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay a narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world. The sun shone fiercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud. Out he sprang, and even as I came behind, he burst into new flame. There was none to see, or perhaps in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak.' Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'But what would they say in song? Those that looked up from afar thought that the mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard, and lightning, they said, smote upon Celebdil, and leaped back broken into tongues of fire. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about us, vapour and steam. Ice fell like rain. I threw down my enemy, and he fell from the high place and broke the mountain-side where he smote it in his ruin. Then darkness took me; and I strayed out of thought and time, and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell.

'Naked I was sent back - for a brief time, until my task is done. And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. The tower behind was crumbled into dust, the window gone; the ruined stair was choked with burned and broken stone. I was alone, forgotten, without escape upon the hard horn of the world. There I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long as a life-age of the earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all lands: the springing and the dying, the song and the weeping, and the slow everlasting groan of overburdened stone. And so at the last Gwaihir the Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away.

' 'Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,' I said.

' 'A burden you have been,' he answered, 'but not so now. Light as a swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines through you. Indeed I do not think you need me any more: were I to let you fall you would float upon the wind.'

' 'Do not let me fall!' I gasped, for I felt life in me again. 'Bear me to Lothlórien!'

' 'That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look for you,' he answered.

'Thus it was that I came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately gone. I tarried there in the ageless time of that land where days bring healing not decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed in white. Counsel I gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came, and messages I bring to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to say this:

Where now are the Dúnedain, Elessar, Elessar?

Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?

Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth,

And the Grey Company ride from the North.

But dark is the path appointed for thee:

The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.

To Legolas she sent this word:

Legolas Greenleaf long under tree

In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!

If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore,

Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.'

Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.

'Then she sent me no message?' said Gimli and bent his head.

'Dark are her words,' said Legolas, 'and little do they mean to those that receive them.'

'That is no comfort,' said Gimli.

'What then?' said Legolas. 'Would you have her speak openly to you of your death?'

'Yes. if she had nought else to say.'

'What is that?' said Gandalf, opening his eyes. 'Yes, I think I can guess what her words may mean. Your pardon, Gimli! I was pondering the messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you, and neither dark nor sad.

' "To Gimli son of Glóin," she said, "give his Lady's greeting. Lock-bearer, wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee. But have a care to lay thine axe to the right tree!" '

'In happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf,' cried the Dwarf, capering as he sang loudly in the strange dwarf-tongue. 'Come, come!' he shouted, swinging his axe. 'Since Gandalf's head is now sacred, let us find one that it is right to cleave!'

'That will not be far to seek,' said Gandalf, rising from his seat. 'Come! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of parted friends. Now there is need of haste.'

He wrapped himself again in his old tattered cloak, and led the way. Following him they descended quickly from the high shelf and made their way back through the forest, down the bank of the Entwash. They spoke no more words, until they stood again upon the grass beyond the eaves of Fangorn. There was no sign of their horses to be seen.

'They have not returned,' said Legolas. 'It will be a weary walk!'

'I shall not walk. Time presses,' said Gandalf. Then lifting up his head he gave a long whistle. So clear and piercing was the note that the others stood amazed to hear such a sound come from those old bearded lips. Three times he whistled; and then faint and far off it seemed to them that they heard the whinny of a horse borne up from the plains upon the eastern wind. They waited wondering. Before long there came the sound of hoofs, at first hardly more than a tremor of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as he lay upon the grass, then growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick beat.

'There is more than one horse coming,' said Aragorn.

'Certainly,' said Gandalf. 'We are too great a burden for one.'

'There are three,' said Legolas, gazing out over the plain. 'See how they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside him! But there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his like before.'

'Nor will you again,' said Gandalf. 'That is Shadowfax. He is the chief of the Mearas, lords of horses, and not even Théoden, King of Rohan, has ever looked on a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White Rider. We are going to battle together.'

Even as the old wizard spoke, the great horse came striding up the slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane flowing in the wind of his speed. The two others followed, now far behind. As soon as Shadowfax saw Gandalf, he checked his pace and whinnied loudly; then trotting gently forward he stooped his proud head and nuzzled his great nostrils against the old man's neck.

Gandalf caressed him. 'It is a long way from Rivendell, my friend,' he said; 'but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us ride now together, and part not in this world again!'

Soon the other horses came up and stood quietly by, as if awaiting orders. 'We go at once to Meduseld, the hall of your master, Théoden,' said Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their heads. 'Time presses, so with your leave, my friends, we will ride. We beg you to use all the speed that you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli before me, and by his leave Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now only to drink a little.'

'Now I understand a part of last night's riddle,' said Legolas as he sprang lightly upon Arod's back. 'Whether they fled at first in fear, or not, our horses met Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with joy. Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?'

'Yes, I knew,' said the wizard. 'I bent my thought upon him, bidding him to make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south of this land. Swiftly may he bear me back again!'

Gandalf spoke now to Shadowfax, and the horse set off at a good pace, yet not beyond the measure of the others. After a little while he turned suddenly, and choosing a place where the banks were lower, he waded the river, and then led them away due south into a flat land, treeless and wide. The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of grass. There was no sign of road or track, but Shadowfax did not stay or falter.

'He is steering a straight course now for the halls of Théoden under the slopes of the White Mountains,' said Gandalf. 'It will be quicker so. The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies, across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.'

For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the grass was so high that it reached above the knees of the riders, and their steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea. They came upon many hidden pools, and broad acres of sedge waving above wet and treacherous bogs; but Shadowfax found the way, and the other horses followed in his swath. Slowly the sun fell from the sky down into the West. Looking out over the great plain, far away the riders saw it for a moment like a red fire sinking into the grass. Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun's disc to the hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed down under the rim of earth.

'There lies the Gap of Rohan,' said Gandalf. 'It is now almost due west of us. That way lies Isengard.'

'I see a great smoke,' said Legolas. 'What may that be?'

'Battle and war!' said Gandalf. 'Ride on!'



Chapter 6
The King of the Golden Hall
They rode on through sunset, and slow dusk, and gathering night. When at last they halted and dismounted, even Aragorn was stiff and weary. Gandalf only allowed them a few hours' rest. Legolas and Gimli slept and Aragorn lay flat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his staff, gazing into the darkness, east and west. All was silent, and there was no sign or sound of living thing. The night was barred with long clouds, fleeting on a chill wind, when they arose again. Under the cold moon they went on once more, as swift as by the light of day.

Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him. Hasufel and Arod, weary but proud, followed their tireless leader, a grey shadow before them hardly to he seen. The miles went by. The waxing moon sank into the cloudy West.

A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark faded to a cold grey. Red shafts of light leapt above the black walls of the Emyn Muil far away upon their left. Dawn came clear and bright; a wind swept across their path, rushing through the bent grasses. Suddenly Shadowfax stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead.

'Look!' he cried, and they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood the mountains of the South: white-tipped and streaked with black. The grass-lands rolled against the hills that clustered at their feet, and flowed up into many valleys still dim and dark, untouched by the light of dawn, winding their way into the heart of the great mountains. Immediately before the travellers the widest of these glens opened like a long gulf among the hills. Far inward they glimpsed a tumbled mountain-mass with one tall peak; at the mouth of the vale there stood like sentinel a lonely height. About its feet there flowed, as a thread of silver, the stream that issued from the dale; upon its brow they caught, still far away, a glint in the rising sun, a glimmer of gold. 'Speak, Legolas!' said Gandalf. 'Tell us what you see there before us!'

Legolas gazed ahead, shading his eyes from the level shafts of the new-risen sun. 'I see a white stream that comes down from the snows,' he said. 'Where it issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill rises upon the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle it. Within there rise the roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there stands aloft a great hall of Men. And it seems to my eyes that it is thatched with gold. The light of it shines far over the land. Golden, too, are the posts of its doors. There men in bright mail stand; but all else within the courts are yet asleep.'

'Edoras those courts are called,' said Gandalf, 'and Meduseld is that golden hall. There dwells Théoden son of Thengel, King of the Mark of Rohan. We are come with the rising of the day. Now the road lies plain to see before us. But we must ride more warily; for war is abroad, and the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even if it seem so from afar. Draw no weapon, speak no haughty word, I counsel you all, until we are come before Théoden's seat.'

The morning was bright and clear about them, and birds were singing, when the travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly into the plain, and beyond the feet of the hills turned across their path in a wide bend, flowing away east to feed the Entwash far off in its reed-choked beds. The land was green: in the wet meads and along the grassy borders of the stream grew many willow-trees. Already in this southern land they were blushing red at their fingertips. Feeling the approach of spring. Over the stream there was a ford between low banks much trampled by the passage of horses. The travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading towards the uplands.

At the foot of the walled hill the way ran under the shadow of many mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass was white as with a drifted snow: small flowers sprang there like countless stars amid the turf.

'Look!' said Gandalf. 'How fair are the bright eyes in the grass! Evermind they are called, simbelmynë in this land of Men, for they blossom in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men rest. Behold! we are come to the great barrows where the sires of Théoden sleep.' 'Seven mounds upon the left, and nine upon the right,' said Aragorn. 'Many long lives of men it is since the golden hall was built.'

'Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home since then,' said Legolas, 'and but a little while does that seem to us.'

'But to the Riders of the Mark it seems so long ago,' said Aragorn, 'that the raising of this house is but a memory of song, and the years before are lost in the mist of time. Now they call this land their home, their own, and their speech is sundered from their northern kin.' Then he began to chant softly in a slow tongue unknown to the Elf and Dwarf; yet they listened, for there was a strong music in it.

'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,' said Legolas; 'for it is like to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and else hard and stern as the mountains. But I cannot guess what it means, save that it is laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.'

'It runs thus in the Common Speech,' said Aragorn, 'as near as I can make it.

Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?

Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing?

Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing?

Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?

They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow;

The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.

Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning,

Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning?

Thus spoke a forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall and fair was Eorl the Young, who rode down out of the North; and there were wings upon the feet of his steed, Felaróf, father of horses. So men still sing in the evening.'

With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the winding way up the green shoulders of the hills, they came at last to the wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.

There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and barred the way with spears. 'Stay, strangers here unknown!' they cried in the tongue of the Riddermark, demanding the names and errand of the strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked darkly upon Gandalf.

'Well do I understand your speech,' he answered in the same language; 'yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue, as is the custom in the West, if you wish to be answered?'

'It is the will of Théoden King that none should enter his gates, save those who know our tongue and are our friends,' replied one of the guards. 'None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk, and those that come from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over the plain thus strangely clad, riding horses like to our own horses? Long have we kept guard here, and we have watched you from afar. Never have we seen other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is one of these that bear you. He is One of the Mearas, unless our eyes are cheated by some spell. Say, are you not a wizard, some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his craft? Speak now and be swift!'

'We are no phantoms,' said Aragorn, 'nor do your eyes cheat you. For indeed these are your own horses that we ride, as you knew well are you asked, I guess. But seldom does thief ride home to the stable. Here are Hasufel and Arod, that Éomer, the Third Marshal of the Mark, lent to us, only two days ago. We bring them back now, even as we promised him. Has not Éomer then returned and given warning of our coming?'

A troubled look came into the guard's eyes. 'Of Éomer I have naught to say,' he answered. 'If what you tell me is truth, then doubtless Théoden will have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and said that by the will of Théoden no stranger should pass these gates.'

'Wormtongue?' said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. 'Say no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in haste. Will you not go or send to say that we are come?' His eyes glinted under his deep brows as he bent his gaze upon the man.

'Yes, I will go,' he answered slowly. 'But what names shall I report? And what shall I say of you? Old and weary you seem now, and yet you are fell and grim beneath, I deem'

'Well do you see and speak,' said the wizard. 'For I am Gandalf. I have returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is Shadowfax the Great, whom no other hand can tame. And here beside me is Aragorn son of Arathorn, the heir of Kings, and it is to Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas the Elf and Gimli the Dwarf, our comrades. Go now and say to your master that we are at his gates and would have speech with him, if he will permit us to come into his hall.' 'Strange names you give indeed! But I will report them as you bid and learn my master's will,' said the guard. 'Wait here a little while, and f will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do not hope too much! These are dark days.' He went swiftly away, leaving the strangers in the watchful keeping of his comrades. After some time he returned. 'Follow me!' he said. 'Théoden gives you leave to enter; but any weapon that you bear; be it only a staff, you must leave on the threshold. The doorwardens will keep them.'

The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking in file behind their guide. They found a broad path, paved with hewn stones, now winding upward, now climbing in short flights of well-laid steps. Many houses built of wood and many dark doors they passed. Beside the way in a stone channel a stream of clear water flowed, sparkling and chattering. At length they came to the crown of the hill. There stood a high platform above a green terrace, at the foot of which a bright spring gushed from a stone carved in the likeness of a horse's head; beneath was a wide basin from which the water. spilled and fed the falling stream. Up the green terrace went a stair of stone, high and broad, and on either side of the topmost step were stone-hewn sea, There sat other guards, with drawn swords laid upon their knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders the sun was blazoned upon their green shields, their long corslets were burnished bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than mortal men.

'There are the doors before you,' said the guide. 'I must return now to my duty at the gate. Farewell! And may the Lord of the Mark be gracious to you!'

He turned and went swiftly back down the road. The others climbed the long stair under the eyes of the tall watchmen. Silent they stood now above and spoke no word, until Gandalf stepped out upon the paved terrace at the stairs head. Then suddenly with clear voices they spoke a courteous greeting in their own tongue.

Hail, corners from afar!' they said, and they turned the hilts of their swords towards the travellers in token of peace. Green gems flashed in the sunlight. Then one of the guards stepped forward and spoke in the Common Speech.

'I am the Doorward of Théoden,' he said. 'Háma is my name. Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.'

Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver-hafted knife, his quiver and his bow. 'Keep these well,' he said, 'for they come from the Golden Wood and the Lady of Lothlórien gave them to me.'

Wonder came into the man's eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the wall, as if he feared to handle them. 'No man will touch them I promise you,' he said.

Aragorn stood a while hesitating. 'It is not my will,' he said, 'to put aside my sword or to deliver Andúril to the hand of any other man.'

'It is the will of Théoden,' said Háma.

'It is not clear to me that the will of Théoden son of Thengel even though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elendil's heir of Gondor.'

'This is the house of Théoden, not of Aragorn, even were he King of Gondor in the seat of Denethor,' said Háma, stepping swiftly before the doors and barring the way. His sword was now in his hand and the point towards the strangers.

'This is idle talk,' said Gandalf. 'Needless is Théoden's demand, but it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own hall, be it folly or wisdom.'

'Truly,' said Aragorn. 'And I would do as the master of the house bade me, were this only a woodman's cot, if I bore now any sword but Andúril.'

'Whatever its name may be,' said Háma, 'here you shall lay it, if you would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.'

'Not alone!' said Gimli, fingering the blade of his axe, and looking darkly up at the guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a mind to fell. 'Not alone!'

'Come, come!' said Gandalf. 'We are all friends here. Or should be; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. My errand is pressing. Here at least is my sword, goodman Háma. Keep it well. Glamdring it is called, for the Elves made it long ago. Now let me pass. Come, Aragorn!'

Slowly Aragorn unbuckled his belt and himself set his sword upright against the wall. 'Here I set it,' he said; 'but I command you not to touch it, nor to permit any other to lay hand on it. In this elvish heath dwells the Blade that was Broken and has been made again. Telchar first wrought it in the deeps of time. Death shall come to any man that draws Elendil's sword save Elendil's heir.'

The guard stepped back and looked with amazement on Aragorn. 'It seems that you are come on the wings of song out of the forgotten days he said. It shall be, lord, as you command.

'Well,' said Gimli, 'if it has Andúril to keep it company, my axe may stay here, too, without shame'; and he laid it on the floor. 'Now then, if all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.'

The guard still hesitated. 'Your staff,' he said to Gandalf. 'Forgive me, but that too must be left at the doors.'

'Foolishness!' said Gandalf. 'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, then I will sit out here, until it pleases Théoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.'

Aragorn laughed. 'Every man has something too dear to trust to another. But would you part an old man from his support? Come, will you not let us enter?'

'The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for age' said Háma. He looked hard at the ash-staff on which Gandalf leaned. 'Yet in doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom. I believe you are friends and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.'

The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung them slowly inwards grumbling on their great hinges. The travellers entered. Inside it seemed dark and warm after the clear air upon the hill. The hall was long and wide and filled with shadows and half lights; mighty pillars upheld its lofty roof. But here and there bright sunbeams fell in glimmering shafts from the eastern windows, high under the deep eaves. Through the louver in the roof, above the thin wisps of issuing smoke, the sky showed pale and blue. As their eyes changed, the travellers perceived that the floor was paved with stones of many hues; branching runes and strange devices intertwined beneath their feet. They saw now that the pillars were richly carved, gleaming dully with gold and half-seen colours. Many woven cloths were hung upon the walls, and over their wide spaces marched figures of ancient legend, some dim with years, some darkling in the shade. But upon one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse. He was blowing a great horn, and his yellow hair was flying in the wind. The horse's head was lifted, and its nostrils were wide and red as it neighed, smelling battle afar. Foaming water, green and white, rushed and curled about its knees.

'Behold Eorl the Young!' said Aragorn. 'Thus he rode out of the North to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.'

Now the four companions went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning upon the long hearth in the midst of the hall. Then they halted. At the far end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing north towards the doors, was a dais with three steps; and in the middle of the dais was a great gilded chair. Upon it sat a man so bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but his white hair was long and thick and fell in great braids from beneath a thin golden circle set upon his brow. In the centre upon his forehead shone a single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees; but his eyes still burned with a bright light, glinting as he gazed at the strangers. Behind his chair stood a woman clad in white. At his feet upon the steps sat a wizened figure of a man, with a pale wise face and heavy-lidded eyes.

There was a silence. The old man did not move in his chair. At length Gandalf spoke. 'Hail, Théoden son of Thengel! I have returned. For behold! the storm comes, and now all friends should gather together, lest each singly be destroyed.'

Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short black staff with a handle of white bone; and now the strangers saw that, bent though he was, he was still tall and must in youth have been high and proud indeed.

'I greet you,' he said, 'and maybe you look for welcome. But truth to tell your welcome is doubtful here, Master Gandalf. You have ever been a herald of woe. Troubles follow you like crows, and ever the oftener the worse. I will not deceive you: when I heard that Shadowfax had come back riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but still more at the lack of the rider; and when Éomer brought the tidings that you had gone at last to your long home, I did not mourn. But news from afar is seldom sooth. Here you come again! And with you come evils worse than before, as might be expected. Why should I welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.' Slowly he sat down again in his chair.

'You speak justly, lord,' said the pale man sitting upon the steps of the dais. 'It is not yet five days since the bitter tidings came that Théodred your son was slain upon the West Marches: your right hand, Second Marshal Of the Mark. In Éomer there is little trust. Few men would be left to guard your walls, if he had been allowed to rule. And even now we learn from Gondor that the Dark Lord is stirring in the East. Such is the hour in which this wanderer chooses to return. Why indeed should we welcome you, Master Stormcrow? Láthspell I name you, Ill-news; and ill news is an ill guest they say.' He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment and gazed on the strangers with dark eyes.

'You are held wise, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a great support to your master,' answered Gandalf in a soft voice. 'Yet in two ways may a man come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.'

'That is so,' said Wormtongue; 'but there is a third kind: pickers of bones, meddlers in other men's sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow fat on war. What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now? It was aid from us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord bade you Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and to the wonder of all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not too great. I guess that it is likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid rather than render it. Do you bring men? Do you bring horses, swords, spears? That I would call aid; that is our present need. But who are these that follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey, and you yourself the most beggar-like of the four!'

'The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Théoden son of Thengel,' said Gandalf. 'Has not the messenger from your gate reported the names of my companions? Seldom has any lord of Rohan received three such guests. Weapons they have laid at your doors that are worth many a mortal man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.'

'Then it is true, as Éomer reported, that you are in league with the Sorceress of the Golden Wood?' said Wormtongue. 'It is not to be wondered at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.'

Gimli strode a pace forward, but felt suddenly the hand of Gandalf clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone.

In Dwimordene, in Lórien

Seldom have walked the feet of Men,

Few mortal eyes have seen the light

That lies there ever, long and bright.

Galadriel! Galadriel!

Clear is the water of your well;

White is the star in your white hand;

Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land

In Dwimordene, in Lórien

More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men.

Thus Gandalf softly sang, and then suddenly he changed. Casting his tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned no longer on his staff; and he spoke in a clear cold voice. 'The wise speak only of what they know, Gríma son of Gálmód. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through fire and death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning falls.' He raised his staff. There was a roll of thunder. The sunlight was blotted out from the eastern windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night. The fire faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf could be seen, standing white and tall before the blackened hearth.

In the gloom they heard the hiss of Wormtongue's voice: 'Did I not counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff? That fool, Háma, has betrayed us!' There was a flash as if lightning had cloven the roof. Then all was silent. Wormtongue sprawled on his face.

'Now Théoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?' said Gandalf. 'Do you ask for help?' He lifted his staff and pointed to a high window. There the darkness seemed to clear, and through the opening could be seen, high and far, a patch of shining sky. 'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the Mark; for better help you will not find. No counsel have I to give to those that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will you hear them? They are not for all ears. I bid you come out before your doors and look abroad. Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to twisted tales and crooked promptings.'

Slowly Théoden left his chair. A faint light grew in the hall again. The woman hastened to the king's side, taking his arm, and with faltering steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly through the hall. Wormtongue remained lying on the floor. They came to the doors and Gandalf knocked.

'Open!' he cried. 'The Lord of the Mark comes forth!'

The doors rolled back and a keen air came whistling in. A wind was blowing on the hill. 'Send your guards down to the stairs foot,' said Gandalf. 'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.'

'Go, Éowyn sister-daughter!' said the old king. 'The time for fear is past.'

The woman turned and went slowly into the house. As she passed the doors she turned and looked back. Grave and thoughtful was her glance, as she looked on the king with cool pity in her eyes. Very fair was her face, and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and tall she was in her white robe girt with silver; but strong she seemed and stern as steel, a daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the first time in the full light of day beheld Éowyn, Lady of Rohan, and thought her fair, fair and cold, like a morning of pale spring that is not yet come to womanhood. And she now was suddenly aware of him: tall heir of kings, wise with many winters, greycloaked. Hiding a power that yet she felt. For a moment still as stone she stood, then turning swiftly she was gone.

'Now, lord,' said Gandalf, 'look out upon your land! Breathe the free air again!'

From the porch upon the top of the high terrace they could see beyond the stream the green fields of Rohan fading into distant grey. Curtains of wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and to the west was still dark with thunder, and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden hills. But the wind had shifted to the north, and already the storm that had come out of the East was receding, rolling away southward to the sea. Suddenly through a rent in the clouds behind them a shaft of sun stabbed down. The falling showers gleamed like silver, and far away the river glittered like a shimmering glass.

'It is not so dark here,' said Théoden.

'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders as some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!'

From the king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He drew himself up, slowly, as a man that is stiff from long bending over some dull toil. Now tall and straight he stood, and his eyes were blue as he looked into the opening sky.

'Dark have been my dreams of late,' he said, 'but I feel as one new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I fear that already you have come too late, only to see the last days of my house. Not long now shall stand the high hall which Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall devour the high seat. What is to be done?'

'Much,' said Gandalf. 'But first send for Éomer. Do I not guess rightly that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Gríma, of him that all save you name the Wormtongue?'

'It is true,' said Théoden. 'He had rebelled against my commands, and threatened death to Gríma in my hall.'

'A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels' said Gandalf.

'That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Háma to me. Since he proved untrusty as a doorward, let him become an errand-runner. The guilty shall bring the guilty to judgement,' said Théoden, and his voice was grim, yet he looked at Gandalf and smiled and as he did so many lines of care were smoothed away and did not return.

When Háma had been summoned and had gone, Gandalf led Théoden to a stone seat, and then sat himself before the king upon the topmost stair. Aragorn and his companions stood nearby.

'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,' said Gandalf. 'Yet if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I can speak more fully. Behold! you are come into a peril greater even than the wit of Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see! you dream no longer. You live. Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning, yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed.'

Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice was low and secret, and none save the king heard what he said. But ever as he spoke the light shone brighter in Théoden's eye, and at the last he rose from his seat to his full height, and Gandalf beside him, and together they looked out from the high place towards the East.

'Verily,' said Gandalf, now in a loud voice, keen and clear, 'that way lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still on a thread. Yet hope there is still, if we can but stand unconquered for a little while.'

The others too now turned their eyes eastward. Over the sundering leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope and fear bore their thoughts still on, beyond dark mountains to the Land of Shadow. Where now was the Ring-bearer? How thin indeed was the thread upon which doom still hung! It seemed to Legolas, as he strained his farseeing eyes, that he caught a glint of white: far away perchance the sun twinkled on a pinnacle of the Tower of Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet a present threat, there was a tiny tongue of flame.

Slowly Théoden sat down again, as if weariness still struggled to master him against the will of Gandalf. He turned and looked at his great house. 'Alas!' he said, 'that these evil days should be mine, and should come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned. Alas for Boromir the brave! The young perish and the old linger, withering.' He clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands.

'Your fingers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped a sword-hilt,' said Gandalf.

Théoden rose and put his hand to his side; but no sword hung at his belt. 'Where has Gríma stowed it?' he muttered under his breath.

'Take this, dear lord!' said a clear voice. 'It was ever at your service.' Two men had come softly up the stair and stood now a few steps from the top. Éomer was there. No helm was on his head, no mail was on his breast, but in his hand he held a drawn sword; and as he knelt he offered the hilt to his master.

'How comes this?' said Théoden sternly. He turned towards Éomer and the men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and erect. Where was the old man whom they had left crouching in his chair or leaning on his stick?

'It is my doing, lord,' said Háma, trembling. I understood that Éomer was to be set free. Such joy was in my heart that maybe I have erred. Yet, since he was free again, and he a Marshal of the Mark,! brought him his sword as he bade me.'

'To lay at your feet, my lord,' said Éomer.

For a moment of silence Théoden stood looking down at Éomer as he knelt still before him. Neither moved.

'Will you not take the sword?' said Gandalf.

Slowly Théoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers took the hilt, it seemed to the watchers that firmness and strength returned to his thin arm. Suddenly he lifted the blade and swung it shimmering and whistling in the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang clear as he chanted in the tongue of Rohan a call to arms.

Arise now, arise, Riders of Théoden!

Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.

Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded!

Forth Eorlingas!

The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stair. They looked at their lord in amazement, and then as one man they drew their swords and laid them at his feet. 'Command us!' they said.

'Westu Théoden hál!' cried Éomer. 'It is a joy to us to see you return into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only with grief!'

'Take back your sword, Éomer, sister-son!' said the king. 'Go, Háma, and seek my own sword! Gríma has it in his keeping. Bring him to me also. Now, Gandalf, you said that you had counsel to give, if I would hear it. What is your counsel?'

'You have yourself already taken it,' answered Gandalf. 'To put your trust in Éomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast aside regret and fear. To do the deed at hand. Every man that can ride should be sent west at once, as Éomer counselled you: we must first destroy the threat of Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we fall. If we succeed - then we will face the next task. Meanwhile your people that are left, the women and the children and the old, should stay to the refuges that you have in the mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let them take provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves with treasures, great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.'

'This counsel seems good to me now,' said Théoden. 'Let all my folk get ready! But you my guests-truly you said, Gandalf, that the courtesy of my hall is lessened. You have ridden through the night, and the morning wears away. You have had neither sleep nor food. A guest-house shall be made ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.'

'Nay, lord,' said Aragorn. 'There is no rest yet for the weary. The men of Rohan must ride forth today, and we will ride with them, axe, sword, and bow. We did not bring them to rest against your wall, Lord of the Mark. And I promised Éomer that my sword and his should be drawn together.'

'Now indeed there is hope of victory!' said Éomer.

'Hope, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard is strong. And other perils draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Théoden, when we are gone. Lead your people swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!'

'Nay, Gandalf!' said the king. 'You do not know your own skill in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in the front of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.'

'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,' said Aragorn. The armed men that stood near clashed their weapons, crying: 'The Lord of the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!'

'But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless' said Gandalf. 'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?'

'I will take thought for that ere I go,' answered Théoden. 'Here comes my counsellor.'

At that moment Háma came again from the hall. Behind him cringing between two other men, came Gríma the Wormtongue. His face was very white. His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Háma knelt and presented to Théoden a long sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and set with green gems. 'Here, lord, is Herugrim, your ancient blade,' he said. 'It was found in his chest. Loth was he to render up the keys. Many other things are there which men have missed.'

'You lie,' said Wormtongue. 'And this sword your master himself gave into my keeping.'

'And he now requires it of you again,' said Théoden. 'Does that displease you?'

'Assuredly not. lord,' said Wormtongue. 'I care for you and yours as best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let others deal with these irksome guests. Your meat is about to be set on the board. Will you not go to it?'

'I will,' said Théoden. 'And let food for my guests be set on the board beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all who dwell nigh! Every man and strong lad able to bear arms, all who have horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from noon!'

'Dear lord!' cried Wormtongue. 'It is as I feared. This wizard has bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of your fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?'

'If this is bewitchment,' said Théoden, 'it seems to me more wholesome than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on all fours like a beast. No, not one shall be left, not even Gríma. Gríma shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean the rust from your sword.'

'Mercy, lord!' whined Wormtongue, grovelling on the ground. 'Have pity on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will stand by you when all others have gone. Do not send your faithful Gríma away!'

'You have my pity,' said Théoden. 'And I do not send you from my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me and prove your faith.'

Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted look of a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked his lips with a long pale tongue. 'Such a resolve might be expected from a lord of the House of Eorl, old though he be,' he said. 'But those who truly love him would spare his failing years. Yet I see that I come too late. Others, whom the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded him. If I cannot undo their work, hear me at least in this, lord! One who knows your mind and honours your commands should be left in Edoras. Appoint a faithful steward. Let your counsellor Gríma keep all things till your return-and I pray that we may see it, though no wise man will deem it hopeful.'

Éomer laughed. 'And if that plea does not excuse you from war, most noble Wormtongue,' he said, what office of less honour would you accept? To carry a sack of meal up into the mountains-if any man would trust you with it?'

'Nay, Éomer, you do not fully understand the mind of Master Wormtongue,' said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him. 'He is bold and cunning. Even now he plays a game with peril and wins a throw. Hours of my precious time he has wasted already. 'Down snake!' he said suddenly in a terrible voice. 'Down on your belly! How long is it since Saruman bought you? What was the promised price? When all the men were dead, you were to pick your share of the treasure, and take the woman you desire? Too long have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.'

Éomer grasped his sword. 'That I knew already,' he muttered. 'For that reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of the hall. But there are other reasons.' He stepped forward, but Gandalf stayed him with his hand.

'Éowyn is safe now,' he said. 'But you, Wormtongue, you have done what you could for your true master. Some reward you have earned at least. Yet Saruman is apt to overlook his bargains. I should advise you to go quickly and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.'

'You lie,' said Wormtongue.

'That word comes too oft and easy from your lips,' said Gandalf. 'I do not lie. See, Théoden, here is a snake! With safety you cannot take it with you, nor can you leave it behind. To slay it would be just. But it was not always as it now is. Once it was a man, and did you service in its fashion. Give him a horse and let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice you shall judge him.'

'Do you hear this, Wormtongue?' said Théoden. 'This is your choice: to ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go now, whither you will. But then, if ever we meet again, I shall not be merciful.'

Slowly Wormtongue rose. He looked at them with half-closed eyes. Last of all he scanned Théoden's face and opened his mouth as if to speak. Then suddenly he drew himself up. His hands worked. His eyes glittered. Such malice was in them that men stepped back from him. He bared his teeth; and then with a hissing breath he spat before the king's feet, and darting to one side, he fled down the stair.

'After him!' said Théoden. 'See that he does no harm to any, but do not hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.'

'And if any will bear him,' said Éomer.

One of the guards ran down the stair. Another went to the well at the foot of the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he washed clean the stones that Wormtongue had defiled.

'Now my guests, come!' said Théoden. 'Come and take such refreshment as haste allows.'

They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below them in the town the heralds crying and the war-horns blowing. For the king was to ride forth as soon as the men of the town and those dwelling near could be armed and assembled.

At the king's board sat Éomer and the four guests, and there also waiting upon the king was the lady Éowyn. They ate and drank swiftly. The others were silent while Théoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman.

'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?' said Gandalf. 'He was not always evil. Once I do not doubt that he was the friend of Rohan; and even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful still. But for long now he has plotted your ruin, wearing the mask of Friendship, until he was ready. In those years Wormtongue's task was easy, and all that you did was swiftly known in Isengard; for your land was open, and strangers came and went. And ever Wormtongue's whispering was in your ears, poisoning your thought, chilling your heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and could do nothing, for your will was in his keeping.

'But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for those who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously, always seeking to delay you, to prevent your full strength being gathered. He was crafty: dulling men's wariness, or working on their fears, as served the occasion. Do you not remember how eagerly he urged that no man should be spared on a wildgoose chase northward, when the immediate peril was westward? He persuaded you to forbid Éomer to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Éomer had not defied Wormtongue's voice speaking with your mouth, those Orcs would have reached Isengard by now, bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which Saruman desires above all else, but at the least two members of my Company, sharers of a secret hope, of which even to you, lord, I cannot yet speak openly. Dare you think of what they might now be suffering, or what Saruman might now have learned to our destruction?'

'I owe much to Éomer,' said Théoden. 'Faithful heart may have forward tongue.' 'Say also,' said Gandalf, 'that to crooked eyes truth may wear a wry face.'

'Indeed my eyes were almost blind,' said Théoden. 'Most of all I owe to you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give you a gift ere we go, at your own choosing. You have only to name aught that is mine. I reserve now only my sword!'

'Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen,' said Gandalf. 'But as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will fit my need: swift and sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was only lent before, if loan we may call it. But now shall ride him into great hazard, setting silver against black: I would not risk anything that is not my own. And already there is a bond of love between us.'

'You choose well,' said Théoden; 'and I give him now gladly. Yet it is a great gift. There is none like to Shadowfax. In him one of the mighty steeds of old has returned. None such shall return again. And to you my other guests I will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords you do not need, but there are helms and coats of mail of cunning work, gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they serve you well!'

Now men came bearing raiment of war from the king's hoard and they arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they chose, and round shields: their bosses were overlaid with gold and set with gems, green and red and white. Gandalf took no armour; and Gimli needed no coat of rings, even if one had been found to match his stature, for there was no hauberk in the hoards of Edoras of better make than his short corslet forged beneath the Mountain in the North. But he chose a cap of iron and leather that fitted well upon his round head; and a small shield he also took. It bore the running horse, white upon green, that was the emblem of the House of Eorl.

'May it keep you well!' said Théoden. 'It was made for me in Thengel's day, while still I was a boy.'

Gimli bowed. 'I am proud, Lord of the Mark, to bear your device,' he said. 'Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one. I love my feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.'

'It may well be so,' said Théoden.

The king now rose, and at once Éowyn came forward bearing wine. 'Ferthu Théoden hál!' she said. 'Receive now this cup and drink in happy hour. Health be with thee at thy going and coming!'

Théoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the guests. As she stood before Aragorn she paused suddenly and looked upon him, and her eyes were shining. And he looked down upon her fair face and smiled; but as he took the cup, his hand met hers, and he knew that she trembled at the touch. 'Hail Aragorn son of Arathorn!' she said. 'Hail Lady of Rohan!' he answered, but his face now was troubled and he did not smile.

When they had all drunk, the king went down the hall to the doors. There the guards awaited him, and heralds stood, and all the lords and chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt nearby.

'Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding,' said Théoden. 'I have no child. Théodred my son is slain. I name Éomer my sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I leave behind, to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?'

No man spoke.

'Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust?'

'In the House of Eorl,' answered Háma.

'But Éomer I cannot spare, nor would he stay,' said the king; 'and he is the last of that House.'

'I said not Éomer,' answered Háma. 'And he is not the last. There is Éowyn, daughter of Éomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.'

'It shall be so,' said Théoden. 'Let the heralds announce to the folk that the Lady Éowyn will lead them!'

Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and Éowyn knelt before him and received from him a sword and a fair corslet. 'Farewell sister-daughter!' he said. 'Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall return to the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend themselves, and if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.' 'Speak not so!' she answered. 'A year shall I endure for every day that passes until your return.' But as she spoke her eyes went to Aragorn who stood nearby.

'The king shall come again,' he said. 'Fear not! Not West but East does our doom await us.'

The king now went down the stair with Gandalf beside him. The others followed. Aragorn looked back as they passed towards the gate. Alone Éowyn stood before the doors of the house at the stair's head; the sword was set upright before her, and her hands were laid upon the hilt. She was clad now in mail and shone like silver in the sun.

Gimli walked with Legolas. his axe on his shoulder. 'Well, at last we set off!' he said. 'Men need many words before deeds. My axe is restless in my hands. Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are fell-handed when they come to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare that suits me. How shall I come to the battle? I wish I could walk and not bump like a sack at Gandalf's saddlebow.'

'A safer seat than many, I guess,' said Legolas. 'Yet doubtless Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or Shadowfax himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.'

'And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not shave the scalps of Men,' said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe.

At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all ready in the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered. Their spears were like a springing wood. Loudly and joyously they shouted as Théoden came forth. Some held in readiness the king's horse, Snowmane, and others held the horses of Aragorn and Legolas. Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, but Éomer came up to him, leading his horse.

'Hail, Gimli Glóin's son!' he cried. 'I have not had time to learn gentle speech under your rod, as you promised. But shall we not put aside our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.'

'I will forget my wrath for a while, Éomer son of Éomund,' said Gimli; 'but if ever you chance to see the Lady Galadriel with your eyes, then you shall acknowledge her the fairest of ladies, or our friendship will end.' 'So be it!' said Éomer. 'But until that time pardon me, and in token of pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.'

'I thank you indeed,' said Gimli greatly pleased. 'I will gladly go with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.'

'It shall he so,' said Éomer. 'Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn upon my right, and none will dare to stand before us!'

'Where is Shadowfax?' said Gandalf.

'Running wild over the grass,' they answered. 'He will let no man handle him. There he goes, away down by the ford, like a shadow among the willows.'

Gandalf whistled and called aloud the horse's name, and far away he tossed his head and neighed, and turning sped towards the host like an arrow.

'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would it appear,' said Éomer, as the great horse ran up, until he stood before the wizard.

'The gift seems already to be given,' said Théoden. 'But hearken all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsellors; most welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.'

'I thank you, Théoden King,' said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw back his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseback. He wore no helm nor mail. His snowy hair flew free in the wind, his white robes shone dazzling in the sun.

'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.

'Our King and the White Rider!' they shouted. 'Forth Eorlingas!'

The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed. Spear clashed on shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush like the sudden onset of a great wind the last host of Rohan rode thundering into the West. Far over the plain Éowyn saw the glitter of their spears, as she stood still, alone before the doors of the silent house.



Chapter 7
Helm's Deep
The sun was already westering as they rode from Edoras, and the light of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden haze. There was a beaten way, north-westward along the foot-hills of the White Mountains, and this they followed, up and down in a green country, crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the Misty Mountains loomed; ever darker and taller they grew as the miles went by. The sun went slowly down before them. Evening came behind.

The host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode with all the speed they could, pausing seldom. Swift and enduring were the steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty leagues and more it was, as a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of the Isen, where they hoped to find the king's men that held back the hosts of Saruman.

Night closed about them. At last they halted to make their camp. They had ridden for some five hours and were far out upon the western plain, yet more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under the starry sky and the waxing moon, they now made their bivouac. They lit no fires, for they were uncertain of events; but they set a ring of mounted guards about them, and scouts rode out far ahead, passing like shadows in the folds of the land. The slow night passed without tidings or alarm. At dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again.

There were no clouds overhead yet, but a heaviness was in the air; it was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was hazy, and behind it, following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a great storm moving out of the East. And away in the North-west there seemed to be another darkness brooding about the feet of the Misty Mountains, a shadow that crept down slowly from the Wizard's Vale.

Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Éomer. 'You have the keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,' he said; 'and they can tell a sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder towards Isengard?'

'Many miles lie between,' said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his eyes with his long hand. 'I can see a darkness. There are shapes moving in it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but what they are I cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my eyes: there is a veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land, and it marches slowly down stream. It is as if the twilight under endless trees were flowing downwards from the hills.'

'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'It will be a black night.'

As the second day of their riding drew on, the heaviness in the air increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them: a sombre canopy with great billowing edges flecked with dazzling light. The sun went down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears of the Riders were tipped with fire as the last shafts of light kindled the steep faces of the peaks of Thrihyrne: now very near they stood on the northernmost arm of the White Mountains, three jagged horns staring at the sunset. In the last red glow men in the vanguard saw a black speck, a horseman riding back towards them. They halted awaiting him.

He came, a weary man with dinted helm and cloven shield. Slowly he climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At length he spoke. 'Is Éomer here?' he asked. 'You come at last, but too late, and with too little strength. Things have gone evilly since Théodred fell. We were driven back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing. Then at night fresh forces came over the river against our camp. All Isengard must be emptied; and Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We were overmastered. The shield-wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm's Deep. The rest are scattered.

'Where is Éomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.' Théoden had sat silent, hidden from the man's sight behind his guards; now he urged his horse forward. 'Come, stand before me, Ceorl!' he said. 'I am here. The last host of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.'

The man's face lightened with joy and wonder. He drew himself up. Then he knelt, offering his notched sword to the king. 'Command me, lord!' he cried. 'And pardon me! I thought-'

'You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has shaken the boughs,' said Théoden. 'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help of Erkenbrand!'

While Théoden was speaking, Gandalf rode a short way ahead, and he sat there alone, gazing north to Isengard and west to the setting sun. Now he came back.

'Ride, Théoden!' he said. 'Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax must bear me now on a swift errand.' Turning to Aragorn and Éomer and the men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till I return. Await me at Helm's Gate! Farewell!'

He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow from the bow the great horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the sunset, a wind over the grass, a shadow that fled and passed from sight. Snowmane snorted and reared, eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the wing could have overtaken him.

'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Háma.

'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,' answered Háma. 'Ever he goes and comes unlooked-for:'

'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain 'Said the other.

'True enough,' said Háma; 'but for myself, I will wait until I see Gandalf again.'

'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other.

The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and bent their course southward. Night fell, and still they rode on. The hills drew near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening sky. Still some miles away, on the far side of the Westfold Vale, lay a green coomb, a great bay in the mountains, out of which a gorge opened in the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's Deep, after a hero of old wars who had made his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound inward from the north under the shadow of the Thrihyrne, till the crow-haunted cliffs rose like mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light.

At Helm's Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur stood high walls of ancient stone, and within them was a lofty tower. Men said that in the far-off days of the glory of Gondor the sea-kings had built here this fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet sounded upon the tower echoed in the Deep behind, as if armies long-forgotten were issuing to war from caves beneath the hills. A wall, too, the men of old had made from the Hornburg to the southern cliff, barring the entrance to the gorge. Beneath it by a wide culvert the Deeping-stream passed out. About the feet of the Hornrock it wound, and flowed then in a gully through the midst of a wide green gore, sloping gently down from Helm's Gate to Helm's Dike. Thence it fell into the Deeping-coomb and out into the Westfold Vale. There in the Hornburg at Helm's Gate Erkenbrand, master of Westfold on the borders of the Mark, now dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being wise, he had repaired the wall and made the fastness strong.

The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the Coomb, when cries and hornblasts were heard from their scouts that went in front. Out of the darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout rode back and reported that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley, and that a host of Orcs and wild men were hurrying southward from the Fords of Isen and seemed to be making for Helm's Deep.

'We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither,' said the scout. 'And we have met scattered companies, going this way and that, leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand none seem to know. It is likely that he will be overtaken ere he can reach Helm's Gate, if he has not already perished.'

'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?' asked Théoden.

'Yes, lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse, passing hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass. Some thought he was Saruman. It is said that he went away ere nightfall towards Isengard. Some say also that Wormtongue was seen earlier, going northward with a company of Orcs.'

'It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him said Théoden. 'Nonetheless I miss now both my counsellors, the old and the new. But in this need we have no better choice than to go on, as Gandalf said, to Helm's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the host that comes from the North?'

'It is very great,' said the scout. 'He that flies counts every foeman twice, yet I have spoken to stouthearted men, and I do not doubt that the main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that we have here.'

'Then let us be swift,' said Éomer. 'Let us drive through such foes as are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm's Deep where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills.

'Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. 'Saruman has long spied out this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!'

Aragorn and Legolas went now with Éomer in the van. On through the dark night they rode, ever slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed southward, higher and higher into the dim folds about the mountains' feet. They found few of the enemy before them. Here and there they came upon roving bands of Orcs; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them.

'It will not be long I fear,' said Éomer, 'ere the coming of the king's host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain he has sent forth.'

The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the dark, the sound of harsh singing. They had climbed far up into the Deeping-coomb when they looked back. Then they saw torches countless points of fiery light upon the black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or winding up from the lowlands in long flickering lines. Here and there a larger blaze leapt up.

'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn.

'They bring fire,' said Théoden, 'and they are burning as they come, rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for my folk!'

'Would that day was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm out of the mountains!' said Aragorn. 'It grieves me to fly before them.'

'We need not fly much further,' said Éomer. 'Not far ahead now lies Helm's Dike, an ancient trench and rampart scored across the coomb, two furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give battle.'

'Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike,' said Théoden. 'It is a mile long or more, and the breach in it is wide.'

'At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed,' said Éomer.

There was neither star nor moon when the Riders came to the breach in the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran down from the Hornburg. The rampart loomed suddenly before them, a high shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them.

'The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm's Gate,' Éomer answered. 'I, Éomer son of Éomund, speak.'

'This is good tidings beyond hope,' said the sentinel. 'Hasten! The enemy is on your heels.'

The host passed through the breach and halted on the sloping sward above. They now learned to their joy that Erkenbrand had left many men to hold Helm's Gate, and more had since escaped thither.

'Maybe, we have a thousand fit to fight on foot,' said Gamling, an old man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. 'But most of them have seen too many winters, as I have, or too few, as my son's son here. What news of Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all that is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.'

'I fear that he will not come now,' said Éomer. 'Our scouts have gained no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.'

'I would that he had escaped,' said Théoden. 'He was a mighty man. In him lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand. But we cannot await him here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored? We bring little provision, for we rode forth to open battle, not to a siege.'

'Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of Westfold, old and young, children and women,' said Gamling. 'But great store of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.'

'That is well,' said Éomer. 'They are burning or despoiling all that is left in the vale.'

'If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a high price,' said Gamling.

The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their horses up the ramp and passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they were welcomed again with joy and renewed hope; for now there were men enough to man both the burg and the barrier wall.

Quickly Éomer set his men in readiness. The king and the men of his household were in the Hornburg, and there also were many of the Westfold-men. But on the Deeping Wall and its tower, and behind it, Éomer arrayed most of the strength that he had, for here the defence seemed more doubtful, if the assault were determined and in great force. The horses were led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared.

The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet over which only a tall man could look. Here and there were clefts in the stone through which men could shoot. This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led also up on to the wall from the Deep behind; but in front it was smooth, and the great stones of it were set with such skill that no foothold could be found at their joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea-delved cliff.

Gimli stood leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom.

'This is more to my liking,' said the dwarf, stamping on the stones. 'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here. This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as we came up from the dike. Give me a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place that armies would break upon like water.'

'I do not doubt it,' said Legolas. 'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it no more by the light of day. But you comfort me, Gimli, and I am glad to have you standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more of your kin among us. But even more would I give for a hundred good archers of Mirkwood. We shall need them. The Rohirrim have good bowmen after their fashion, but there are too few here, too few.'

'It is dark for archery,' said Gimli. 'Indeed it is time for sleep. Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never I thought any dwarf could. Riding is tiring work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give me a row of orc-necks and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!'

A slow time passed. Far down in the valley scattered fires still burned. The hosts of Isengard were advancing in silence now. Their torches could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.

Suddenly from the Dike yells and screams, and the fierce battle-cries of men broke out. Flaming brands appeared over the brink and clustered thickly at the breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping back over the field and up the ramp to the gate of the Hornburg. The rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in.

'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow that we had, and filled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long. Already they are scaling the bank at many points, thick as marching ants. But we have taught them not to carry torches.'

It was now past midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness of the heavy air foreboded storm. Suddenly the clouds were seared by a blinding flash. Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills. For a staring moment the watchers on the walls saw all the space between them and the Dike lit with white light: it was boiling and crawling with black shapes. some squat and broad, some tall and grim, with high helms and sable shields. Hundreds and hundreds more were pouring over the Dike and through the breach. The dark tide flowed up to the walls from cliff to cliff. Thunder rolled in the valley. Rain came lashing down.

Arrows thick as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell clinking and glancing on the stones. Some found a mark. The assault on Helm's Deep had begun, but no sound or challenge was heard within; no answering arrows came.

The assailing hosts halted, foiled by the silent menace of rock and wall. Ever and again the lightning tore aside the darkness. Then the Orcs screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that stood revealed upon the battlements; and the men of the Mark amazed looked out, as it seemed to them, upon a great field of dark corn, tossed by a tempest of war, and every ear glinted with barbed light.

Brazen trumpets sounded. The enemy surged forward, some against the Deeping Wall, other towards the causeway and the ramp that led up to the Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Orcs were mustered, and the wild men of the Dunland fells. A moment they hesitated and then on they came. The lightning flashed, and blazoned upon every helm and shield the ghastly hand of Isengard was seen: They reached the summit of the rock; they drove towards the gates.

Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them, and a hail of stones. They wavered, broke, and fled back; and then charged again, broke and charged again; and each time, like the incoming sea, they halted at a higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press of roaring men leaped forth. They held their great shields above them like a roof, while in their midst they bore two trunks of mighty trees. Behind them orc-archers crowded, sending a hail of darts against the bowmen on the walls. They gained the gates. The trees, swung by strong arms, smote the timbers with a rending boom. If any man fell, crushed by a stone hurtling from above, two others sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed.

Éomer and Aragorn stood together on the Deeping Wall. They heard the roar of voices and the thudding of the rams; and then in a sudden flash of light they beheld the peril of the gates.

'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!'

Running like fire, they sped along the wall, and up the steps, and passed into the outer court upon the Rock. As they ran they gathered a handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that opened in an angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff stretched out to meet it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate, between the wall and the sheer brink of the Rock. Together Éomer and Aragorn sprang through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath as one.

'Gúthwinë!' cried Éomer. 'Gúthwinë for the Mark!'

'Andúril!' cried Aragorn. 'Andúril for the Dúnedain!'

Charging from the side, they hurled themselves upon the wild men. Andúril rose and fell, gleaming with white fire. A shout went up from wall and tower: 'Andúril! Andúril goes to war. The Blade that was Broken shines again!'

Dismayed the rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight; but the wall of their shields was broken as by a lightning-stroke, and they were swept away, hewn down, or cast over the Rock into the stony stream below. The orc-archers shot wildly and then fled.

For a moment Éomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was rumbling in the distance now. The lightning flickered still, far off among the mountains in the South. A keen wind was blowing from the North again. The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills of the Coomb-side the westering moon rode, glimmering yellow in the storm-wrack.

'We did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking at the gates. Their great hinges and iron bars were wrenched and bent; many of their timbers were cracked.

'Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them,' said Éomer. 'Look!' He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Orcs and Men were gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and skipped on the stones about them. 'Come! We must get back and see what we can do to pile stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!'

They turned and ran. At that moment some dozen Orcs that had lain motionless among the slain leaped to their feet, and came silently and swiftly behind. Two flung themselves to the ground at Éomer's heels, tripped him, and in a moment they were on top of him. But a small dark figure that none had observed sprang out of the shadows and gave a hoarse shout: Baruk Khazâd! Khazâd ai-mênu! An axe swung and swept back. Two Orcs fell headless. The rest fled.

Éomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid.

The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside with stones. When all were safe within, Éomer turned: 'I thank you, Gimli son of Glóin!' he said. 'I did not know that you were with us in the sortie. But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?'

'I followed you to shake off sleep,' said Gimli; 'but I looked on the hillmen and they seemed over large for me, so I sat beside a stone to see your sword-play.'

'I shall not find it easy to repay you,' said Éomer.

'There may be many a chance ere the night is over,' laughed the Dwarf. 'But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria.'

'Two!' said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the wall.

'Two?' said Legolas. 'I have done better, though now I must grope for spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But that is only a few leaves in a forest.'

The sky now was quickly clearing and the sinking moon was shining brightly. But the light brought little hope to the Riders of the Mark. The enemy before them seemed to have grown rather than diminished, still more were pressing up from the valley through the breach. The sortie upon the Rock gained only a brief respite. The assault on the gates was redoubled. Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a sea. Orcs and hillmen swarmed about its feet from end to end. Ropes with grappling hooks were hurled over the parapet faster than men could cut them or fling them back. Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down in ruin, but many more replaced them, and Orcs sprang up them like apes in the dark forests of the South. Before the wall's foot the dead and broken were piled like shingle in a storm; ever higher rose the hideous mounds, and still the enemy came on.

The men of Rohan grew weary. All their arrows were spent, and every shaft was shot; their swords were notched, and their shields were riven. Three times Aragorn and Éomer rallied them, and three times Andúril flamed in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall.

Then a clamour arose in the Deep behind. Orcs had crept like rats through the culvert through which the stream flowed out. There they had gathered in the shadow of the cliffs, until the assault above was hottest and nearly all the men of the defence had rushed to the wall's top. Then they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of the Deep and were among the horses, fighting with the guards.

Down from the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce cry that echoed in the cliffs. 'Khazâd! Khazâd!' He soon had work enough.

'Ai-oi!' he shouted. 'The Orcs are behind the wall. Ai-oi! Come, Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazâd ai-mênu!'

Gamling the Old looked down from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice of the dwarf above all the tumult. 'The Orcs are in the Deep!' he cried. 'Helm! Helm! Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped down the stair from the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back.

Their onset was fierce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before them. Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the guardians of the hidden caves.

'Twenty-one!' cried Gimli. He hewed a two-handed stroke and laid the last Orc before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.'

'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling. 'Dwarves are said to be cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!'

'We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our finger-nails,' said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.'

They gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find to hand, and under Gimli's direction the Westfold-men blocked up the inner end of the culvert, until only a narrow outlet remained. Then the Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path, and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff.

'It will be drier above,' said Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see how things go on the wall!'

He climbed up and found Legolas beside Aragorn and Éomer. The elf was whetting his long knife. There was for a while a lull in the assault, since the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled.

'Twenty-one!' said Gimli.

'Good!' said Legolas. 'But my count is now two dozen. It has been knife-work up here.'

Éomer and Aragorn leant wearily on their swords. Away on the left the crash and clamour of the battle on the Rock rose loud again. But the Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea. Its gates lay in ruin; but over the barricade of beams and stones within no enemy as yet had passed.

Aragorn looked at the pale stars, and at the moon, now sloping behind the western hills that enclosed the valley. 'This is a night as long as years,' he said. 'How long will the day tarry?'

'Dawn is not far off,' said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him. 'But dawn will not help us, I fear.'

'Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,' said Aragorn.

'But these creatures of Isengard, these half-orcs and goblin-men that the foul craft of Saruman has bred, they will not quail at the sun,' said Gamling. 'And neither will the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their voices?'

'I hear them,' said Éomer; 'but they are only the scream of birds and the bellowing of beasts to my ears.'

'Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,' said Gamling. 'I know that tongue. It is an ancient speech of men, and once was spoken in many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us, and they are glad; for our doom seems certain to them. 'The king the king!' they cry. 'We will take their king. Death to the Forgoil! Death to the Strawheads! Death to the robbers of the North!' Such names they have for us. Not in half a thousand years have they forgotten their grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the Mark to Eorl the Young and made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman has inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They will not give way now for dusk or dawn, until Théoden is taken, or they themselves are slain.'

'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,' said Aragorn. 'Is it not said that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?'

'So the minstrels say,' said Éomer.

'Then let us defend it, and hope!' said Aragorn.

Even as they spoke there came a blare of trumpets. Then there was a crash and a flash of flame and smoke. The waters of the Deeping-stream poured out hissing and foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping hole was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in.

'Devilry of Saruman!' cried Aragorn. 'They have crept in the culvert again, while we talked, and they have lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our feet. Elendil, Elendil!' he shouted, as he leaped down into the breach; but even as he did so a hundred ladders were raised against the battlements. Over the wall and under the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark wave upon a hill of sand. The defence was swept away. Some of the Riders were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting as they gave way, step by step, towards the caves. Others cut their way back towards the citadel.

A broad stairway, climbed from the Deep up to the Rock and the rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood Aragorn. In his hand still Andúril gleamed, and the terror of the sword for a while held back the enemy, as one by one all who could gain the stair passed up towards the gate. Behind on the upper steps knelt Legolas. His bow was bent, but one gleaned arrow was all that he had left, and he peered out now, ready to shoot the first Orc that should dare to approach the stair.

'All who can have now got safe within, Aragorn,' he called. 'Come back!'

Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as he ran he stumbled in his weariness. At once his enemies leapt forward. Up came the Orcs, yelling, with their long arms stretched out to seize him. The foremost fell with Legolas' last arrow in his throat. but the rest sprang over him. Then a great boulder, cast from the outer wall above, crashed down upon the stair, and hurled them back into the Deep. Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it clanged to behind him.

'Things go ill, my friends,' he said, wiping the sweat from his brow with his arm.

'Ill enough,' said Legolas, 'but not yet hopeless, while we have you with us. Where is Gimli?'

'I do not know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw him fighting on the ground behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.'

'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas.

'He is stout and strong,' said Aragorn. 'Let us hope that he will escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we. Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.'

'That must be my hope'' said Legolas. 'But I wish that he had come this way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.'

'If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your count again,' laughed Aragorn. 'Never did I see an axe so wielded.'

'I must go and seek some arrows,' said Legolas. 'Would that this night would end, and I could have better light for shooting.'

Aragorn now passed into the citadel. There to his dismay he learned that Éomer had not reached the Hornburg.

'Nay, he did not come to the Rock,' said one of the Westfold-men, 'I last saw him gathering men about him and fighting in the mouth of the Deep. Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not come to them.'

Aragorn strode on through the inner court, and mounted to a high chamber in the tower. There stood the king, dark against a narrow window, looking out upon the vale.

'What is the news, Aragorn?' he said.

'The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and all the defence swept away; but many have escaped hither to the Rock.'

'Is Éomer here?'

'No, lord. But many of your men retreated into the Deep; and some say that Éomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back the enemy and come within the caves. What hope they may have then I do not know.'

'More than we. Good provision, it is said. And the air is wholesome there because of the outlets through fissures in the rock far above. None can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold out long.'

'But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc,' said Aragorn. 'They have a blasting fire, and with it they took the Wall. If they cannot come in the caves, they may seal up those that are inside. But now we must turn all our thoughts to our own defence.'

'I fret in this prison,' said Théoden. 'If I could have set a spear in rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.'

'Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the Mark,' said Aragorn. 'More hope we have to defend you in the Hornburg than in Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.'

'It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,' said Théoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers and such reckless hate? Had I known that the strength of Isengard was grown so great, maybe l should not so rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all the arts of Gandalf. His counsel seems not now so good as it did under the morning sun.'

'Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said Aragorn.

'The end will not be long,' said the king. 'But I will not end here, taken like an old badger in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel and the horses of my guard are in the inner court. When dawn comes, I will bid men sound Helm's horn, and I will ride forth. Will you ride with me then, son of Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.'

'I will ride with you,' said Aragorn.

Taking his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot. Legolas went with him. Blasts of fire leaped up from below shaking the stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the Orcs gained the summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them down.

At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless of the darts of the enemy. As he looked forth he saw the eastern sky grow pale. Then he raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley.

The Orcs yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you wish to speak to us, come down! Bring out your king! We are the fighting Uruk-hai. We will fetch him from his hole, if he does not come. Bring out your skulking king!'

'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn.

'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fighting Uruk-hai.'

'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn.

'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai: we do not stop the fight for night or day, for fair weather or for storm. We come to kill, by sun or moon. What of the dawn?'

'None knows what the new day shall bring him,' said Aragorn. 'Get you gone, ere it turn to your evil.'

'Get down or we will shoot you from the wall,' they cried. 'This is no parley. You have nothing to say.'

'I have still this to say,' answered Aragorn. 'No enemy has yet taken the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one will be left alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not know your peril.'

So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there alone above the ruined gates before the host of his enemies, that many of the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to the valley, and some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs laughed with loud voices; and a hail of darts and arrows whistled over the wall, as Aragorn leaped down.

There was a roar and a blast of fire. The archway of the gate above which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smoke and dust. The barricade was scattered as if by a thunderbolt. Aragorn ran to the king's tower.

But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs about it yelled, preparing to charge, a murmur arose behind them. like a wind in the distance, and it grew to a clamour of many voices crying strange news in the dawn. The Orcs upon the Rock, hearing the rumour of dismay, wavered and looked back. And then, sudden and terrible, from the tower above, the sound of the great horn of Helm rang out.

All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs cast themselves on their faces and covered their ears with their claws. Back from the Deep the echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff and hill a mighty herald stood. But on the walls men looked up, listening with wonder; for the echoes did not die. Ever the horn-blasts wound on among the hills; nearer now and louder they answered one to another, blowing fierce and free.

'Helm! Helm!' the Riders shouted. 'Helm is arisen and comes back to war. Helm for Théoden King!'

And with that shout the king came. His horse was white as snow, golden was his shield, and his spear was long. At his right hand was Aragorn, Elendil's heir, behind him rode the lords of the House of Eorl the Young. Light sprang in the sky. Night departed.

'Forth Eorlingas!' With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they drove through the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind them from the Deep came the stern cries of' men issuing from the caves, driving forth the enemy. Out poured all the men that were left upon the Rock. And ever the sound of blowing horns echoed in the hills.

On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains and champions fell or fled before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them. Their backs were to the swords and spears of the Riders and their faces to the valley. They cried and wailed, for fear and great wonder had come upon them with the rising of the day.

So King Théoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to the great Dike. There the company halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the sun flared above the eastern hills and glimmered on their spears. But they sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb.

The land had changed. Where before the green dale had lain, its grassy slopes lapping the ever-mounting hills, there now a forest loomed. Great trees, bare and silent, stood, rank on rank, with tangled bough and hoary head; their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was under them. Between the Dike and the eaves of that nameless wood only two open furlongs lay. There now cowered the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror of the king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate until all above the Dike was empty of them, but below it they were packed like swarming flies. Vainly they crawled and clambered about the walls of the coomb. seeking to escape. Upon the east too sheer and stony was the valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached.

There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in the rising sun. Over the low hills the horns were sounding. Behind him, hastening down the long slopes, were a thousand men on foot; their swords were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong. His shield was red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn and blew a ringing blast.

'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!'

'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn. 'Gandalf is come again!'

'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!' said Legolas. 'This is wizardry indeed! Come! I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.'

The hosts of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach of the Dike charged the king's company. Down from the hills leaped Erkenbrand, lord of Westfold. Down leaped Shadowfax, like a deer that runs surefooted in the mountains. The White Rider was upon them, and the terror of his coming filled the enemy with madness. The wild men fell on their faces before him. The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and spear. Like a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they fled. Wailing they passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that shadow none ever came again.



Chapter 8
The Road to Isengard
So it was that in the light of a fair morning King Théoden and Gandalf the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the Deeping-stream. There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas the Elf, and Erkenbrand of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden House. About them were gathered the Rohirrim, the Riders of the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and their eyes were turned towards the wood.

Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who had been driven back into the Deep. There came Gamling the Old, and Éomer son of Éomund, and beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. He had no helm, and about his head was a linen band stained with blood; but his voice was loud and strong.

'Forty-two, Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My axe is notched: the forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?'

'You have passed my score by one,' answered Legolas. 'But I do not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!'

'Welcome, Éomer, sister-son!' said Théoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I am glad indeed.'

'Hail, Lord of the Mark!' said Éomer. 'The dark night has passed and day has come again. But the day has brought strange tidings.' He turned and gazed in wonder, first at the wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said.

'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and meet you here.'

'But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming. Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf the White!'

'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good counsel in peril, and made use of the speed of Shadowfax. Your own valour has done more, and the stout legs of the Westfold-men marching through the night.'

Then they all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced darkly at the wood, and passed their hands over their brows, as if they thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.

Gandalf laughed long and merrily. 'The trees?' he said. 'Nay, I see the wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope the event has proved.'

'Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?' said Théoden. 'Not Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we have yet to learn?'

'It is not wizardry, but a power far older,' said Gandalf: 'a power that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang.

Ere iron was found or tree was hewn,

When young was mountain under moon;

Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe,

It walked the forests long ago.'

'And what may be the answer to your riddle?' said Théoden.

'If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard ' answered Gandalf.

'To Isengard?' they cried.

'Yes,' said Gandalf. 'I shall return to Isengard, and those who will may come with me. There we may see strange things.'

'But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault the stronghold of Saruman,' said Théoden.

'Nevertheless to Isengard I go,' said Gandalf. 'I shall not stay there long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the moon!'

'Nay!' said Théoden. 'In the dark hour before dawn I doubted, but we will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.'

'I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,' said Gandalf, 'and since he has done you great injury, it would be fitting if you were there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?'

'My men are weary with battle,' said the King; 'and I am weary also. For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My old age is not feigned nor due only to the whisperings of Wormtongue. It is an ill that no leech can wholly cure, not even Gandalf.'

'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,' said Gandalf. 'We will journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my counsel that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may be, henceforth. But do not command many men to go with you, Théoden. We go to a parley not to a fight.'

The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses, and he sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young and old, to come in haste to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark would hold an assembly of all that could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To ride with him to Isengard the King chose Éomer and twenty men of his household. With Gandalf would go Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite of his hurt the dwarf would not stay behind.

'It was only a feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.'

'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn.

The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quiet as he had not known for many years, and the remainder of his chosen company rested also. But the others, all that were not hurt or wounded, began a great labour; for many had fallen in the battle and lay dead upon the field or in the Deep.

No Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But a great many of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid, and cried for mercy.

The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work.

'Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined,' said Erkenbrand; 'and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march with the enemies of Men; and then you shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded by Saruman. Many of you have got death as the reward of your trust in him; but had you conquered, little better would your wages have been.'

The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told them that the men of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.

In the midst of the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised, and beneath them were laid all the Riders of the Mark who fell in the defence, those of the East Dales upon one side, and those of Westfold upon the other. In a_ grave alone under the shadow of the Hornburg lay Háma, captain of the King's guard. He fell before the Gate.

The Orcs were piled in great heaps, away from the mounds of Men, not far from the eaves of the forest. And the people were troubled in their minds; for the heaps of carrion were too great for burial or for burning. They had little wood for firing, and none would have dared to take an axe to the strange trees, even if Gandalf had not warned them to hurt neither bark nor bough at their great peril.

'Let the Orcs lie,' said Gandalf. 'The morning may bring new counsel.'

In the afternoon the King's company prepared to depart. The work of burial was then but beginning; and Théoden mourned for the loss of Háma, his captain, and cast the first earth upon his grave. 'Great injury indeed has Saruman done to me and all this land,' he said; 'and I will remember it, when we meet.'

The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the Coomb, when at last Théoden and Gandalf and their companions rode down from the Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host, both of the Riders and of the people of Westfold, old and young, women and children, who had come out from the caves. A song of victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell silent, wondering what would chance, for their eyes were on the trees and they feared them.

The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and man, they were unwilling to pass in. The trees were grey and menacing, and a shadow or a mist was about them. The ends of their long sweeping boughs hung down like searching fingers, their roots stood up from the ground like the limbs of strange monsters, and dark caverns opened beneath them. But Gandalf went forward, leading the company, and where the road from the Hornburg met the trees they saw now an opening like an arched gate under mighty boughs; and through it Gandalf passed, and they followed him. Then to their amazement they found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream beside it; and the sky was open above and full of golden light. But on either side the great aisles of the wood were already wrapped in dusk, stretching away into impenetrable shadows; and there they heard the creaking and groaning of boughs, and far cries, and a rumour of wordless voices, murmuring angrily. No Orc or other living creature could be seen.

Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse; and they kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood.

'It is hot in here,' said Legolas to Gandalf. 'I feel a great wrath about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?'

'Yes,' said Gandalf.

'What has become of the miserable Orcs?' said Legolas.

'That, I think, no one will ever know,' said Gandalf.

They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas was ever glancing from side to side, and would often have halted to listen to the sounds of the wood, if Gimli had allowed it.

'These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,' he said; 'and I have seen many an oak grow from acorn to ruinous age. I wish that there were leisure now to walk among them: they have voices, and in time I might come to understand their thought.'

'No, no!' said Gimli. 'Let us leave them! I guess their thought already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of crushing and strangling.'

'Not of all that go on two legs,' said Legolas. 'There I think you are wrong. It is Orcs that they hate. For they do not belong here and know little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they sprang. From the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.'

'Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,' said Gimli. 'I should be grateful for the part they have played, but I do not love them. You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land, more beautiful than any grove or glade that ever grew: my heart is still full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the marvels of the Northern World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say! Caves! Holes to fly to in time of war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas, do you know that the caverns of Helm's Deep are vast and beautiful? There would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such things were known to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold for a brief glance!'

'And I would give gold to be excused,' said Legolas; 'and double to be let out, if I strayed in!'

'You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,' said Gimli. 'But you speak like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long ago? They are but hovels compared with the caverns I have seen here: immeasurable halls, filled with an everlasting music of water that tinkles into pools, as fair as Kheled-zâram in the starlight.

'And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the sandy floors under the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas, gems and crystals and veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls; and the light glows through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen Galadriel. There are columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose, Legolas, fluted and twisted into dreamlike forms; they spring up from many-coloured floors to meet the glistening pendants of the roof: wings, ropes, curtains fine as frozen clouds; spears, banners, pinnacles of suspended palaces! Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered with clear glass; cities. such as the mind of Durin could scarce have imagined in his sleep, stretch on through avenues and pillared courts, on into the dark recesses where no light can come. And plink! a silver drop falls, and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they fade and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another chamber and another dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas; hall opening out of hall, dome after dome, stair beyond stair; and still the winding paths lead on into the mountains' heart. Caves! The Caverns of Helm's Deep! Happy was the chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.'

'Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort, Gimli,' said the Elf, 'that you may come safe from war and return to see them again. But do not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your account. Maybe the men of this land are wise to say little: one family of busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.'

'No, you do not understand,' said Gimli. 'No dwarf could be unmoved by such loveliness. None of Durin's race would mine those caves for stones or ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there. Do you cut down groves of blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades of flowering stone, not quarry them. With cautious skill, tap by tap - a small chip of rock and no more, perhaps, in a whole anxious day - so we could work, and as the years went by, we should open up new ways, and display far chambers that are still dark, glimpsed only as a void beyond fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps as once shone in Khazad-dûm; and when we wished we would drive away the night that has lain there since the hills were made; and when we desired rest, we would let the night return.'

'You move me, Gimli,' said Legolas. 'I have never heard you speak like this before. Almost you make me regret that I have not seen these caves. Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.'

'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli. 'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves and share their wonder with me.'

'You have my promise,' said Legolas. 'But alas! Now we must leave behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We are coming to the end of the trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?'

'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf: 'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords: and ten more from there to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.'

'And when we come there, what shall we see?' asked Gimli. 'You may know, but I cannot guess.'

'I do not know myself for certain,' answered the wizard. 'I was there at nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet I think that you will not say that the journey was in vain - not though the Glittering Caves of Aglarond be left behind.'

At last the company passed through the trees, and found that they had come to the bottom of the Coomb, where the road from Helm's Deep branched, going one way east to Edoras, and the other north to the Fords of Isen. As they rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas halted and looked back with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry.

'There are eyes!' he said. 'Eyes looking out from the shadows of the boughs! I never saw such eyes before.'

The others, surprised by his cry, halted and turned; but Legolas started to ride back.

'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do as you please in your madness, but let me first get down from this horse! I wish to see no eyes!' 'Stay, Legolas Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not your time.'

Even as he spoke, there came forward out of the trees three strange shapes. As tall as trolls they were, twelve feet or more in height; their strong bodies, stout as young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with hide of close-fitting grey and brown. Their limbs were long, and their hands had many fingers; their hair was stiff, and their beards grey-green as moss. They gazed out with solemn eyes, but they were not looking at the riders: their eyes were bent northwards. Suddenly they lifted their long hands to their mouths, and sent forth ringing calls, clear as notes of a horn, but more musical and various. The calls were answered; and turning again, the riders saw other creatures of the same kind approaching, striding through the grass. They came swiftly from the North, walking like wading herons in their gait, but not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat quicker than the heron's wings. The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some set their hands upon their sword-hilts.

'You need no weapons,' said Gandalf. 'These are but herdsmen. They are not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.'

So it seemed to be; for as he spoke the tall creatures, without a glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished.

'Herdsmen!' said Théoden. 'Where are their flocks? What are they, Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.'

'They are the shepherds of the trees,' answered Gandalf. 'Is it so long since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the answer to your question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of Fangorn Forest, which in your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only in idle fancy? Nay, Théoden, it is otherwise: to them you are but the passing tale; all the years from Eorl the Young to Théoden the Old are of little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.'

The king was silent. 'Ents!' he said at length. 'Out of the shadows of legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the trees, I think. I have lived to see strange days. Long we have tended our beasts and our fields, built our houses, wrought our tools, or ridden away to help in the wars of Minas Tirith. And that we called the life of Men, the way of the world. We cared little for what lay beyond the borders of our land. Songs we have that tell of these things, but we are forgetting them, teaching them only to children, as a careless custom. And now the songs have come down among us out of strange places, and walk visible under the Sun.'

'You should be glad, Théoden King,' said Gandalf. 'For not only the little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those things which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even if you know them not.'

'Yet also I should be sad,' said Théoden. 'For however the fortune of war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle-earth?'

'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on with the journey we have begun!'

The company turned then away from the Coomb and from the wood and took the road towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set, already it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but as they rode out from the shadow of the hills and looked west to the Gap of Rohan the sky was still red, and a burning light was under the floating clouds. Dark against it there wheeled and flew many black-winged birds. Some passed overhead with mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks.

'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Éomer.

They rode now at an easy pace and dark came down upon the plains about them. The slow moon mounted, now waxing towards the full, and in its cold silver light the swelling grass-lands rose and fell like a wide grey sea. They had ridden for some four hours from the branching of the roads when they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river spread in stony shoals between high grassy terraces. Borne upon the wind they heard the howling of wolves. Their hearts were heavy, remembering the many men that had fallen in battle in this place.

The road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were three lines of flat stepping-stones across the stream, and between them fords for horses, that went from either brink to a bare eyot in the midst. The riders looked down upon the crossings, and it seemed strange to them; for the Fords had ever been a place full of the rush and chatter of water upon stones; but now they were silent. The beds of the stream were almost dry, a bare waste of shingles and grey sand.

'This is become a dreary place,' said Éomer. 'What sickness has befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has destroyed: has he devoured the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf.

'Alas!' said Théoden. 'Must we pass this way, where the carrion-beasts devour so many good Riders of the Mark?'

'This is our way,' said Gandalf. 'Grievous is the fall of your men; but you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not devour them. It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their feast: such indeed is the friendship of their kind. Come!'

They rode down to the river, and as they came the wolves ceased their howling and slunk away. Fear fell on them seeing Gandalf in the moon, and Shadowfax his horse shining like silver. The riders passed over to the islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from the shadows of the banks.

'Look!' said Gandalf. 'Friends have laboured here.'

And they saw that in the midst of the eyot a mound was piled, ringed with stones, and set about with many spears.

'Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place,' said Gandalf.

'Here let them rest!' said Éomer. 'And when their spears have rotted and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!'

'Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend?' said Théoden. 'You accomplished much in an evening and a night!'

'With the help of Shadowfax - and others,' said Gandalf. 'I rode fast and far. But here beside the mound I will say this for your comfort: many fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour made them. More were scattered than were slain; I gathered together all that I could find. Some men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold to join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make this burial. They have now followed your marshal, Elfhelm. I sent him with many Riders to Edoras. Saruman I knew had despatched his full strength against you, and his servants had turned aside from all other errands and gone to Helm's Deep: the lands seemed empty of enemies; yet I feared that wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless to Meduseld, while it was undefended. But now I think you need not fear: you will find your house to welcome your return.'

'And glad shall I be to see it again,' said Théoden, 'though brief now, I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.'

With that the company said farewell to the island and the mound, and passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they rode on, glad to have left the mournful Fords. As they went the howling of the wolves broke out anew.

There was an ancient highway that ran down from Isengard to the crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bending with it east and then north; but at the last it turned away and went straight towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the west of the valley, sixteen miles or more from its mouth. This road they followed but they did not ride upon it; for the ground beside it was firm and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind. Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They were come to the feet of the Misty Mountains, and the long arms of Nan Curunír stretched down to meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the moon had passed into the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and spread in shimmering billows, black and silver, over the starry sky.

'What do you think of that, Gandalf?' asked Aragorn. 'One would say that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.'

'There is ever a fume above that valley in these days,' said Éomer: 'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are steams rather than smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.'

'Maybe he is,' said Gandalf. 'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing. Now let us rest for a while, if we can.'

They camped beside the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the watchmen cried out, and all awoke. The moon was gone. Stars were shining above; but over the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night. On both sides of the river it rolled towards them, going northward.

'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will pass you by!'

A mist gathered about them. Above them a few stars still glimmered faintly; but on either side there arose walls of impenetrable gloom; they were in a narrow lane between moving towers of shadow. Voices they heard, whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling sigh; the earth shook under them. Long it seemed to them that they sat and were afraid; but at last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's arms.

Away south upon the Hornburg, in the middle night men heard a great noise, as a wind in the valley, and the ground trembled; and all were afraid and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning they went out and were amazed; for the slain Orcs were gone, and the trees also. Far down into the valley of the Deep the grass was crushed and trampled brown, as if giant herdsmen had pastured great droves of cattle there; but a mile below the Dike a huge pit had been delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled into a hill. Men believed that the Orcs whom they had slain were buried there; but whether those who had fled into the wood were with them, none could say, for no man ever set foot upon that hill. The Death Down it was afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the strange trees were never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had returned at night, and had gone far away to the dark dales of Fangorn. Thus they were revenged upon the Orcs.

The king and his company slept no more that night; but they saw and heard no other strange thing, save one: the voice of the river beside them suddenly awoke. There was a rush of water hurrying down among the stones; and when it had passed, the Isen flowed and bubbled in its bed again, as it had ever done.

At dawn they made ready to go on. The light came grey and pale, and they did not see the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy with fog, and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly, riding now upon the highway. It was broad and hard, and well-tended. Dimly through the mists they could descry the long arm of the mountains rising on their left. They had passed into Nan Curunír, the Wizard's Vale. That was a sheltered valley, open only to the South. Once it had been fair and green, and through it the Isen flowed, already deep and strong before it found the plains; for it was fed by many springs and lesser streams among the rain-washed hills. and all about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land.

It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres tilled by the slaves of Saruman; but most of the valley had become a wilderness of weeds and thorns. Brambles trailed upon the ground, or clambering over bush and bank, made shaggy caves where small beasts housed. No trees grew there; but among the rank grasses could still be seen the burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves. It was a sad country, silent now but for the stony noise of quick waters. Smokes and steams drifted in sullen clouds and lurked in the hollows. The riders did not speak. Many doubted in their hearts, wondering to what dismal end their journey led.

After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street, paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of grass was seen in any joint. Deep gutters, filled with trickling water. ran down on either side. Suddenly a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black; and set upon it was a great stone, carved and painted in the likeness of a long White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew that the gates of Isengard must stand, and their hearts were heavy; but their eyes could not pierce the mists ahead.

Beneath the mountain's arm within the Wizard's Vale through years uncounted had stood that ancient place that Men called Isengard. Partly it was shaped in the making of the mountains, but mighty works the Men of Westernesse had wrought there of old; and Saruman had dwelt there long and had not been idle.

This was its fashion, while Saruman was at his height, accounted by many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs, stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which it ran and then returned again. One entrance only was there made in it, a great arch delved in the southern wall. Here through the black rock a long tunnel had been hewn, closed at either end with mighty doors of iron. They were so wrought and poised upon their huge hinges, posts of steel driven into the living stone, that when unbarred they could be moved with a light thrust of the arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of the echoing tunnel, beheld a plain, a great circle, somewhat hollowed like a vast shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and filled with avenues, and groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that flowed from the mountains to a lake. But no green thing grew there in the latter days of Saruman. The roads were paved with stone-flags, dark and hard; and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron. joined by heavy chains.

Many houses there were, chambers, halls, and passages, cut and tunnelled back into the walls upon their inner side, so that all the open circle was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands could dwell there, workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with great store of arms; wolves were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was bored and delved. Shafts were driven deep into the ground; their upper ends were covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the Ring of Isengard looked like a graveyard of unquiet dead. For the ground trembled. The shafts ran down by many slopes and spiral stairs to caverns far under; there Saruman had treasuries, store-houses, armouries, smithies, and great furnaces. Iron wheels revolved there endlessly, and hammers thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents, lit from beneath with red light, or blue, or venomous green.

To the centre all the roads ran between their chains. There stood a tower of marvellous shape. It was fashioned by the builders of old, who smoothed the Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed a thing not made by the craft of Men, but riven from the bones of the earth in the ancient torment of the hills. A peak and isle of rock it was. black and gleaming hard: four mighty piers of many-sided stone were welded into one, but near the summit they opened into gaping horns. their pinnacles sharp as the points of spears, keen-edged as knives. Between them was a narrow space, and there upon a floor of polished stone, written with strange signs, a man might stand five hundred feet above the plain. This was Orthanc, the citadel of Saruman, the name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for in the Elvish speech orthanc signifies Mount Fang, but in the language of the Mark of old the Cunning Mind.

A strong place and wonderful was Isengard, and long it had been beautiful; and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of Gondor upon the West, and wise men that watched the stars. But Saruman had slowly shaped it to his shifting purposes, and made it better. as he thought, being deceived-for all those arts and subtle devices, for which he forsook his former wisdom, and which fondly he imagined were his own. came but from Mordor; so that what he made was naught, only a little copy, a child's model or a slave's flattery, of that vast fortress. armoury, prison, furnace of great power, Barad-dûr, the Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed at flattery, biding its time, secure in its pride and its immeasurable strength.

This was the stronghold of Saruman, as fame reported it; for within living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save perhaps a few, such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and told no man what they saw.

Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as he did so the Riders saw to their wonder that the Hand appeared no longer white. It was stained as with dried blood; and looking closer they perceived that its nails were red. Unheeding Gandalf rode on into the mist, and reluctantly they followed him. All about them now, as if there had been a sudden flood. wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows. and rills went trickling down among the stones.

At last Gandalf halted and beckoned to them; and they came, and saw that beyond him the mists had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone. The hour of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard.

But the doors lay hurled and twisted on the ground. And all about, stone, cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards, was scattered far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch still stood, but it opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare. and through the cliff-like walls on either side great rents and breaches had been torn; their towers were beaten into dust. If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and fallen on the hills with storm. it could have worked no greater ruin.

The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in which there heaved and floated a wreckage of beams and spars, chests and casks and broken gear. Twisted and leaning pillars reared their splintered stems above the flood. but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it seemed, half veiled in winding cloud, there loomed the island rock. Still dark and tall, unbroken by the storm, the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped about its feet.

The king and all his company sat silent on their horses, marvelling, perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not guess. And now they turned their eyes towards the archway and the ruined gates. There they saw close beside them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly they were aware of two small figures lying on it at their ease, grey-clad, hardly to be seen among the stones. There were bottles and bowls and platters laid beside them, as if they had just eaten well, and now rested from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs and arms behind his head, leaned back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke.

For a moment Théoden and Éomer and all his men stared at them in wonder. Amid all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to them the strangest sight. But before the king could speak, the small smoke-breathing figure became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent on the edge of the mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though not much more than half a man in height; his head of brown curling hair was uncovered, but he was clad in a travel-stained cloak of the same hue and shape as the companions of Gandalf had worn when they rode to Edoras. He bowed very low. putting his hand upon his breast. Then, seeming not to observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Éomer and the king.

'Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!' he said. 'We are the doorwardens. Meriadoc, son of Saradoc is my name; and my companion, who, alas! is overcome with weariness' - here he gave the other a dig with his foot - 'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North is our home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one Wormtongue, or doubtless he would be here to welcome such honourable guests.'

'Doubtless he would!' laughed Gandalf. 'And was it Saruman that ordered you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?'

'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,' answered Merry gravely 'He has been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who has taken over the management of Isengard. He commanded me to welcome the Lord of Rohan with fitting words. I have done my best.'

'And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?' cried Gimli, unable to contain himself longer. 'You rascals, you woolly-footed and wool-pated truants! A fine hunt you have led us! Two hundred leagues, through fen and forest, battle and death, to rescue you! And here we find you feasting and idling-and smoking! Smoking! Where did you come by the weed, you villains? Hammer and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy, that if I do not burst. it will be a marvel!'

'You speak for me, Gimli,' laughed Legolas. 'Though I would sooner learn how they came by the wine.'

'One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that's brighter wits,' said Pippin, opening an eye. 'Here you find us sitting on a field of victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came by a few well-earned comforts!'

'Well-earned?' said Gimli. 'I cannot believe that!'

The Riders laughed. 'It cannot be doubted that we witness the meeting of dear friends,' said Théoden. 'So these are the lost ones of your company, Gandalf? The days are fated to be filled with marvels. Already I have seen many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the Holbytlan?'

'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin.

'Hobbits?' said Théoden. 'Your tongue is strangely changed; but the name sounds not unfitting so. Hobbits! No report that I have heard does justice to the truth.'

Merry bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord; or I hope that I may so take your words,' he said. 'And here is another marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left my home, and never till now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.'

'My people came out of the North long ago,' said Théoden. 'But I will not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is said among us is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the halfling folk that dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their deeds. for it is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of men, being able to vanish in a twinkling: and they can change their voices to resemble the piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.'

'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry.

'For one thing,' said Théoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke from their mouths.'

'That is not surprising,' answered Merry; 'for it is an art which we have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who first grew the true pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our reckoning. How old Toby came by the plant…'

'You do not know your danger, Théoden,' interrupted Gandalf. 'These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table, or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers, and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you encourage them with undue patience. Some other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking. Where is Treebeard, Merry?'

'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink-of clean water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work - over there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as they looked, they heard a distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was falling from the mountain-side. Far away came a hoom-hom, as of horns blowing triumphantly.

'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?' asked Gandalf.

'There is the water,' said Merry. 'But Quickbeam and some others are watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of Saruman's planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.'

'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,' said Legolas, 'but his arms are at his sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.'

'It is past noon,' said Gandalf, 'and we at any rate have not eaten since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?'

'He left a message,' said Merry, 'and I was coming to it, but I have been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they will find Treebeard there, and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of the best there, it was discovered and selected by your humble servants.' He bowed.

Gandalf laughed. 'That is better!' he said. 'Well, Théoden. will you ride with me to find Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not far. When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is Fangorn, and the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear the speech of the oldest of all living things.'

'I will come with you,' said Théoden. 'Farewell, my hobbits! May we meet again in my house! There you shall sit beside me and tell me all that your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as you can reckon them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!'

The hobbits bowed low. 'So that is the King of Rohan!' said Pippin in an undertone. 'A fine old fellow. Very polite.'



Chapter 9
Flotsam and Jetsam
Gandalf and the King's company rode away, turning eastward to make the circuit of the ruined walls of Isengard. But Aragorn, Gimli, and Legolas remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to stray in search of grass, they came and sat beside the hobbits.

'Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where none of us ever thought to come,' said Aragorn.

'And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters,' said Legolas, 'the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their own small riddles. We tracked you as far as the forest, but there are still many things that I should like to know the truth of.'

'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you ' said Merry. 'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that is not nearly enough.'

'All in good time,' said Legolas. 'We were the hunters, and you should give an account of yourselves to us first.'

'Or second,' said Gimli. 'It would go better after a meal. t have a sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends by finding us some of the plunder that you spoke of. Food and drink would pay off some of my score against you.'

'Then you shall have it,' said Pippin. 'Will you have it here, or in more comfort in what's left of Saruman's guard-house--over there under the arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.'

'Less than an eye!' said Gimli. 'But I will not go into any orc-house nor touch Orcs' meat or anything that they have mauled.'

'We wouldn't ask you to,' said Merry. 'We have had enough of Orcs ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in Isengard. Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his gates: some of his most faithful servants, I suppose. Anyway they were favoured and got good provisions.'

'And pipe-weed?' asked Gimli.

'No, I don't think so,' Merry laughed. 'But that is another story, which can wait until after lunch.'

'Well let us go and have lunch then!' said the Dwarf.

The hobbits led the way; and they passed under the arch and came to a wide door upon the left, at the top of a stair. It opened direct into a large chamber, with other smaller doors at the far end, and a hearth and chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the stone; and it must once have been dark, for its windows looked out only into the tunnel. But light came in now through the broken roof. On the hearth wood was burning.

'I lit a bit of fire,' said Pippin. 'It cheered us up in the fogs. There were few faggots about, and most of the wood we could find was wet. But there is a great draught in the chimney: it seems to wind away up through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire is handy. I will make you some toast. The bread is three or four days old, I am afraid.'

Aragorn and his companions sat themselves down at one end of a long table, and the hobbits disappeared through one of the inner doors. 'Store-room in there, and above the woods, luckily,' said Pippin, as they came back laden with dishes, bowls, cups, knives, and food of various sorts.

'And you need not turn up your nose at the provender, Master Gimli,' said Merry. 'This is not orc-stuff, but man-food, as Treebeard calls it. Will you have wine or beer? There's a barrel inside there - very passable. And this is first-rate salted pork. Or I can cut you some rashers of bacon and broil them, if you like. I am sorry there is no green stuff: the deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer you anything to follow but butter and honey for your bread. Are you content?'

'Indeed yes,' said Gimli. 'The score is much reduced.'

The three were soon busy with their meal; and the two hobbits, unabashed, set to a second time. 'We must keep our guests company,' they said.

'You are full of courtesy this morning,' laughed Legolas. 'But maybe. if we had not arrived, you would already have been keeping one another company again.'

'Maybe; and why not?' said Pippin. 'We had foul fare with the Orcs, and little enough for days before that. It seems a long while since we could eat to heart's content.'

'It does not seem to have done you any harm,' said Aragorn. 'Indeed you look in the bloom of health.'

'Aye, you do indeed,' said Gimli, looking them up and down over the top of his cup. 'Why, your hair is twice as thick and curly as when we parted; and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.'

'He has not,' said Merry. 'But Ents only drink, and drink is not enough for content. Treebeard's draughts may be nourishing, but one feels the need of something solid. And even lembas is none the worse for a change.'

'You have drunk of the waters of the Ents, have you?' said Legolas. 'Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive him. Strange songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.'

'Many strange tales have been told about that land,' said Aragorn. 'I have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the Ents!'

'Ents,' said Pippin, 'Ents are - well Ents are all different for on thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.' He tried a few fumbling words that trailed off into silence. 'Oh, well,' he went on, 'you have seen some at a distance, already-they saw you at any rate, and reported that you were on the way-and you will see many others, I expect, before you leave here. You must form your own ideas.'

'Now, now!' said Gimli. 'We are beginning the story in the middle. I should like a tale in the right order, starting with that strange day when our fellowship was broken.'

'You shall have it, if there is time,' said Merry. 'But first-if you have finished eating-you shall fill your pipes and light up. And then for a little while we can pretend that we are all back safe at Bree again, or in Rivendell.'

He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. 'We have heaps of it,' he said; 'and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we go. We did some salvage-work this morning, Pippin and I. There are lots of things floating about. It was Pippin who found two small barrels, washed up out of some cellar or store-house, I suppose. When we opened them, we found they were filled with this: as fine a pipe-weed as you could wish for, and quite unspoilt.'

Gimli took some and rubbed it in his palms and sniffed it. 'It feels good, and it smells good,' he said.

'It is good!' said Merry. 'My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf! There were the Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as plain as plain. How it came here, I can't imagine. For Saruman's private use. I fancy. I never knew that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?'

'It would,' said Gimli, 'if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?'

'No, I am afraid not,' said Merry. 'We have not found any, not even here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself. it seems. And I don't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of Orthanc to beg a pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes. as good friends must at a pinch.'

'Half a moment!' said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast of his jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. 'I keep a treasure or two near my skin, as precious as Rings to me. Here's one: my old wooden pipe. And here's another: an unused one. I have carried it a long way,, though I don't know why. I never really expected to find any pipe-weed on the journey, when my own ran out. But now it comes in useful after all.' He held up a small pipe with a wide flattened bowl, and handed it to Gimli. 'Does that settle the score between us?' he said. 'Settle it!' cried Gimli. 'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.'

'Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind and sky are doing!' said Legolas.

'We will come with you,' said Aragorn.

They went out and seated themselves upon the piled stones before the gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists were lifting and floating away upon the breeze.

'Now let us take our ease here for a little!' said Aragorn. 'We will sit on the edge of ruin and talk, as Gandalf says, while he is busy elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.' He wrapped his grey cloak about him, hiding his mail-shirt, and stretched out his long legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin stream of smoke.

'Look!' said Pippin. 'Strider the Ranger has come back!'

'He has never been away,' said Aragorn. 'I am Strider and Dúnadan too, and I belong both to Gondor and the North.'

They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them; slanting into the valley from among white clouds high in the West. Legolas lay still, looking up at the sun and sky with steady eyes, and singing softly to himself. At last he sat up. 'Come now!' he said. 'Time wears on, and the mists are blowing away, or would if you strange folk did not wreathe yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?'

'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all strung-up in an orc-camp,' said Pippin. 'Let me see, what is today?'

'The fifth of March in the Shire-reckoning,' said Aragorn. Pippin made some calculations on his fingers. 'Only nine days ago!' he said.1 'It seems a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was like a bad dream, I reckon that three very horrible days followed. Merry will correct me, if I forget anything important: I am not going into details: the whips and the filth and stench and all that; it does not bear remembering.' With that he plunged into an account of Boromir's last fight and the orc-march from Emyn Muil to the Forest. The others nodded as the various points were fitted in with their guesses.

'Here are some treasures that you let fall,' said Aragorn. 'You will be glad to have them back.' He loosened his belt from under his cloak and took from it the two sheathed knives.

'Well!' said Merry. 'I never expected to see those again! I marked a few orcs with mine; but Uglúk took them from us. How he glared! At first I thought he was going to stab me, but he threw the things away as if they burned him.'

'And here also is your brooch, Pippin,' said Aragorn. 'I have kept it safe, for it is a very precious thing.'

'I know,' said Pippin. 'It was a wrench to let it go; but what else could I do?'

'Nothing else,' answered Aragorn. 'One who cannot cast away a treasure at need is in fetters. You did rightly.'

'The cutting of the bands on your wrists, that was smart work!' said Gimli. 'Luck served you there; but you seized your chance with both hands, one might say.'

'And set us a pretty riddle,' said Legolas. 'I wondered if you had grown wings!'

'Unfortunately not,' said Pippin. 'But you did not know about Grishnákh.' He shuddered and said no more, leaving Merry to tell of those last horrible moments: the pawing hands, the hot breath, and the dreadful strength of Grishnákh's hairy arms.

'All this about the Orcs of Barad-dûr, Lugbúrz as they call it, makes me uneasy,' said Aragorn. 'The Dark Lord already knew too much and his servants also; and Grishnákh evidently sent some message across the River after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman at any rate is in a cleft stick of his own cutting.'

'Yes, whichever side wins, his outlook is poor,' said Merry. 'Things began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in Rohan.'

'We caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so Gandalf hints,' said Gimli. 'On the edge of the Forest.'

'When was that?' asked Pippin.

'Five nights ago,' said Aragorn.

'Let me see,' said Merry: 'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the story you know nothing about. We met Treebeard that morning after the battle; and that night we were at Wellinghall, one of his ent-houses. The next morning we went to Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is, and the queerest thing I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that day and the next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in the afternoon in the third day of their moot, the Ents suddenly blew up. It was amazing. The Forest had felt as tense as if a thunderstorm was brewing inside it: then all at once it exploded. I wish you could have heard their song as they marched.'

'If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even if he had had to run on his own legs,' said Pippin.

'Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone,

We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door!

There was very much more. A great deal of the song had no words, and was like a music of horns and drums. It was very exciting. But I thought it was only marching music and no more, just a song - until I got here. I know better now.'

'We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunír, after night had fallen,' Merry continued. 'It was then that I first had the feeling that the Forest itself was moving behind us. I thought I was dreaming an entish dream, but Pippin had noticed it too. We were both frightened; but we did not find out more about it until later.

'It was the Huorns, or so the Ents call them in "short language". Treebeard won't say much about them, but I think they are Ents that have become almost like trees, at least to look at. They stand here and there in the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching endlessly over the trees; but deep in the darkest dales there are hundreds and hundreds of them, I believe.

'There is a great power in them, and they seem able to wrap themselves in shadow: it is difficult to see them moving. But they do. They can move very quickly, if they are angry. You stand still looking at the weather, maybe, or listening to the rustling of the wind, and then suddenly you find that you are in the middle of a wood with great groping trees all around you. They still have voices, and can speak with the Ents - that is why they are called Huorns, Treebeard says - but they have become queer and wild. Dangerous. I should be terrified of meeting them, if there were no true Ents about to look after them.

'Well, in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the upper end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns behind. We could not see them, of course, but the whole air was full of creaking. It was very dark, a cloudy night. They moved at a great speed as soon as they had left the hills, and made a noise like a rushing wind. The Moon did not appear through the clouds, and not long after midnight there was a tall wood all round the north side of Isengard. There was no sign of enemies nor of any challenge. There was a light gleaming from a high window in the tower, that was all.

'Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on, right round to within sight of the great gates. Pippin and I were with him. We were sitting on Treebeard's shoulders, and I could feel the quivering tenseness in him. But even when they are roused, Ents can be very cautious and patient. They stood still as carved stones, breathing and listening.

'Then all at once there was a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the walls of Isengard echoed. We thought that we had been discovered, and that battle was going to begin. But nothing of the sort. All Saruman's people were marching away. I don't know much about this war, or about the Horsemen of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I saw the enemy go: endless lines of marching Orcs; and troops of them mounted on great wolves. And there were battalions of Men, too. Many of them carried torches, and in the flare I could see their faces. Most of them were ordinary men, rather tall and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly evil-looking. But there were some others that were horrible: man-high, but with goblin-faces, sallow, leering, squint-eyed. Do you know, they reminded me at once of that Southerner at Bree: only he was not so obviously orc-like as most of these were.'

'I thought of him too,' said Aragorn. 'We had many of these half-orcs to deal with at Helm's Deep. It seems plain now that that Southerner was a spy of Saruman's; but whether he was working with the Black Riders, or for Saruman alone, I do not know. It is difficult with these evil folk to know when they are in league, and when they are cheating one another.'

'Well, of all sorts together, there must have been ten thousand at the very least,' said Merry. 'They took an hour to pass out of the gates. Some went off down the highway to the Fords, and some turned away µ and went eastward. A bridge has been built down there, about a mile away, where the river runs in a very deep channel. You could see it now, if you stood up. They were all singing with harsh voices, and laughing, making a hideous din. I thought things looked very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He said: 'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.'

'But, though I could not see what was happening in the dark, I believe that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were shut again. Their business was with Orcs I think. They were far down the valley in the morning; or any rate there was a shadow there that one couldn't see through.

'As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came. Treebeard put us down, and went up to the gates, and began hammering on the doors, and calling for Saruman. There was no answer, except arrows and stones from the walls. But arrows are no use against Ents. They hurt them, of course, and infuriate them: like stinging flies. But an Ent can be stuck as full of orc-arrows as a pin-cushion, and take no serious harm. They cannot be poisoned, for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher than bark. It takes a very heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They don't like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe-men to one Ent: a man that hacks once at an Ent never gets a chance of a second blow. A punch from an Ent-fist crumples up iron like thin tin.

'When Treebeard had got a few arrows in him, he began to warm up, to get positively "hasty", as he would say. He let out a great hoom-hom, and a dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent is terrifying. Their fingers, and their toes, just freeze on to rock; and they tear it up like bread-crust. It was like watching the work of great tree-roots in a hundred years, all packed into a few moments.

'They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and clang-bang, crash-crack, in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in ruin; and some were already beginning to eat into the walls, like rabbits in a sand-pit. I don't know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he did not know how to deal with it. His wizardry may have been falling off lately, of course; but anyway I think he has not much grit, not much plain courage alone in a tight place without a lot of slaves and machines and things, if you know what I mean. Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame was not all along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.'

'No,' said Aragorn. 'Once he was as great as his fame made him. His knowledge was deep, his thought was subtle, and his hands marvellously skilled; and he had a power over the minds of others. The wise he could persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That power he certainly still keeps. There are not many in Middle-earth that I should say were safe, if they were left alone to talk with him, even now when he has suffered a defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has been laid bare, but very few others.'

'The Ents are safe,' said Pippin. 'He seems at one time to have got round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand them; and he made the great mistake of leaving them out of his calculations. He had no plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work. As soon as our attack began, the few remaining rats in Isengard started bolting through every hole that the Ents made. The Ents let the Men go, after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down at this end. I don't think many orc-folk, of any size, escaped. Not from the Huorns: there was a wood full of them all round Isengard by that time, as well as those that had gone down the valley.

'When the Ents had reduced a large part of the southern walls to rubbish, and what was left of his people had bolted and deserted him, Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived: I expect he came to watch his splendid army march out. When the Ents broke their way in, he left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for Ents to see by, and suddenly Quickbeam gave a cry "The tree-killer, the tree-killer!" Quickbeam is a gentle creature, but he hates Saruman all the more fiercely for that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He leapt down the path from the inner gate, and he can move like a wind when he is roused. There was a pale figure hurrying away in and out of the shadows of the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs to the tower-door. But it was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after him, that he was within a step or two of being caught and strangled when he slipped in through the door.

'When Saruman was safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before he set some of his precious machinery to work. By that time there were many Ents inside Isengard: some had followed Quickbeam, and others had burst in from the north and east; they were roaming about and doing a great deal of damage. Suddenly up came fires and foul fumes: the vents and shafts all over the plain began to spout and belch. Several of the Ents got scorched and blistered. One of them, Beechbone I think he was called, a very tall handsome Ent, got caught in a spray of some liquid fire and burned like a torch: a horrible sight.

'That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused before; but I was wrong. I saw what it was like at last. It was staggering. They roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to crack and fall at the mere noise of them. Merry and I lay on the ground and stuffed our cloaks into our ears. Round and round the rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding and storming like a howling gale, breaking pillars, hurling avalanches of boulders down the shafts, tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air like leaves. The tower was in the middle of a spinning whirlwind. I saw iron posts and blocks of masonry go rocketing up hundreds of feet, and smash against the windows of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. He had not had any burns, luckily. He did not want his folk to hurt themselves in their fury, and he did not want Saruman to escape out of some hole in the confusion. Many of the Ents were hurling themselves against the Orthanc-rock; but that defeated them. It is very smooth and hard. Some wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than Saruman's. Anyway they could not get a grip on it, or make a crack in it; and they were bruising and wounding themselves against it. 'So Treebeard went out into the ring and shouted. His enormous voice rose above all the din. There was a dead silence, suddenly. In it we heard a shrill laugh from a high window in the tower. That had a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now they became cold, grim as ice, and quiet. They left the plain and gathered round Treebeard, standing quite still. He spoke to them for a little in their own language; I think he was telling them of a plan he had made in his old head long before. Then they just faded silently away in the grey light. Day was dawning by that time.

'They set a watch on the tower, I believe, but the watchers were so well hidden in shadows and kept so still, that I could not see them. The others went away north. All that day they were busy, out of sight. Most of the time we were left alone. It was a dreary day; and we wandered about a bit, though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc, as much as we could: they stared at us so threateningly. A good deal of the time we spent looking for something to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was happening away south in Rohan, and what had become of all the rest of our Company. Every now and then we could hear in the distance the rattle and fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.

'In the afternoon we walked round the circle, and went to have a look at what was going on. There was a great shadowy wood of Huorns at the head of the valley, and another round the northern wall. We did not dare to go in. But there was a rending, tearing noise of work going on inside. Ents and Huorns were digging great pits and trenches, and making great pools and dams, gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream that they could find. We left them to it.

'At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming and booming to himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched his great arms and legs and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired.

' "Tired?" he said, "tired? Well no, not tired, but stiff. I need a good draught of Entwash. We have worked hard; we have done more stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many a long year before. But it is nearly finished. When night falls do not linger near this gate or in the old tunnel! Water may come through-and it will be foul water for a while, until all the filth of Saruman is washed away. Then Isen can run clean again." He began to pull down a bit more of the walls, in a leisurely sort of way, just to amuse himself.

'We were just wondering where it would be safe to lie and get some sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was the sound of a rider coming swiftly up the road. Merry and I lay quiet, and Treebeard hid himself in the shadows under the arch. Suddenly a great horse came striding up, like a flash of silver. It was already dark. but I could see the rider's face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn't.

'There was no need. He halted just by us and looked down at us. 'Gandalf!' I said at last. but my voice was only a whisper. Did he say: "Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!"? No, indeed! He said: "Get up, you tom-fool of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in all this ruin is Treebeard? I want him. Quick!"

'Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once; and there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed surprised at all. Gandalf obviously expected to find Treebeard here; and Treebeard might almost have been loitering about near the gates on purpose to meet him. Yet we had told the old Ent all about Moria. But then I remembered a queer look he gave us at the time. I can only suppose that he had seen Gandalf or had some news of him, but would not say anything in a hurry. "Don't be hasty" is his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say much about Gandalf's movements when he is not there.

'"Hoom! Gandalf!" said Treebeard. "I am glad you have come. Wood and water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to manage here."

'"Treebeard," said Gandalf. "I need your help. You have done much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage."

'Then those two went off and had a council together in some corner. It must have seemed very hasty to Treebeard, for Gandalf was in a tremendous hurry, and was already talking at a great pace, before they passed out of hearing. They were only away a matter of minutes, perhaps a quarter of an hour. Then Gandalf came back to us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He did say he was glad to see us, then.

'"But Gandalf," I cried, "where have you been? And have you seen the others?"

'"Wherever I have been, I am back," he answered in the genuine Gandalf manner. "Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must wait. This is a perilous night, and I must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if so, we shall meet again. Take care of yourselves, and keep away from Orthanc! Good-bye!"

'Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had evidently learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked at us and said: "Hm, well, I find you are not such hasty folk as I thought. You said much less than you might, and not more than you should. Hm, this is a bundle of news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again."

'Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it did not cheer us up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you three than about Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we gathered that there was a great battle going on, or soon would be, and that you were in it, and might never come out of it.

'"Huorns will help," said Treebeard. Then he went away and we did not see him again until this morning.

'It was deep night. We lay on top of a pile of stone, and could see nothing beyond it. Mist or shadows blotted out everything like a great blanket all round us. The air seemed hot and heavy; and it was full of rustlings, creakings, and a murmur like voices passing. I think that hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle. Later there was a great rumble of thunder away south, and flashes of lightning far away across Rohan. Every now and then we could see mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab out suddenly, black and white, and then vanish. And behind us there were noises like thunder in hills, but different. At times the whole valley echoed.

'It must have been about midnight when the Ents broke the dams and poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall, down into Isengard. The Huorn-dark had passed, and the thunder had rolled away. The Moon was sinking behind the western mountains.

'Isengard began to fill up with black creeping streams and pools. They glittered in the last light of the Moon, as they spread over the plain. Every now and then the waters found their way down into some shaft or spouthole. Great white steams hissed up. Smoke rose in billows. There were explosions and gusts of fire. One great coil of vapour went whirling up, twisting round and round Orthanc, until it looked like a tall peak of cloud, fiery underneath and moonlit above. And still more water poured in, until at last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.'

'We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night when we came to the mouth of Nan Curunír,' said Aragorn. 'We feared that Saruman was brewing some new devilry for us.'

'Not he!' said Pippin. 'He was probably choking and not laughing any more. By the morning, yesterday morning, the water had sunk down into all the holes, and there was a dense fog. We took refuge in that guardroom over there; and we had rather a fright. The lake began to overflow and pour out through the old tunnel, and the water was rapidly rising up the steps. We thought we were going to get caught like Orcs in a hole; but we found a winding stair at the back of the store-room that brought us out on top of the arch. It was a squeeze to get out, as the passages had been cracked and half blocked with fallen stone near the top. There we sat high up above the floods and watched the drowning of Isengard. The Ents kept on pouring in more water, till all the fires were quenched and every cave filled. The fogs slowly gathered together and steamed up into a huge umbrella of cloud: it must have been a mile high. In the evening there was a great rainbow over the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted out by a thick drizzle on the mountain-sides. It all went very quiet. A few wolves howled mournfully, far away. The Ents stopped the inflow in the night, and sent the Isen back into its old course. And that was the end of it all.

'Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of his windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We felt very lonely. Not even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin; and no news. We spent the night up on top there above the arch, and it was cold and damp and we did not sleep. We had a feeling that anything might happen at any minute. Saruman is still in his tower. There was a noise in the night like a wind coming up the valley. I think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came back then; but where they have all gone to now, I don't know. It was a misty, moisty morning when we climbed down and looked round again, and nobody was about. And that is about all there is to tell. It seems almost peaceful now after all the turmoil. And safer too, somehow, since Gandalf came back. I could sleep!'

They all fell silent for a while. Gimli re-filled his pipe. 'There is one thing I wonder about,' he said as he lit it with his flint and tinder: 'Wormtongue. You told Théoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?'

'Oh yes, I forgot about him,' said Pippin. 'He did not get here till this morning. We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast when Treebeard appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our names outside.

'"I have just come round to see how you are faring, my lads,' he said; 'and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All's well; aye very well indeed!" he laughed, and slapped his thighs. "No more Orcs in Isengard, no more axes! And there will be folk coming up from the South before the day is old; some that you may be glad to see."

'He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road. We rushed out before the gates, and I stood and stared, half expecting to see Strider and Gandalf come riding up at the head of an army. But out of the mist there rode a man on an old tired horse; and he looked a queer twisted sort of creature himself. There was no one else. When he came. out of the mist and suddenly saw all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he sat and gaped, and his face went almost green. He was so bewildered that he did not seem to notice us at first. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to turn his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides, put out a long arm, and lifted him out of the saddle. His horse bolted in terror, and he grovelled on the ground. He said he was Gríma, friend and counsellor of the king, and had been sent with important messages from Théoden to Saruman.

'"No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul Orcs," he said, "so I was sent. And I have had a perilous journey, and I am hungry and weary. I fled far north out of my way, pursued by wolves."

'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself "liar". Treebeard looked at him in his long slow way for several minutes, till the wretched man was squirming on the floor. Then at last he said: "Ha, hm, I was expecting you, Master Wormtongue." The man started at that name. "Gandalf got here first. So I know as much about you as I need, and I know what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of."

'"Let me go, let me go!" said Wormtongue. "I know the way."

'"You knew the way, I don't doubt," said Treebeard. "But things have changed here a little. Go and see!"

'He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch with us close behind, until he came inside the ring and could see all the floods that lay between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us.

'"Let me go away!" he whined. "Let me go away! My messages are useless now."

'"They are indeed," said Treebeard. "But you have only two choices: to stay with me until Gandalf and your master arrive; or to cross the water. Which will you have?"

'The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the water; but he drew back. "I cannot swim," he said.

'"The water is not deep," said Treebeard. "It is dirty, but that will not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!"

'With that the wretch floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly to his neck before he got too far away for me to see him. The last I saw of him was clinging to some old barrel or piece of wood. But Treebeard waded after him, and watched his progress.

'"Well, he has gone in," he said when he returned. "I saw him crawling up the steps like a draggled rat. There is someone in the tower still: a hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and I hope the welcome is to his liking. Now I must go and wash myself clean of the slime. I'll be away up on the north side, if anyone wants to see me. There is no clean water down here fit for an Ent to drink. or to bathe in. So I will ask you two lads to keep a watch at the gate for the folk that are coming. There'll be the Lord of the Fields of Rohan, mark you! You must welcome him as well as you know how: his men have fought a great fight with the Orcs. Maybe, you know the right fashion of Men's words for such a lord, better than Ents. There have been many lords in the green fields in my time, and I have never learned their speech or their names. They will be wanting man-food, and you know all about that, I guess. So find what you think is fit for a king to eat, if you can." And that is the end of the story. Though I should like to know who this Wormtongue is. Was he really the king's counsellor?'

'He was,' said Aragorn; 'and also Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan. Fate has not been kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of the ruin of all that he thought so strong and magnificent must have been almost punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits him.'

'Yes, I don't suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of kindness,' said Merry. 'He seemed rather grimly delighted with the business and was laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe and drink. We spent a busy time after that, searching the flotsam, and rummaging about. We found two or three store-rooms in different places nearby, above the flood-level. But Treebeard sent some Ents down, and they carried off a great deal of the stuff.

'"We want man-food for twenty-five," the Ents said, so you can see that somebody had counted your company carefully before you arrived. You three were evidently meant to go with the great people. But you would not have fared any better. We kept as good as we sent, I promise you. Better, because we sent no drink.

'"What about drink?" I said to the Ents.

'"There is water of Isen," they said, "and that is good enough for Ents and Men." But I hope that the Ents may have found time to brew some of their draughts from the mountain-springs, and we shall see Gandalf's beard curling when he returns. After the Ents had gone, we felt tired, and hungry. But we did not grumble - our labours had been well rewarded. It was through our search for man-food that Pippin discovered the prize of all the flotsam, those Hornblower barrels. "Pipe-weed is better after food," said Pippin; that is how the situation arose.'

'We understand it all perfectly now,' said Gimli.

'All except one thing,' said Aragorn: 'leaf from the Southfarthing in Isengard. The more I consider it, the more curious I find it. I have never been in Isengard, but I have journeyed in this land, and I know well the empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire. Neither goods nor folk have passed that way for many a long year, not openly. Saruman had secret dealings with someone in the Shire, I guess. Wormtongues may be found in other houses than King Théoden's. Was there a date on the barrels?'

'Yes,' said Pippin. 'It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the year before, of course, now: a good year.'

'Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is beyond our reach at present,' said Aragorn. 'Yet I think I shall mention it to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great affairs.'

'I wonder what he is doing,' said Merry. 'The afternoon is getting on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any rate, Strider, if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.'



Chapter 10
The Voice of Saruman
They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of stones, gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows, a menace still in the desolation that lay all about it. The waters had now nearly all subsided. Here and there gloomy pools remained, covered with scum and wreckage; but most of the wide circle was bare again, a wilderness of slime and tumbled rock, pitted with blackened holes, and dotted with posts and pillars leaning drunkenly this way and that. At the rim of the shattered bowl there lay vast mounds and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great storm; and beyond them the green and tangled valley ran up into the long ravine between the dark arms of the mountains. Across the waste they saw riders picking their way; they were coming from the north side, and already they were drawing near to Orthanc.

'There is Gandalf, and Théoden and his men!' said Legolas. 'Let us go and meet them!'

'Walk warily!' said Merry. 'There are loose slabs that may tilt up and throw you down into a pit, if you don't take care.'

They followed what was left of the road from the gates to Orthanc, going slowly, for the flag-stones were cracked and slimed. The riders, seeing them approach, halted under the shadow of the rock and waited for them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them.

'Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting discussions, and made a few plans,' he said; 'and we have all had some much-needed rest. Now we must be going on again. I hope you companions have all rested, too, and refreshed yourselves?'

'We have,' said Merry. 'But our discussions began and ended in smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.'

'Do you indeed?' said Gandalf. 'Well, I do not. I have now a last task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangerous, and probably useless; but it must be done. Those of you who wish may come with me - but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.'

'I will come,' said Gimli. 'I wish to see him and learn if he really looks like you.'

'And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf?' said Gandalf. 'Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect all his counterfeits? Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be shy of showing himself before many different eyes together. But I have ordered all the Ents to remove themselves from sight, so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.'

'What's the danger?' asked Pippin. 'Will he shoot at us, and pour fire out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?'

'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do not guess. Beware of his voice!'

They came now to the foot of Orthanc. It was black, and the rock gleamed as if it were wet. The many faces of the stone had sharp edges as though they had been newly chiselled. A few scorings. and small flake-like splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury of the Ents.

On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door, high above the ground; and over it was a shuttered window, opening upon a balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold of the door there mounted a flight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn by some unknown art of the same black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower; but many tall windows were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns.

At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 'I will go up,' said Gandalf. 'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.'

'And I too will go up,' said the king. 'I am old, and fear no peril any more. I wish to speak with the enemy who has done me so much wrong. Éomer shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not falter.'

'As you will,' said Gandalf. 'Aragorn shall come with me. Let the others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if there is anything to hear or see.'

'Nay!' said Gimli. 'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here represent our kindred. We also will come behind.'

'Come then!' said Gandalf, and with that he climbed the steps, and Théoden went beside him.

The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon their horses, on either side of the stair, and looked up darkly at the great tower, fearing what might befall their lord. Merry and Pippin sat on the bottom step, feeling both unimportant and unsafe.

'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!' muttered Pippin. 'I wish I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are not wanted.'

Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his staff. It rang with a hollow sound. 'Saruman, Saruman!' he cried in a loud commanding voice. 'Saruman come forth!'

For some time there was no answer. At last the window above the door was unbarred, hut no figure could be seen at its dark opening.

'Who is it?' said a voice. 'What do you wish?'

Théoden started. 'I know that voice,' he said, 'and I curse the day when I first listened to it.'

'Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his footman, Gríma Wormtongue!' said Gandalf. 'And do not waste our time!'

The window closed. They waited. Suddenly another voice spoke, low and melodious, its very sound an enchantment. Those who listened unwarily to that voice could seldom report the words that they heard; and if they did, they wondered, for little power remained in them. Mostly they remembered only that it was a delight to hear the voice speaking, all that it said seemed wise and reasonable, and desire awoke in them by swift agreement to seem wise themselves. When others spoke they seemed harsh and uncouth by contrast; and if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of those under the spell. Fur some the spell lasted only while the voice spoke to them, and when it spake to another they smiled, as men do who see through a juggler's trick while others gape at it. For many the sound of the voice alone was enough to hold them enthralled; but for those whom it conquered the spell endured when they were far away. and ever they heard that soft voice whispering and urging them. But none were unmoved; none rejected its pleas and its commands without an effort of mind and will, so long as its master had control of it.

'Well?' it said now with gentle question. 'Why must you disturb my rest? Will you give me no peace at all by night or day?' Its tone was that of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved.

They looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his coming; and they saw a figure standing at the rail, looking down upon them: an old man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for it changed if they moved their eyes or if he stirred. His face was long, with a high forehead, he had deep darkling eyes, hard to fathom, though the look that they now bore was grave and benevolent, and a little weary. His hair and beard were white, but strands of black still showed about his lips and ears.

'Like, and yet unlike,' muttered Gimli.

'But come now,' said the soft voice. 'Two at least of you I know by name. Gandalf I know too well to have much hope that he seeks help or counsel here. But you, Théoden Lord of the Mark of Rohan are declared by your noble devices, and still more by the fair countenance of the House of Eorl. O worthy son of Thengel the Thrice-renowned! Why have you not come before, and as a friend? Much have I desired to see you, mightiest king of western lands, and especially in these latter years, to save you from the unwise and evil counsels that beset you! Is it yet too late? Despite the injuries that have been done to me, in which the men of Rohan, alas! have had some part, still I would save you, and deliver you from the ruin that draws nigh inevitably, if you ride upon this road which you have taken. Indeed I alone can aid you now.'

Théoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked up at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent down upon him, and then to Gandalf at his side; and he seemed to hesitate. Gandalf made no sign; but stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call that has not yet come. The Riders stirred at first, murmuring with approval of the words of Saruman; and then they too were silent, as men spell-bound. It seemed to them that Gandalf had never spoken so fair and fittingly to their lord. Rough and proud now seemed all his dealings with Théoden. And over their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end of the Mark in a darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while Saruman stood beside a door of escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came through. There was a heavy silence.

It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. 'The words of this wizard stand on their heads,' he growled, gripping the handle of his axe. 'In the language of Orthanc help means ruin, and saving means slaying, that is plain. But we do not come here to beg.'

'Peace!' said Saruman, and for a fleeting moment his voice was less suave, and a light flickered in his eyes and was gone. 'I do not speak to you yet, Gimli Glóin's son,' he said. 'Far away is your home and small concern of yours are the troubles of this land. But it was not by design of your own that you became embroiled in them, and so I will not blame such part as you have played-a valiant one, I doubt not. But I pray you, allow me first to speak with the King of Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend.

'What have you to say, Théoden King? Will you have peace with me, and all the aid that my knowledge, founded in long years, can bring? Shall we make our counsels together against evil days, and repair our injuries with such good will that our estates shall both come to fairer flower than ever before?'

Still Théoden did not answer. Whether he strove with anger or doubt none could say. Éomer spoke.

'Lord, hear me!' he said. 'Now we feel the peril that we were warned of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last amazed by an old liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would the trapped wolf speak to the hounds, if he could. What aid can he give to you, forsooth? All he desires is to escape from his plight. But will you parley with this dealer in treachery and murder? Remember Théodred at the Fords, and the grave of Háma in Helm's Deep!'

'If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours, young serpent?' said Saruman, and the flash of his anger was now plain to see. 'But come, Éomer, Éomund's son!' he went on in his soft voice again. To every man h part. Valour in arms is yours, and you win high honour thereby. Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and be content. Meddle not in policies which you do not understand. But maybe. if you become a king, you Will find that he must choose his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the power of Orthanc cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real or fancied, may lie behind. You have won a battle but not a war and that with help on which you cannot count again. You may find the Shadow of the Wood at your own door next: it is wayward, and senseless, and has no love for Men.

'But my lord of Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because valiant men have fallen in battle? If you go to war, needlessly, for I did not desire it, then men will be slain. But if I am a murderer on that account, then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many wars, and assailed many who defied them. Yet with some they have afterwards made peace, none the worse for being politic. I say, Théoden King: shall we have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command '

'We will have peace,' said Théoden at last thickly and with an effort. Several of the Riders cried out gladly. Théoden held up his hand. 'Yes, we will have peace,' he said, now in a clear voice, 'we will have peace, when you and all your works have perished - and the works of your dark master to whom you would deliver us. You are a liar. Saruman, and a corrupter of men's hearts. You hold out your hand to me, and I perceive only a finger of the claw of Mordor. Cruel and cold! Even if your war on me was just as it was not, for were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule me and mine for your own profit as you desired - even so, what will you say of your torches in Westfold and the children that lie dead there? And they hewed Háma's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he was dead. When you hang from a gibbet at your window for the sport of your own crows, I will have peace with you and Orthanc. So much for the House of Eorl. A lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.'

The Riders gazed up at Théoden like men startled out of a dream. Harsh as an old raven's their master's voice sounded in their ears after the music of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside himself with wrath. He leaned over the rail as if he would smite the King with his staff. To some suddenly it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike.

'Gibbets and crows!' he hissed, and they shuddered at the hideous change. 'Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands drink in the reek, and their brats roll on the floor among the dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes, slow in the drawing, tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!' Now his voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself. 'I know not why I have had the patience to speak to you. For I need you not, nor your little band of gallopers, as swift to fly as to advance, Théoden Horsemaster. Long ago I offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it again, so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give me brag and abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!

'But you, Gandalf! For you at least I am grieved, feeling for your shame. How comes it that you can endure such company? For you are proud, Gandalf-and not without reason, having a noble mind and eyes that look both deep and far. Even now will you not listen to my counsel?'

Gandalf stirred, and looked up. 'What have you to say that you did not say at our last meeting?' he asked. 'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?'

Saruman paused. 'Unsay?' he mused, as if puzzled. 'Unsay? I endeavoured to advise you for your own good, but you scarcely listened. You are proud and do not love advice, having indeed a store of your own wisdom. But on that occasion you erred, I think, misconstruing my intentions wilfully. I fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I lost patience. And indeed I regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; and even now I bear none, though you return to me in the company of the violent and the ignorant. How should I? Are we not both members of a high and ancient order, most excellent in Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us both alike. Much we could still accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the world. Let us understand one another, and dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let them wait on our decisions! For the common good I am willing to redress the past, and to receive you. Will you not consult with me? Will you not come up?'

So great was the power that Saruman exerted in this last effort that none that stood within hearing were unmoved. But now the spell was wholly different. They heard the gentle remonstrance of a kindly king with an erring but much-loved minister. But they were shut out, listening at a door to words not meant for them: ill-mannered children or stupid servants overhearing the elusive discourse of their elders, and wondering how it would affect their lot. Of loftier mould these two were made: reverend and wise. It was inevitable that they should make alliance. Gandalf would ascend into the tower, to discuss deep things beyond their comprehension in the high chambers of Orthanc. The door would be closed, and they would be left outside, dismissed to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of Théoden the thought took shape, like a shadow of doubt: 'He will betray us; he will go - we shall be lost.'

Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke.

'Saruman, Saruman!' said Gandalf still laughing. 'Saruman, you missed your path in life. You should have been the king's jester and earned your bread, and stripes too, by mimicking his counsellors. Ah me!' he paused, getting the better of his mirth. 'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand now too well. I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, the guest who has escaped from the roof, will think twice before he comes back in by the door. Nay, I do not think I will come up. But listen, Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less strong than your hope and fancy made it. So may other things in which you still have trust. Would it not be well to leave it for a while? To turn to new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?'

A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before he could conceal it, they saw through the mask the anguish of a mind in doubt, loathing to stay and dreading to leave its refuge. For a second he hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke, and his voice was shrill and cold. Pride and hate were conquering him.

'Will I come down?' he mocked. 'Does an unarmed man come down to speak with robbers out of doors? I can hear you well enough here. I am no fool, and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They do not stand openly on my stairs, but I know where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.'

'The treacherous are ever distrustful,' answered Gandalf wearily. 'But you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect you. I am giving you a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free - if you choose.'

'That sounds well,' sneered Saruman. 'Very much in the manner of Gandalf the Grey: so condescending, and so very kind. I do not doubt that you would find Orthanc commodious, and my departure convenient. But why should I wish to leave? And what do you mean by 'free'? There are conditions, I presume?'

'Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows.' answered Gandalf. 'Others will occur to your thought. Your servants are destroyed and scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you have cheated your new master. or tried to do so. When his eye turns hither, it will be the red eye of wrath. But when I say 'free', I mean 'free': free from bond, of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if you desire. But you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you merit them.'

Saruman's face grew livid, twisted with rage, and a red light was kindled in his eyes. He laughed wildly. 'Later!' he cried, and his voice rose to a scream. 'Later! Yes, when you also have the Keys of Barad-dûr itself, I suppose; and the crowns of seven kings. and the rods of the Five Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair of boots many sizes larger than those that you wear now. A modest plan. Hardly one in which my help is needed! I have other things to do. Do not be a fool. If you wish to treat with me, while you have a chance, go away, and come back when you are sober! And leave behind these cut-throats and small rag-tag that dangle at your tail! Good day!' He turned and left the balcony.

'Come back, Saruman!' said Gandalf in a commanding voice. To the amazement of the others, Saruman turned again. and as if dragged against his will, he came slowly back to the iron rail, leaning on it, breathing hard. His face was lined and shrunken. His hand clutched his heavy black staff like a claw.

'I did not give you leave to go,' said Gandalf sternly. 'I have not finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You might still have turned away from folly and evil, and have been of service. But you choose to stay and gnaw the ends of your old plots. Stay then! But I warn you. you will not easily come out again. Not unless the dark hands of the East stretch out to take you. Saruman!' he cried, and his voice grew in power and authority. 'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey, whom you betrayed. I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour now, and I cast you from the order and from the Council.'

He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in a clear cold voice. 'Saruman, your staff is broken.' There was a crack, and the staff split asunder in Saruman's hand, and the head of it fell down at Gandalf's feet. 'Go!' said Gandalf. With a cry Saruman fell back and crawled away. At that moment a heavy shining thing came hurtling down from above. It glanced off the iron rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf's head, it smote the stair on which he stood. The rail rang and snapped. The stair cracked and splintered in glittering sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on down the steps, a globe of crystal, dark, but glowing with a heart of fire. As it bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up.

'The murderous rogue!' cried Éomer. But Gandalf was unmoved. No, that was not thrown b Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I think. It came from a window far above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy, but ill aimed.'

'The aim was poor, maybe, because he could not make up his mind which he hated more, you or Saruman,' said Aragorn.

'That may be so,' said Gandalf. 'Small comfort will those two have in their companionship: they will gnaw one another with words. But the punishment is just. If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive, it will be more than he deserves.

'Here, my lad, I'll take that! I did not ask you to handle it,' he cried, turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly, as if he were bearing a great weight. He went down to meet him and hastily took the dark globe from the hobbit, wrapping it in the folds of his cloak. 'I will take care of this,' he said. 'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman would have chosen to cast away.'

'But he may have other things to cast,' said Gimli. 'If that is the end of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!'

'It is the end,' said Gandalf. 'Let us go.'

They turned their backs on the doors of Orthanc, and went down. The riders hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The spell of Saruman was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed.

'Well, that is done,' said Gandalf. 'Now I must find Treebeard and tell him how things have gone.'

'He will have guessed, surely?' said Merry. 'Were they likely to end any other way?'

'Not likely,' answered Gandalf, 'though they came to the balance of a hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful and some less so. First Saruman was shown that the power of his voice was waning. He cannot be both tyrant and counsellor. When the plot is ripe it remains no longer secret. Yet he fell into the trap, and tried to deal with his victims piece-meal, while others listened. Then I gave him a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need. He knows our need, none better. Great service he could have rendered. But he has chosen to withhold it, and keep the power of Orthanc. He will not serve, only command. He lives now in terror of the shadow of Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding the storm. Unhappy fool! He will be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron - who knows what he can do?'

'And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him?' asked Pippin.

'I? Nothing!' said Gandalf. 'I will do nothing to him. I do not wish for mastery. What w ill become of him? I cannot say. I grieve that so much that was good now festers in the tower. Still for us things have not gone badly. Strange are the turns of fortune! Often does hatred hurt itself! I guess that, even if we had entered in, we could have found few treasures in Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.'

A shrill shriek; suddenly cut off, came from an open window high above.

'It seems that Saruman thinks so too,' said Gandalf. 'Let us leave them!'

They returned now to the ruins of the gate. Hardly had they passed out under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled stones where they had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came striding up. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas gazed at them in wonder.

'Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,' said Gandalf. 'I have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.' He named them one by one.

The Old Ent looked at them long and searchingly, and spoke to them in turn. Last he turned to Legolas. 'So you have come all the way from Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!'

'And still is,' said Legolas. 'But not so great that we who dwell there ever tire of seeing new trees. I should dearly love to journey in Fangorn's Wood. I scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and I did not wish to turn back.'

Treebeard's eyes gleamed with pleasure. 'I hope you may have your wish, ere the hills be much older,' he said.

'I will come, if I have the fortune,' said Legolas. 'I have made a bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fangorn together - by your leave.'

'Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,' said Treebeard.

'The friend I speak of is not an Elf,' said Legolas; 'I mean Gimli, Glóin's son here.' Gimli bowed low, and the axe slipped from his belt and clattered on the ground.

'Hoom, hm! Ah now,' said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. 'A dwarf and an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good will to Elves; but you ask much. This is a strange friendship!' 'Strange it may seem,' said Legolas; 'but while Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but for orc-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn's Wood. Forty-two he hewed in the battle.'

'Hoo! Come now!' said Treebeard. 'That is a better story! Well, well, things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them. But now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark is eager for his own house.'

'Yes, we must go, and go now,' said Gandalf. 'I fear that I must take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.'

'Maybe I shall,' said Treebeard. 'But I shall miss them. We have become friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting hasty - growing backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there, they are the first new thing under Sun or Moon that I have seen for many a long, long day. I shall not forget them. I have put their names into the Long List. Ents will remember it.

Ents the earthborn, old as mountains,

the wide-walkers, water drinking;

and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children,

the laughing-folk, the little people,

they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you well! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land, in the Shire, send me word! You know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if you can!'

'We will!' said Merry and Pippin together, and they turned away hastily. Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking his head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.

'So Saruman would not leave?' he said. 'I did not think he would. His heart is as rotten as a black Huorn's. Still, if I were overcome and all my trees destroyed, I would not come while I had one dark hole left to hide in.'

'No,' said Gandalf. 'But you have not plotted to cover all the world with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it is, Saruman remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can. He has the Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.'

'Indeed no! Ents will see to that,' said Treebeard. 'Saruman shall not set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over him.'

'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped. Now I can go and turn to other matters with one care the less. But you must be wary. The waters have gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I do not doubt that there were deep ways delved under Orthanc, and that Saruman hopes to go and come unmarked, before long. If you will undertake the labour, I beg you to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard remains a standing pool, or you discover the outlets. When all the underground places are drowned, and the outlets blocked, then Saruman must stay upstairs and look out of the windows.'

'Leave it to the Ents!' said Treebeard. 'We shall search the valley from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming back to live here, old trees, wild trees. The Watchwood we will call it. Not a squirrel will go here, but I shall know of it. Leave it to Ents! Until seven times the years in which he tormented us have passed, we shall not tire of watching him.'

Chapter 11

The Palantír

The sun was sinking behind the long western arm of the mountains when Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of the king's men went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace.

Ents in a solemn row stood like statues at the gate, with their long arms uplifted, but they made no sound. Merry and Pippin looked back, when they had passed some way down the winding road. Sunlight was still shining in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey ruins falling into darkness. Treebeard stood alone there now, like the distant stump of an old tree: the hobbits thought of their first meeting, upon the sunny ledge far away on the borders of Fangorn.

They came to the pillar of the White Hand. The pillar was still standing, but the graven hand had been thrown down and broken into small pieces. Right in the middle of the road the long forefinger lay, white in the dusk, its red nail darkening to black.

'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf.

They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley.

'Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf?' asked Merry after a while. 'I don't know how you feel with small rag-tag dangling behind you; but the rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.'

'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is any comfort to your pride, I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in his thoughts than all the rest of us. Who you are; how you came there, and why; what you know; whether you were captured, and if so, how you escaped when all the Orcs perished - it is with those little riddles that the great mind of Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if you feel honoured by his concern.'

'Thank you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?'

Gandalf laughed. 'A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a hobbit or two in their care - to teach them the meaning of the word, and to correct them. I beg your pardon. But I have given thought even to these simple matters. We will ride for a few hours, gently, until we come to the end of the valley. Tomorrow we must ride faster.

'When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's house at Edoras over the plains, a ride of some days. But we have taken thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone ahead to Helm's Deep, to warn them that the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than two or three together are to go openly over the land, by day or night, when it can be avoided.'

'Nothing or a double helping is your way!' said Merry. 'I am afraid I was not looking beyond tonight's bed. Where and what are Helm's Deep and all the rest of it? I don't know anything about this country.'

'Then you'd best learn something, if you wish to understand what is happening. But not just now, and not from me: I have too many pressing things to think about.'

'All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less testy. But why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!'


Chapter 6
The Forbidden Pool
Frodo woke to find Faramir bending over him. For a second old fears seized him and he sat up and shrank away.

`There is nothing to fear,' said Faramir.

'Is it morning already? ' said Frodo yawning.

`Not yet, but night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is setting. Will you come and see it? Also there is a matter on which I desire your counsel. I am sorry to rouse you from sleep, but will you come? '

`I will,' said Frodo, rising and shivering a little as he left the warm blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the fireless cave. The noise of the water was loud in the stillness. He put on his cloak and followed Faramir.

Sam, waking suddenly by some instinct of watchfulness, saw first his master's empty bed and leapt to his feet. Then he saw two dark figures, Frodo and a man, framed against the archway, which was now filled with a pale white light. He hurried after them, past rows of men sleeping on mattresses along the wall. As he went by the cave-mouth he saw that the Curtain was now become a dazzling veil of silk and pearls and silver thread: melting icicles of moonlight. But he did not pause to admire it, and turning aside he followed his master through the narrow doorway in the wall of the cave.

They went first along a black passage, then up many wet steps, and so came to a small flat landing cut in the stone and lit by the pale sky, gleaming high above through a long deep shaft. From here two flights of steps led: one going on, as it seemed, up on to the high bank of the stream; the other turning away to the left. This they followed. It wound its way up like a turret-stair.

At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about. They were on a wide flat rock without rail or parapet. At their right, eastwards, the torrent fell, splashing over many terraces, and then, pouring down a steep race, it filled a smooth-hewn channel with a dark force of water flecked with foam, and curling and rushing almost at their feet it plunged sheer over the edge that yawned upon their left. A man stood there, near the brink, silent, gazing down.

Frodo turned to watch the sleek necks of the water as they curved and dived. Then he lifted his eyes and gazed far away. The world was quiet and cold, as if dawn were near. Far off in the West the full moon was sinking, round and white. Pale mists shimmered in the great vale below: a wide gulf of silver fume, beneath which rolled the cool night-waters of the Anduin. A black darkness loomed beyond, and in it glinted, here and there, cold, sharp, remote, white as the teeth of ghosts, the peaks of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountains of the Realm of Gondor, tipped with everlasting snow.

For a while Frodo stood there on the high stone, and a shiver ran through him, wondering if anywhere in the vastness of the night-lands his old companions walked or slept, or lay dead shrouded in mist. Why was he brought here out of forgetful sleep?

Sam was eager for an answer to the same question and could not refrain himself from muttering, for his master's ear alone as he thought: 'It's a fine view, no doubt, Mr. Frodo, but chilly to the heart, not to mention the bones! What's going on? '

Faramir heard and answered. `Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes from Middle-earth, glances upon the white locks of old Mindolluin. It is worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought you to see-though as for you, Samwise, you were not brought, and do but pay the penalty of your watchfulness. A draught of wine shall amend it. Come, look now! '

He stepped up beside the silent sentinel on the dark edge. and Frodo followed. Sam hung back. He already felt insecure enough on this high wet platform. Faramir and Frodo looked down. Far below them they saw the white waters pour into a foaming bowl, and then swirl darkly about a deep oval basin in the rocks. until they found their way out again through a narrow gate, and flowed away, fuming and chattering, into calmer and more level reaches. The moonlight still slanted down to the fall's foot and gleamed on the ripples of the basin. Presently Frodo was aware of a small dark thing on the near bank, but even as he looked at it, it dived and vanished just beyond the boil and bubble of the fall, cleaving the black water as neatly as an arrow or an edgewise stone.

Faramir turned to the man at his side. `Now what would you say that it is, Anborn? A squirrel, or a kingfisher? Are there black kingfishers in the night-pools of Mirkwood? '

`'Tis not a bird, whatever else it be,' answered Anborn. `It has four limbs and dives manwise; a pretty mastery of the craft it shows, too. What is it at? Seeking a way up behind the Curtain to our hidings? It seems we are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and I have posted other archers, nigh as good marksmen as myself, on either bank. We wait only for your command to shoot, Captain.'

`Shall we shoot? ' said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo.

Frodo did not answer for a moment. Then `No! ' he said. `No! I beg you not to.' If Sam had dared, he would have said `Yes,' quicker and louder. He could not see, but he guessed well enough from their words what they were looking at.

'You know, then, what this thing is? ' said Faramir. `Come, now you have seen, tell me why it should be spared. In all our words together you have not once spoken of your gangrel companion, and I let him be for the time. He could wait till he was caught and brought before me. I sent my keenest huntsmen to seek him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of him till now, save Anborn here, once at dusk yesterevening. But now he has done worse trespass than only to go coney-snaring in the uplands: he has dared to come to Henneth Annûn, and his life is forfeit. I marvel at the creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before our very window. Does he think that men sleep without watch all night? Why does he so?'

'There are two answers, I think,' said Frodo. `For one thing, he knows little of Men, and sly though he is, your refuge is so hidden that perhaps he does not know that Men are concealed here. For another, I think he is allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.'

`He is lured here, you say? ' said Faramir in a low voice. `Can he, does he then know of your burden? '

`Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.'

'He bore it? ' said Faramir, breathing sharply in his wonder. `This matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it? '

'Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.'

`What then does the creature seek? '

`Fish,' said Frodo. `Look! '

They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head appeared at the far end of the basin, just out of the deep shadow of the rocks. There was a brief silver glint, and a swirl of tiny ripples. It swam to the side, and then with marvellous agility a froglike figure climbed out of the water and up the bank. At once it sat down and began to gnaw at the small silver thing that glittered as it turned: the last rays of the moon were now falling behind the stony wall at the pool's end.

Faramir laughed softly. `Fish! ' he said. `It is a less perilous hunger. Or maybe not: fish from the pool of Henneth Annûn may cost him all he has to give.'

`Now I have him at the arrow-point,' said Anborn. `Shall I not shoot, Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law.'

`Wait, Anborn,' said Faramir. `This is a harder matter than it seems. What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare? '

`The creature is wretched and hungry,' said Frodo, `and unaware of his danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he would have bidden you not to slay him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the Elves to do so. I do not know clearly why, and of what I guess I cannot speak openly out here. But this creature is in some way bound up with my errand. Until you found us and took us, he was my guide.'

`Your guide! ' said Faramir. `The matter becomes ever stranger. I would do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this sly wanderer go free at his own will from here, to join you later if it please him, or to be caught by Orcs and tell all he knows under threat of pain. He must be slain or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very swiftly. But how can this slippery thing of many guises be caught, save by a feathered shaft? '

`Let me go down quietly to him,' said Frodo. `You may keep your bows bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.'

`Go then and be swift! ' said Faramir. `If he comes off alive, he should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead Frodo down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a nose and ears. Give me your bow.'

Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding stair to the landing, and then up the other stair, until at last they came to a narrow opening shrouded with thick bushes. Passing silently through, Frodo found himself on the top of the southern bank above the pool. It was now dark and the falls were pale and grey, reflecting only the lingering moonlight of the western sky. He could not see Gollum. He went forward a short way and Anborn came softly behind him.

`Go on! ' he breathed in Frodo's ear. `Have a care to your right. If you fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend can help you. And forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you may not see them.'

Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way and to steady himself. The rocks were for the most part flat and smooth but slippery. He halted listening. At first he could hear no sound but the unceasing rush of the fall behind him. Then presently he heard, not far ahead, a hissing murmur.

'Fissh, nice fissh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last, yes. Now we can eat fish in peace. No, not in peace, precious. For Precious is lost; yes, lost. Dirty hobbits, nasty hobbits. Gone and left us, gollum; and Precious is gone. Only poor Sméagol all alone. No Precious. Nasty Men, they'll take it, steal my Precious. Thieves. We hates them. Fissh, nice fissh: Makes us strong. Makes eyes bright, fingers tight, yes. Throttle them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if we gets chances. Nice fissh. Nice fissh! '

So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall, only interrupted by a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo shivered, listening with pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he never need hear that voice again. Anborn was not far behind. He could creep back and ask him to get the huntsmen to shoot. They would probably get close enough, while Gollum was gorging and off his guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be rid of the miserable voice for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now. The servant has a claim on the master for service, even service in fear. They would have foundered in the Dead Marshes but for Gollum. Frodo knew, too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it.

`Sméagol! ' he said softly.

`Fissh, nice fissh,' said the voice.

`Sméagol! ' he said, a little louder. The voice stopped.

`Sméagol, Master has come to look for you. Master is here. Come, Sméagol! ' There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath.

'Come, Sméagol! ' said Frodo. `We are in danger. Men will kill you, if they find you here. Come quickly, if you wish to escape death. Come to Master!'

'No!' said the voice. `Not nice Master. Leaves poor Sméagol and goes with new friends. Master can wait. Sméagol hasn't finished.'

`There's no time,' said Frodo. `Bring fish with you. Come! '

`No! Must finish fish.'

'Sméagol! ' said Frodo desperately. 'Precious will be angry. I shall take Precious, and I shall say: make him swallow the bones and choke. Never taste fish again. Come, Precious is waiting! '

There was a sharp hiss. Presently out of the darkness Gollum came crawling on all fours, like an erring dog called to heel. He had a half-eaten fish in his mouth and another in his hand. He came close to Frodo, almost nose to nose, and sniffed at him. His pale eyes were shining. Then he took the fish out of his mouth and stood up.

`Nice Master! ' he whispered. `Nice hobbit, come back to poor Sméagol. Good Sméagol comes. Now let's go, go quickly, yes. Through the trees, while the Faces are dark. Yes, come let's go! '

`Yes, we'll go soon,' said Frodo. `But not at once. I will go with you as I promised. I promise again. But not now. You are not safe yet. I will save you, but you must trust me.'

`We must trust Master? ' said Gollum doubtfully. 'Why? Why not go at once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is he?'

'Away up there,' said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. 'I am not going without him. We must go back to him.' His heart sank. This was too much like trickery. He did not really fear that Faramir would allow Gollum to be killed, but he would probably make him prisoner and bind him; and certainly what Frodo did would seem a treachery to the poor treacherous creature. It would probably be impossible ever to make him understand or believe that Frodo had saved his life in the only way he could. What else could he do? - to keep faith, as near as might be, with both sides. `Come!' he said. `Or the Precious will be angry. We are going back now, up the stream. Go on, go on, you go in front! '

Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way, snuffling and suspicious. Presently he stopped and raised his head. `Something's there! ' he said. `Not a hobbit.' Suddenly he turned back. A green light was flickering in his bulging eyes. `Masster, masster!' he hissed. 'Wicked! Tricksy! False!' He spat and stretched out his long arms with white snapping fingers.

At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind him and came down on him. A large strong hand took him in the nape of the neck and pinned him. He twisted round like lightning, all wet and slimy as he was, wriggling like an eel, biting and scratching like a cat. But two more men came up out of the shadows.

'Hold still! ' said one. `Or we'll stick you as full of pins as a hedgehog. Hold still!'

Gollum went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him, none too gently.

`Easy, easy! ' said Frodo. `He has no strength to match you. Don't hurt him, if you can help it. He'll be quieter, if you don't. Sméagol! They won't hurt you. I'll go with you, and you shall come to no harm. Not unless they kill me too. Trust Master! '

Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked him up, put a hood over his eyes, and carried him off.

Frodo followed them, feeling very wretched. They went through the opening behind the bushes. and back, down the stairs and passages, into the cave. Two or three torches had been lit. Men were stirring. Sam was there, and he gave a queer look at the limp bundle that the men carried. `Got him?' he said to Frodo.

'Yes. Well no, I didn't get him. He came to me, because he trusted me at first, I'm afraid. I did not want him tied up like this. I hope it will be all right; but I hate the whole business.'

`So do I,' said Sam. `And nothing will ever be all right where that piece of misery is.'

A man came and beckoned to the hobbits, and took them to the recess at the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in his chair, and the lamp had been rekindled in its niche above his head. He signed to them to sit down on the stools beside him. `Bring wine for the guests,' he said. `And bring the prisoner to me.'

The wine was brought, and then Anborn came carrying Gollum. He removed the cover from Gollum's head and set him on his feet standing behind him to support him. Gollum blinked, hooding the malice of his eyes with their heavy pale lids. A very miserable creature he looked, dripping and dank, smelling of fish (he still clutched one in his hand); his sparse locks were hanging like rank weed over his bony brows, his nose was snivelling.

`Loose us! Loose us! ' he said. `The cord hurts us, yes it does, it hurts us, and we've done nothing.'

`Nothing? ' said Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a keen glance, but without any expression in his face either of anger, or pity, or wonder. 'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of worse punishment? However, that is not for me to judge, happily. But tonight you have come where it is death to come. The fish of this pool are dearly bought.'

Gollum dropped the fish from his hand. `Don't want fish,' he said.

'The price is not set on the fish,' said Faramir. `Only to come here and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you so far at the prayer of Frodo here, who says that of him at least you have deserved some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is your name? Whence do you come? And whither do you go? What is your business? '

`We are lost, lost,' said Gollum. 'No name, no business, no Precious, nothing. Only empty. Only hungry; yes, we are hungry. A few little fishes, nasty bony little fishes, for a poor creature, and they say death. So wise they are; so just, so very just.'

'Not very wise,' said Faramir. 'But just: yes perhaps, as just as our little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! ' Faramir took a small nail-knife from his belt and handed it to Frodo. Gollum misunderstanding the gesture, squealed and fell down.

'Now, Sméagol! ' said Frodo. 'You must trust me. I will not desert you. Answer truthfully, if you can. It will do you good not harm.' He cut the cords on Gollum's wrists and ankles and raised him to his feet.

'Come hither! ' said Faramir. `Look at me! Do you know the name of this place? Have you been here before? '

Slowly Gollum raised his eyes and looked unwillingly into Faramir's. All light went out of them, and they stared bleak and pale for a moment into the clear unwavering eyes of the man of Gondor. There was a still silence. Then Gollum dropped his head and shrank down, until he was squatting on the floor, shivering. 'We doesn't know and we doesn't want to know,' he whimpered. `Never came here; never come again.'

`There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms behind them,' said Faramir. `But in this I judge that you speak the truth. It is well for you. What oath will you swear never to return; and never to lead any living creature hither by word or sign?'

`Master knows,' said Gollum with a sidelong glance at Frodo. `Yes, he knows. We will promise Master, if he saves us. We'll promise to It, yes.' He crawled to Frodo's feet. 'Save us, nice Master! ' he whined. `Sméagol promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never come again, never speak, no never! No, precious, no!'

`Are you satisfied? ' said Faramir.

`Yes,' said Frodo. 'At least, you must either accept this promise or carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came to me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved faithless.'

Faramir sat for a moment in thought. `Very good,' he said at last. `I surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he will do with you! '

'But, Lord Faramir,' said Frodo bowing, `you have not yet declared your will concerning the said Frodo, and until that is made known, he cannot shape his plans for himself or his companions. Your judgement was postponed until the morning; but that is now at hand.'

`Then I will declare my doom,' said Faramir. `As for you, Frodo, in so far as lies in me under higher authority, I declare you free in the realm of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you nor any that go with you have leave to come to this place unbidden. This doom shall stand for a year and a day, and then cease, unless you shall before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to the Lord and Steward of the City. Then I will entreat him to confirm what I have done and to make it lifelong. In the meantime, whomsoever you take under your protection shall be under my protection and under the shield of Gondor. Are you answered? '

Frodo bowed low. 'I am answered,' he said, `and I place myself at your service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.'

`It is of great worth,' said Faramir. 'And now, do you take this creature, this Sméagol, under your protection? '

`I do take Sméagol under my protection,' said Frodo. Sam sighed audibly; and not at the courtesies, of which, as any hobbit would, he thoroughly approved. Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have required a great many more words and bows.

'Then I say to you,' said Faramir, turning to Gollum, 'you are under doom of death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall fall. And may death find you swiftly, within Gondor or without, if you do not well serve him. Now answer me: whither would you go? You were his guide, he says. Whither were you leading him? ' Gollum made no reply.

`This I will not have secret,' said Faramir. `Answer me, or I will reverse my judgement! ' Still Gollum did not answer.

`I will answer for him,' said Frodo. `He brought me to the Black Gate, as I asked; but it was impassable.'

`There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,' said Faramir.

`Seeing this, we turned aside and came by the Southward road ' Frodo continued; 'for he said that there is, or there may be, a path near to Minas Ithil.'

`Minas Morgul,' said Faramir.

`I do not know clearly,' said Frodo; `but the path climbs, I think, up into the mountains on the northern side of that vale where the old city stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to - that which is beyond.'

`Do you know the name of that high pass? ' said Faramir.

'No,' said Frodo.

'It is called Cirith Ungol.' Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering to himself. `Is not that its name? ' said Faramir turning to him.

`No! ' said Gollum, and then he squealed, as if something had stabbed him. 'Yes, yes, we heard the name once. But what does the name matter to us? Master says he must get in. So we must try some way. There is no other way to try, no.'

'No other way? ' said Faramir. `How do you know that? And who has explored all the confines of that dark realm? ' He looked long and thoughtfully at Gollum. Presently he spoke again. `Take this creature away, Anborn. Treat him gently, but watch him. And do not you, Sméagol, try to dive into the falls. The rocks have such teeth there as would slay you before your time. Leave us now and take your fish! '

Anborn went out and Gollum went cringing before him. The curtain was drawn across the recess.

`Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,' said Faramir. `I do not think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.'

'No, not altogether wicked,' said Frodo.

'Not wholly, perhaps,' said Faramir; 'but malice eats it like a canker, and the evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you will part with him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to any point on the borders of Gondor that he may name.'

`He would not take it,' said Frodo. 'He would follow after me as he long has done. And I have promised many times to take him under my protection and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with him?'

'No,' said Faramir. `But my heart would. For it seems less evil to counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if one sees a friend bound unwitting to his own harm. But no - if he will go with you, you must now endure him. But I do not think you are holden to go to Cirith Ungol, of which he has told you less than he knows. That much I perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!'

`Where then shall I go? ' said Frodo. `Back to the Black Gate and deliver myself up to the guard? What do you know against this place that makes its name so dreadful? '

`Nothing certain,' said Faramir. 'We of Gondor do not ever pass east of the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ever done so, nor has any of us set foot upon the Mountains of Shadow. Of them we know only old report and the rumour of bygone days. But there is some dark terror that dwells in the passes above Minas Morgul. If Cirith Ungol is named, old men and masters of lore will blanch and fall silent.

,The valley of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and it was a menace and a dread while the banished Enemy dwelt yet far away, and Ithilien was still for the most part in our keeping. As you know, that city was once a strong place, proud and fair, Minas Ithil, the twin sister of our own city. But it was taken by fell men whom the Enemy in his first strength had dominated, and who wandered homeless and masterless after his fall. It is said that their lords were men of Númenor who had fallen into dark wickedness; to them the Enemy had given rings of power, and he had devoured them: living ghosts they were become, terrible and evil. After his going they took Minas Ithil and dwelt there, and they filled it, and all the valley about, with decay: it seemed empty and was not so, for a shapeless fear lived within the ruined walls. Nine Lords there were, and after the return of their Master, which they aided and prepared in secret, they grew strong again. Then the Nine Riders issued forth from the gates of horror, and we could not withstand them. Do not approach their citadel. You will be espied. It is a place of sleepless malice, full of lidless eyes. Do not go that way! '

'But where else will you direct me? ' said Frodo. 'You cannot yourself, you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over them. But over the mountains I am bound, by solemn undertaking to the Council, to find a way or perish in the seeking. And if I turn back, refusing the road in its bitter end, where then shall I go among Elves or Men? Would you have me come to Gondor with this Thing, the Thing that drove your brother mad with desire? What spell would it work in Minas Tirith? Shall there be two cities of Minas Morgul, grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness? '

`I would not have it so,' said Faramir.

`Then what would you have me do? '

`I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torment. And I do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way.'

'Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find. And there is no time for long searching,' said Frodo.

`It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,' said Faramir. 'But at the least, remember my warning: beware of this guide, Sméagol. He has done murder before now. I read it in him.' He sighed.

`Well, so we meet and part, Frodo son of Drogo. You have no need of soft words: I do not hope to see you again on any other day under this Sun. But you shall go now with my blessing upon you, and upon all your people. Rest a little while food is prepared for you.

'I would gladly learn how this creeping Sméagol became possessed of the Thing of which we speak, and how he lost it, but I will not trouble you now. If ever beyond hope you return to the lands of the living and we retell our tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing at old grief, you shall tell me then. Until that time, or some other time beyond the vision of the Seeing-stones of Númenor, farewell! '

He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed out into the cave.



Chapter 7
Journey to the Cross-roads
Frodo and Sam returned to their beds and lay there in silence resting for a little, while men bestirred themselves and the business of the day began. After a while water was brought to them, and then they were led to a table where food was set for three. Faramir broke his fast with them. He had not slept since the battle on the day before, yet he did not look weary.

When they had finished they stood up. `May no hunger trouble you on the road,' said Faramir. `You have little provision, but some small store of food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed in your packs. You will have no lack of water as you walk in Ithilien, but do not drink of any stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I must tell you. My scouts and watchers have all returned, even some that have crept within sight of the Morannon. They all find a strange thing. The land is empty. Nothing is on the road, and no sound of foot, or horn, or bowstring is anywhere to be heard. A waiting silence broods above the Nameless Land. I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If you are ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.'

The hobbits' packs were brought to them (a little heavier than they had been), and also two stout staves of polished wood, shod with iron, and with carven heads through which ran plaited leathern thongs.

'I have no fitting gifts to give you at our parting,' said Faramir; `but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in the wild. The men of the White Mountains use them; though these have been cut down to your height and newly shod. They are made of the fair tree lebethron, beloved of the woodwrights of Gondor, and a virtue has been set upon them of finding and returning. May that virtue not wholly fail under the Shadow into which you go!'

The hobbits bowed low. `Most gracious host,' said Frodo, 'it was said to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret and unlooked for. Certainly I looked for no such friendship as you have shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.'

Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some corner or hiding-hole, and he seemed better pleased with himself than he had been, though he kept close to Frodo and avoided the glance of Faramir.

'Your guide must be blindfolded,' said Faramir, 'but you and your servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.'

Gollum squealed, and squirmed, and clutched at Frodo, when they came to bind his eyes; and Frodo said: 'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm is meant.' This was done, and they were led from the cave of Henneth Annûn. After they had passed the passages and stairs they felt the cool morning air, fresh and sweet, about them. Still blind they went on for some little time, up and then gently down. At last the voice of Faramir ordered them to be uncovered.

They stood under the boughs of the woods again. No noise of the falls could be heard, for a long southward slope lay now between them and the ravine in which the stream flowed. To the west they could see light through the trees, as if the world came there to a sudden end, at a brink looking out only on to sky.

'Here is the last parting of our ways,' said Faramir. 'If you take my counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go straight on, for thus you will have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your west is an edge where the land falls into the great vales, sometimes suddenly and sheer, sometimes in long hillsides. Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest. In the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight, I think. The land dreams in a false peace, and for a while all evil is withdrawn. Fare you well, while you may!'

He embraced the hobbits then, after the manner of his people, stooping, and placing his hands upon their shoulders, and kissing their foreheads. 'Go with the good will of all good men!' he said.

They bowed to the ground. Then he turned and without looking back he left them and went to his two guards that stood at a little distance away. They marvelled to see with what speed these green-clad men now moved, vanishing almost in the twinkling of an eye. The forest where Faramir had stood seemed empty and drear, as if a dream had passed.

Frodo sighed and turned back southward. As if to mark his disregard of all such courtesy, Gollum was scrabbling in the mould at the foot of a tree. `Hungry again already?' thought Sam. `Well, now for it again!'

'Have they gone at last? ' said Gollum. `Nassty wicked Men! Sméagol's neck still hurts him, yes it does. Let's go! '

`Yes, let us go,' said Frodo. `But if you can only speak ill of those who showed you mercy, keep silent! '

`Nice Master! ' said Gollum. `Sméagol was only joking. Always forgives, he does, yes, yes, even nice Master's little trickses. Oh yes, nice Master, nice Sméagol! '

Frodo and Sam did not answer. Hoisting their packs and taking their staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien.

Twice that day they rested and took a little of the food provided by Faramir: dried fruits and salted meat, enough for many days; and bread enough to last while it was still fresh. Gollum ate nothing.

The sun rose and passed overhead unseen, and began to sink, and the light through the trees to the west grew golden; and always they walked in cool green shadow, and all about them was silence. The birds seemed all to have flown away or to have fallen dumb.

Darkness came early to the silent woods, and before the fall of night they halted, weary, for they had walked seven leagues or more from Henneth Annûn. Frodo lay and slept away the night on the deep mould beneath an ancient tree. Sam beside him was more uneasy: he woke many times, but there was never a sign of Gollum, who had slipped off as soon as the others had settled to rest. Whether he had slept by himself in some hole nearby, or had wandered restlessly prowling through the night, he did not say; but he returned with the first glimmer of light, and roused his companions.

`Must get up, yes they must!' he said. 'Long ways to go still, south and east. Hobbits must make haste!'

That day passed much as the day before had gone, except that the silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be stifling under the trees. It felt as if thunder was brewing. Gollum often paused, sniffing the air, and then he would mutter to himself and urge them to greater speed.

As the third stage of their day's march drew on and afternoon waned, the forest opened out, and the trees became larger and more scattered. Great ilexes of huge girth stood dark and solemn in wide glades with here and there among them hoary ash-trees. and giant oaks just putting out their brown-green buds. About them lay long launds of green grass dappled with celandine and anemones, white and blue, now folded for sleep; and there were acres populous with the leaves of woodland hyacinths: already their sleek bell-stems were thrusting through the mould. No living creature, beast or bird, was to be seen, but in these open places Gollum grew afraid, and they walked now with caution, flitting from one long shadow to another.

Light was fading fast when they came to the forest-end. There they sat under an old gnarled oak that sent its roots twisting like snakes down a steep crumbling bank. A deep dim valley lay before them. On its further side the woods gathered again, blue and grey under the sullen evening, and marched on southwards. To the right the Mountains of Gondor glowed, remote in the West, under a fire-flecked sky. To the left lay darkness: the towering walls of Mordor; and out of that darkness the long valley came, falling steeply in an ever-widening trough towards the Anduin. At its bottom ran a hurrying stream: Frodo could hear its stony voice coming up through the silence; and beside it on the hither side a road went winding down like a pale ribbon, down into chill grey mists that no gleam of sunset touched. There it seemed to Frodo that he descried far off, floating as it were on a shadowy sea, the high dim tops and broken pinnacles of old towers forlorn and dark.

He turned to Gollum. `Do you know where we are? ' he said.

'Yes, Master. Dangerous places. This is the road from the Tower of the Moon, Master, down to the ruined city by the shores of the River. The ruined city, yes, very nasty place, full of enemies. We shouldn't have taken Men's advice. Hobbits have come a long way out of the path. Must go east now, away up there.' He waved his skinny arm towards the darkling mountains. `And we can't use this road. Oh no! Cruel peoples come this way, down from the Tower.'

Frodo looked down on to the road. At any rate nothing was moving on it now. It appeared lonely and forsaken, running down to empty ruins in the mist. But there was an evil feeling in the air, as if things might indeed be passing up and down that eyes could not see. Frodo shuddered as he looked again at the distant pinnacles now dwindling into night, and the sound of the water seemed cold and cruel: the voice of Morgulduin, the polluted stream that flowed from the Valley of the Wraiths.

'What shall we do? ' he said. 'We have walked long and far. Shall we look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden? '

'No good hiding in the dark,' said Gollum. 'It's in day that hobbits must hide now, yes in day.'

`Oh come! ' said Sam. 'We must rest for a bit, even if we get up again in the middle of the night. There'll still be hours of dark then time enough for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.'

Gollum reluctantly agreed to this, and he turned back towards the trees, working eastward for a while along the straggling edges of the wood. He would not rest on the ground so near the evil road, and after some debate they all climbed up into the crotch of a large holm-oak, whose thick branches springing together from the trunk made a good hiding-place and a fairly comfortable refuge. Night fell and it grew altogether dark under the canopy of the tree. Frodo and Sam drank a little water and ate some bread and dried fruit, but Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep. The hobbits did not shut their eyes.

It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them. He listened and sniffed, which seemed, as they had noticed before, his usual method of discovering the time of night.

'Are we rested? Have we had beautiful sleep?' he said. 'Let's go!'

'We aren't, and we haven't,' growled Sam. 'But we'll go if we must.'

Gollum dropped at once from the branches of the tree on to all fours, and the hobbits followed more slowly.

As soon as they were down they went on again with Gollum leading, eastwards, up the dark sloping land. They could see little, for the night was now so deep that they were hardly aware of the stems of trees before they stumbled against them. The ground became more broken and walking was more difficult, but Gollum seemed in no way troubled. He led them through thickets and wastes of brambles; sometimes round the lip of a deep cleft or dark pit, sometimes down into black bush-shrouded hollows and out again; but if ever they went a little downward, always the further slope was longer and steeper. They were climbing steadily. At their first halt they looked back, and they could dimly perceive the roofs of the forest they had left behind lying like a vast dense shadow, a darker night under the dark blank sky. There seemed to be a great blackness looming slowly out of the East, eating up the faint blurred stars. Later the sinking moon escaped from the pursuing cloud, but it was ringed all about with a sickly yellow glare.

At last Gollum turned to the hobbits. 'Day soon,' he said. 'Hobbits must hurry. Not safe to stay in the open in these places. Make haste! '

He quickened his pace, and they followed him wearily. Soon they began to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most part it was covered with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry, and low tough thorns, though here and there clearings opened, the scars of recent fires. The gorse-bushes became more frequent as they got nearer the top; very old and tall they were, gaunt and leggy below but thick above, and already putting out yellow flowers that glimmered in the gloom and gave a faint sweet scent. So tall were the spiny thickets that the hobbits could walk upright under them, passing through long dry aisles carpeted with a deep prickly mould.

On the further edge of this broad hill-back they stayed their march and crawled for hiding underneath a tangled knot of thorns. Their twisted boughs, stooping to the ground, were overridden by a clambering maze of old briars. Deep inside there was a hollow hall, raftered with dead branch and bramble, and roofed with the first leaves and shoots of spring. There they lay for a while, too tired yet to eat; and peering out through the holes in the covert they watched for the slow growth of day.

But no day came, only a dead brown twilight. In the East there was a dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it was not the red of dawn. Across the tumbled lands between, the mountains of the Ephel Dúath frowned at them, black and shapeless below where night lay thick and did not pass away, above with jagged tops and edges outlined hard and menacing against the fiery glow. Away to their right a great shoulder of the mountains stood out, dark and black amid the shadows, thrusting westward.

`Which way do we go from here?' asked Frodo. `Is that the opening of-of the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass?'

`Need we think about it yet?' said Sam, `Surely we're not going to move any more today, if day it is?'

`Perhaps not, perhaps not,' said Gollum. `But we must go soon, to the Cross-roads. Yes, to the Cross-roads. That's the way over there yes, Master.'

The red glare over Mordor died away. The twilight deepened as great vapours rose in the East and crawled above them. Frodo and Sam took a little food and then lay down, but Gollum was restless. He would not eat any of their food, but he drank a little water and then crawled about under the bushes, sniffing and muttering. Then. suddenly he disappeared.

`Off hunting, I suppose,' said Sam and yawned. It was his turn to sleep first, and he was soon deep in a dream. He thought he was back in the Bag End garden looking for something; but he had a heavy pack on his back, which made him stoop. It all seemed very weedy and rank somehow, and thorns and bracken were invading the beds down near the bottom hedge.

`A job of work for me, I can see; but I'm so tired,' he kept on saying. Presently he remembered what he was looking for. `My pipe!' he said, and with that he woke up.

`Silly!' he said to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered why he was lying down under the hedge. `It's in your pack all the time!' Then he realized, first that the pipe might be in his pack but he had no leaf, and next that he was hundreds of miles from Bag End. He sat up. It seemed to be almost dark. Why had his master let him sleep on out of turn, right on till evening?

`Haven't you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'What's the time? Seems to be getting late!'

'No it isn't,' said Frodo. `But the day is getting darker instead of lighter: darker and darker. As far as I can tell, it isn't midday yet, and you've only slept for about three hours.'

'I wonder what's up,' said Sam. 'Is there a storm coming? If so it's going to be the worst there ever was. We shall wish we were down a deep hole, not just stuck under a hedge.' He listened. `What's that? Thunder, or drums, or what is it? '

'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It's been going on for a good while now. Sometimes the ground seems to tremble, sometimes it seems to be the heavy air throbbing in your ears.'

Sam looked round. `Where's Gollum? ' he said. 'Hasn't he come back yet?'

`No,' said Frodo. `There's not been a sign or sound of him.'

`Well, I can't abide him,' said Sam. `In fact, I've never taken anything on a journey that I'd have been less sorry to lose on the way. But it would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to go and get lost now, just when we shall need him most - that is, if he's ever going to be any use, which I doubt.'

`You forget the Marshes,' said Frodo. `I hope nothing has happened to him.'

`And I hope he's up to no tricks. And anyway I hope he doesn't fall into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we shall soon be in for trouble.'

At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again, louder now and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their feet. 'I think we are in for trouble anyhow,' said Frodo. `I'm afraid our journey is drawing to an end.'

'Maybe,' said Sam; `but where there's life there's hope, as my Gaffer used to say; and need of vittles, as he mostways used to add. You have a bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.'

The afternoon, as Sam supposed it must be called, wore on. Looking out from the covert he could see only a dun, shadowless world, fading slowly into a featureless, colourless gloom. It felt stifling but not warm. Frodo slept unquietly, turning and tossing, and sometimes murmuring. Twice Sam thought he heard him speaking Gandalf's name. The time seemed to drag interminably. Suddenly Sam heard a hiss behind him, and there was Gollum on all fours, peering at them with gleaming eyes.

`Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies!' he whispered. `Wake up! No time to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to lose!'

Sam stared at him suspiciously: he seemed frightened or excited. `Go now? What's your little game? It isn't time yet. It can't be tea-time even, leastways not in decent places where there is tea-time.'

`Silly! ' hissed Gollum. `We're not in decent places. Time's running short, yes, running fast. No time to lose. We must go. Wake up. Master, wake u He clawed at Frodo; and Frodo, startled out of sleep, sat up suddenly and seized him by the arm. Gollum tore himself loose and backed away.

'They mustn't be silly,' he hissed. `We must go. No time to lose!' And nothing more could they get out of him. Where he had been, and what he thought was brewing to make him in such a hurry, he would not say. Sam was filled with deep suspicion, and showed it; but Frodo gave no sign of what was passing in his mind. He sighed, hoisted his pack, and prepared to go out into the ever-gathering darkness.

Very stealthily Gollum led them down the hillside, keeping under cover wherever it was possible, and running, almost bent to the ground, across any open space; but the light was now so dim that even a keen-eyed beast of the wild could scarcely have seen the hobbits, hooded, in their grey cloaks, nor heard them, walking as warily as the little people can. Without the crack of a twig or the rustle of a leaf they passed and vanished.

For about an hour they went on, silently, in single file, oppressed by the gloom and by the absolute stillness of the land, broken only now and again by the faint rumbling as of thunder far away or drum-beats in some hollow of the hills. Down from their hiding-place they went, and then turning south they steered as straight a course as Gollum could find across a long broken slope that leaned up towards the mountains. Presently, not far ahead, looming up like a black wall, they saw a belt of trees. As they drew nearer they became aware that these were of vast size, very ancient it seemed, and still towering high, though their tops were gaunt and broken, as if tempest and lightning-blast had swept across them, but had failed to kill them or to shake their fathomless roots.

'The Cross-roads, yes,' whispered Gollum, the first words that had been spoken since they left their hiding-place. 'We must go that way.' Turning eastward now, he led them up the slope; and then suddenly there it was before them: the Southward Road, winding its way about the outer feet of the mountains, until presently it plunged into the great ring of trees.

'This is the only way,' whispered Gollum. 'No paths beyond the road. No paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be silent! '

As furtively as scouts within the campment of their enemies, they crept down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under the stony bank, grey as the stones themselves, and soft-footed as hunting cats. At length they reached the trees, and found that they stood in a great roofless ring, open in the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between their immense boles were like the great dark arches of some ruined hall. In the very centre four ways met. Behind them lay the road to the Morannon; before them it ran out again upon its long journey south; to their right the road from old Osgiliath came climbing up, and crossing, passed out eastward into darkness: the fourth way, the road they were to take.

Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a light was shining; he saw it glowing on Sam's face beside him. Turning towards it, he saw, beyond an arch of boughs, the road to Osgiliath running almost as straight as a stretched ribbon down, down, into the West. There, far away, beyond sad Gondor now overwhelmed in shade, the Sun was sinking, finding at last the hem of the great slow-rolling pall of cloud, and falling in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied Sea. The brief glow fell upon a huge sitting figure, still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath. The years had gnawed it, and violent hands had maimed it. Its head was gone, and in its place was set in mockery a round rough-hewn stone, rudely painted by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with one large red eye in the midst of its forehead. Upon its knees and mighty chair, and all about the pedestal, were idle scrawls mixed with the foul symbols that the maggot-folk of Mordor used.

Suddenly, caught by the level beams, Frodo saw the old king's head: it was lying rolled away by the roadside. `Look, Sam!' he cried, startled into speech. `Look! The king has got a crown again!'

The eyes were hollow and the carven beard was broken, but about the high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold. A trailing plant with flowers like small white stars had bound itself across the brows as if in reverence for the fallen king, and in the crevices of his stony hair yellow stonecrop gleamed.

'They cannot conquer for ever!' said Frodo. And then suddenly the brief glimpse was gone. The Sun dipped and vanished, and as if at the shuttering of a lamp, black night fell.



Chapter 8
The Stairs of Cirith Ungol
Gollum was tugging at Frodo's cloak and hissing with fear and impatience. `We must go,' he said. `We mustn't stand here. Make haste!'

Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as his guide led him, out into the darkness of the East. They left the ring of trees and crept along the road towards the mountains. This road, too, ran straight for a while, but soon it began to bend away southwards, until it came right under the great shoulder of rock that they had seen from the distance. Black and forbidding it loomed above them, darker than the dark sky behind. Crawling under its shadow the road went on, and rounding it sprang east again and began to climb steeply.

Frodo and Sam were plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer able to care greatly about their peril. Frodo's head was bowed; his burden was dragging him down again. As soon as the great Cross-roads had been passed, the weight of it, almost forgotten in Ithilien, had begun to grow once more. Now, feeling the way become steep before his feet, he looked wearily up; and then he saw it, even as Gollum had said that he would: the city of the Ringwraiths. He cowered against the stony bank.

A long-tilted valley, a deep gulf of shadow, ran back far into the mountains. Upon the further side, some way within the valley's arms high on a rocky seat upon the black knees of the Ephel Dúath, stood the walls and tower of Minas Morgul. All was dark about it, earth and sky, but it was lit with light. Not the imprisoned moonlight welling through the marble walls of Minas Ithil long ago, Tower of the Moon, fair and radiant in the hollow of the hills. Paler indeed than the moon ailing in some slow eclipse was the light of it now, wavering and blowing like a noisome exhalation of decay, a corpse-light, a light that illuminated nothing. In the walls and tower windows showed, like countless black holes looking inward into emptiness; but the topmost course of the tower revolved slowly, first one way and then another, a huge ghostly head leering into the night. For a moment the three companions stood there, shrinking, staring up with unwilling eyes. Gollum was the first to recover. Again he pulled at their cloaks urgently, but he spoke no word. Almost he dragged them forward. Every step was reluctant, and time seemed to slow its pace. so that between the raising of a foot and the setting of it down minutes of loathing passed.

So they came slowly to the white bridge. Here the road, gleaming faintly, passed over the stream in the midst of the valley, and went on, winding deviously up towards the city's gate: a black mouth opening in the outer circle of the northward walls. Wide flats lay on either bank, shadowy meads filled with pale white flowers. Luminous these were too, beautiful and yet horrible of shape, like the demented forms in an uneasy dream; and they gave forth a faint sickening charnel-smell; an odour of rottenness filled the air. From mead to mead the bridge sprang. Figures stood there at its head, carven with cunning in forms human and bestial, but all corrupt and loathsome. The water flowing beneath was silent, and it steamed, but the vapour that rose from it, curling and twisting about the bridge, was deadly cold. Frodo felt his senses reeling and his mind darkening. Then suddenly, as if some force were at work other than his own will, he began to hurry, tottering forward, his groping hands held out, his head lolling from side to side. Both Sam and Gollum ran after him. Sam caught his master in his arms, as he stumbled and almost fell, right on the threshold of the bridge.

`Not that way! No, not that way! ' whispered Gollum, but the breath between his teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a whistle, and he cowered to the ground in terror.

`Hold up, Mr. Frodo! ' muttered Sam in Frodo's ear. 'Come back! Not that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.'

Frodo passed his hand over his brow and wrenched his eyes away from the city on the hill. The luminous tower fascinated him, and he fought the desire that was on him to run up the gleaming road towards its gate. At last with an effort he turned back, and as he did so, he felt the Ring resisting him, dragging at the chain about his neck; and his eyes too, as he looked away, seemed for the moment to have been blinded. The darkness before him was impenetrable.

Gollum, crawling on the ground like a frightened animal, was already vanishing into the gloom. Sam, supporting and guiding his stumbling master, followed after him as quickly as he could. Not far from the near bank of the stream there was a gap in the stone-wall beside the road. Through this they passed, and Sam saw that they were on a narrow path that gleamed faintly at first, as the main road did, until climbing above the meads of deadly flowers it faded and went dark, winding its crooked way up into the northern sides of the valley.

Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see Gollum in front of them, except when he turned back to beckon them on. Then his eyes shone with a green-white light, reflecting the noisome Morgul-sheen perhaps, or kindled by some answering mood within. Of that deadly gleam and of the dark eyeholes Frodo and Sam were always conscious, ever glancing fearfully over their shoulders, and ever dragging their eyes back to find the darkening path. Slowly they laboured on. As they rose above the stench and vapours of the poisonous stream their breath became easier and their heads clearer; but now their limbs were deadly tired, as if they had walked all night under a burden, or had been swimming long against a heavy tide of water. At last they could go no further without a halt.

Frodo stopped and sat down on a stone. They had now climbed up to the top of a great hump of bare rock. Ahead of them there was a bay in the valley-side, and round the head of this the path went on, no more than a wide ledge with a chasm on the right; across the sheer southward face of the mountain it crawled upwards, until it disappeared into the blackness above.

`I must rest a while, Sam,' whispered Frodo. `It's heavy on me, Sam lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry it? Anyway I must rest before we venture on to that.' He pointed to the narrow way ahead.

`Sssh! ssh! ' hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. `Sssh! ' His fingers were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging at Frodo's sleeve, he pointed towards the path; but Frodo would not move.

`Not yet,' he said, 'not yet.' Weariness and more than weariness oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind and body. `I must rest,' he muttered.

At this Gollum's fear and agitation became so great that he spoke again, hissing behind his hand, as if to keep the sound from unseen listeners in the air. `Not here, no. Not rest here. Fools! Eyes can see us. When they come to the bridge they will see us. Come away! Climb, climb! Come! '

`Come, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. `He's right, again. We can't stay here.'

'All right,' said Frodo in a remote voice, as of one speaking half asleep. `I will try.' Wearily he got to his feet.

But it was too late. At that moment the rock quivered and trembled beneath them. The great rumbling noise, louder than ever before, rolled in the ground and echoed in the mountains. Then with searing suddenness there came a great red flash. Far beyond the eastern mountains it leapt into the sky and splashed the lowering clouds with crimson. In that valley of shadow and cold deathly light it seemed unbearably violent and fierce. Peaks of stone and ridges like notched knives sprang out in staring black against the uprushing flame in Gorgoroth. Then came a great crack of thunder.

And Minas Morgul answered. There was a flare of livid lightnings: forks of blue flame springing up from the tower and from the encircling hills into the sullen clouds. The earth groaned; and out of the city there came a cry. Mingled with harsh high voices as of birds of prey, and the shrill neighing of horses wild with rage and fear, there came a rending screech, shivering, rising swiftly to a piercing pitch beyond the range of hearing. The hobbits wheeled round towards it, and cast themselves down, holding their hands upon their ears.

As the terrible cry ended, falling back through a long sickening wail to silence, Frodo slowly raised his head. Across the narrow valley, now almost on a level with his eyes, the walls of the evil city stood, and its cavernous gate, shaped like an open mouth with gleaming teeth, was gaping wide. And out of the gate an army came.

All that host was clad in sable, dark as the night. Against the wan walls and the luminous pavement of the road Frodo could see them, small black figures in rank upon rank, marching swiftly and silently, passing outwards in an endless stream. Before them went a great cavalry of horsemen moving like ordered shadows, and at their head was one greater than all the rest: a Rider, all black, save that on his hooded head he had a helm like a crown that flickered with a perilous light. Now he was drawing near the bridge below, and Frodo's staring eyes followed him, unable to wink or to withdraw. Surely there was the Lord of the Nine Riders returned to earth to lead his ghastly host to battle? Here, yes here indeed was the haggard king whose cold hand had smitten down the Ring-bearer with his deadly knife. The old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo's heart.

Even as these thoughts pierced him with dread and held him bound as with a spell, the Rider halted suddenly, right before the entrance of the bridge, and behind him all the host stood still. There was a pause, a dead silence. Maybe it was the Ring that called to the Wraith-lord, and for a moment he was troubled, sensing some other power within his valley. This way and that turned the dark head helmed and crowned with fear, sweeping the shadows with its unseen eyes. Frodo waited, like a bird at the approach of a snake, unable to move. And as he waited, he felt, more urgent than ever before, the command that he should put on the Ring. But great as the pressure was, he felt no inclination now to yield to it. He knew that the Ring would only betray him, and that he had not, even if he put it on, the power to face the Morgul-king-not yet. There was no longer any answer to that command in his own will, dismayed by terror though it was, and he felt only the beating upon him of a great power from outside. It took his hand, and as Frodo watched with his mind, not willing it but in suspense (as if he looked on some old story far away), it moved the hand inch by inch towards the chain upon his neck. Then his own will stirred; slowly it forced the hand back. and set it to find another thing, a thing lying hidden near his breast. Cold and hard it seemed as his grip closed on it: the phial of Galadriel, so long treasured, and almost forgotten till that hour. As he touched it, for a while all thought of the Ring was banished from his mind. He sighed and bent his head.

At that moment the Wraith-king turned and spurred his horse and rode across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe the elven-hoods defied his unseen eyes, and the mind of his small enemy; being strengthened, had turned aside his thought. But he was in haste. Already the hour had struck, and at his great Master's bidding he must march with war into the West.

Soon he had passed, like a shadow into shadow, down the winding road, and behind him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So great an army had never issued from that vale since the days of Isildur's might; no host so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed the fords of Anduin; and yet it was but one and not the greatest of the hosts that Mordor now sent forth.

Frodo stirred. And suddenly his heart went out to Faramir. 'The storm has burst at last,' he thought. `This great array of spears and swords is going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He guessed it, but did he know the hour? And who can now hold the fords when the King of the Nine Riders comes? And other armies will come. I am too late. All is lost. I tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will ever know. There will be no one I can tell. It will be in vain.' Overcome with weakness he wept. And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge.

Then at a great distance, as if it came out of memories of the Shire, some sunlit early morning, when the day called and doors were opening, he heard Sam's voice speaking. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up! ' Had the voice added: `Your breakfast is ready,' he would hardly have been surprised. Certainly Sam was urgent. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone,' he said.

There was a dull clang. The gates of Minas Morgul had closed. The last rank of spears had vanished down the road. The tower still grinned across the valley, but the light was fading in it. The whole city was falling back into a dark brooding shade, and silence. Yet still it was filled with watchfulness.

'Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone, and we'd better go too. There's something still alive in that place, something with eyes, or a seeing mind, if you take me; and the longer we stay in one spot, the sooner it will get on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo! '

Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left him, but the weakness had passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling now as clearly as a moment before he had felt the opposite, that what he had to do, he had to do, if he could, and that whether Faramir or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel or Gandalf or anyone else ever knew about it was beside the purpose. He took his staff in one hand and the phial in his other. When he saw that the clear light was already welling through his fingers, he thrust it into his bosom and held it against his heart. Then turning from the city of Morgul, now no more than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf, he prepared to take the upward road.

Gollum, it seemed, had crawled off along the ledge into the darkness beyond, when the gates of Minas Morgul opened, leaving the hobbits where they lay. He now came creeping back, his teeth chattering and his fingers snapping. `Foolish! Silly! ' he hissed. `Make haste! They mustn't think danger has passed. It hasn't. Make haste! '

They did not answer, but they followed him on to the climbing ledge. It was little to the liking of either of them, not even after facing so many other perils; but it did not last long. Soon the path reached a rounded angle where the mountain-side swelled out again, and there it suddenly entered a narrow opening in the rock. They had come to the first stair that Gollum had spoken of. The darkness was almost complete, and they could see nothing much beyond their hands' stretch; but Gollum's eyes shone pale, several feet above, as he turned back towards them.

`Careful! ' he whispered. `Steps. Lots of steps. Must be careful! '

Care was certainly needed. Frodo and Sam at first felt easier, having now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as steep as a ladder, and as they climbed up and up, they became more and more aware of the long black fall behind them. And the steps were narrow, spaced unevenly, and often treacherous: they were worn and smooth at the edges, and some were broken, and some cracked as foot was set upon them. The hobbits struggled on, until at last they were clinging with desperate fingers to the steps ahead, and forcing their aching knees to bend and straighten; and ever as the stair cut its way deeper into the sheer mountain the rocky walls rose higher and higher above their heads.

At length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they saw Gollum's eyes peering down at them again. `We're up,' he whispered. 'First stair's past. Clever hobbits to climb so high, very clever hobbits. Just a few more little steps and that's all, yes.'

Dizzy and very tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up the last step, and sat down rubbing their legs and knees. They were in a deep dark passage that seemed still to go up before them, though at a gentler slope and without steps. Gollum did not let them rest long.

'There's another stair still,' he said. `Much longer stair. Rest when we get to the top of next stair. Not yet.'

Sam groaned. 'Longer, did you say? ' he asked.

'Yes, yess, longer,' said Gollum. `But not so difficult. Hobbits have climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair.'

'And what after that? ' said Sam.

`We shall see,' said Gollum softly. `O yes, we shall see! '

'I thought you said there was a tunnel,' said Sam. `Isn't there a tunnel or something to go through? '

'O yes, there's a tunnel,' said Gollum. `But hobbits can rest before they try that. If they get through that, they'll be nearly at the top. Very nearly, if they get through. O yes! '

Frodo shivered. The climb had made him sweat, but now he felt cold and clammy, and there was a chill draught in the dark passage, blowing down from the invisible heights above. He got up and shook himself. `Well, let's go on! ' he said. `This is no place to sit in.'

The passage seemed to go on for miles, and always the chill air flowed over them, rising as they went on to a bitter wind. The mountains seemed to be trying with their deadly breath to daunt them, to turn them back from the secrets of the high places, or to blow them away into the darkness behind. They only knew that they had come to the end, when suddenly they felt no wall at their right hand. They could see very little. Great black shapeless masses and deep grey shadows loomed above them and about them, but now and again a dull red light flickered up under the lowering clouds, and for a moment they were aware of tall peaks, in front and on either side, like pillars holding up a vast sagging roof. They seemed to have climbed up many hundreds of feet, on to a wide shelf. A cliff was on their left and a chasm on their right.

Gollum led the way close under the cliff. For the present they were no longer climbing, but the ground was now more broken and dangerous in the dark, and there were blocks and lumps of fallen stone in the way. Their going was slow and cautious. How many hours had passed since they had entered the Morgul Vale neither Sam nor Frodo could any longer guess. The night seemed endless.

At length they were once more aware of a wall looming up, and once more a stairway opened before them. Again they halted, and again they began to climb. It was a long and weary ascent; but this stairway did not delve into the mountain-side. Here the huge cliff face sloped backwards, and the path like a snake wound to and fro across it. At one point it crawled sideways right to the edge of the dark chasm, and Frodo glancing down saw below him as a vast deep pit the great ravine at the head of the Morgul Valley. Down in its depths glimmered like a glow-worm thread the wraith-road from the dead city to the Nameless Pass. He turned hastily away.

Still on and up the stairway bent and crawled, until at last with a final flight, short and straight, it climbed out again on to another level. The path had veered away from the main pass in the great ravine, and it now followed its own perilous course at the bottom of a lesser cleft among the higher regions of the Ephel Dúath. Dimly the hobbits could discern tall piers and jagged pinnacles of stone on either side, between which were great crevices and fissures blacker than the night, where forgotten winters had gnawed and carved the sunless stone. And now the red light in the sky seemed stronger; though they could not tell whether a dreadful morning were indeed coming to this place of shadow, or whether they saw only the flame of some great violence of Sauron in the torment of Gorgoroth beyond. Still far ahead, and still high above, Frodo, looking up, saw, as he guessed, the very crown of this bitter road. Against the sullen redness of the eastern sky a cleft was outlined in the topmost ridge, narrow, deep-cloven between two black shoulders; and on either shoulder was a horn of stone.

He paused and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left was tall and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red light in the land beyond was shining through a hole. He saw now: it was a black tower poised above the outer pass. He touched Sam's arm and pointed.

'I don't like the look of that! ' said Sam. `So this secret way of yours is guarded after all,' he growled, turning to Gollum. 'As you knew all along, I suppose? '

'All ways are watched, yes,' said Gollum. `Of course they are. But hobbits must try some way. This may be least watched. Perhaps they've all gone away to big battle, perhaps! '

'Perhaps,' grunted Sam. 'Well, it still seems a long way off, and a long way up before we get there. And there's still the tunnel. I think you ought to rest now, Mr. Frodo. I don't know what time of day or night it is, but we've kept going for hours and hours.'

`Yes, we must rest,' said Frodo. 'Let us find some corner out of the wind, and gather our strength-for the last lap.' For so he felt it to be. The terrors of the land beyond, and the deed to be done there, seemed remote, too far off yet to trouble him. All his mind was bent on getting through or over this impenetrable wall and guard. If once he could do that impossible thing, then somehow the errand would be accomplished, or so it seemed to him in that dark hour of weariness, still labouring in the stony shadows under Cirith Ungol.

In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down: Frodo and Sam a little way within. and Gollum crouched upon the ground near the opening. There the hobbits took what they expected would be their last meal before they went down into the Nameless Land, maybe the last meal they would ever eat together. Some of the food of Gondor they ate, and wafers of the waybread of the Elves. and they drank a little. But of their water they were sparing and took only enough to moisten their dry mouths.

`I wonder when we'll find water again? ' said Sam. 'But I suppose even over there they drink? Orcs drink, don't they? '

'Yes, they drink,' said Frodo. 'But do not let us speak of that. Such drink is not for us.'

`Then all the more need to fill our bottles,' said Sam. `But there isn't any water up here: not a sound or a trickle have I heard. And anyway Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.'

'No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,' said Frodo. `We are not in that valley now, and if we came on a spring it would be flowing into it and not out of it.'

'I wouldn't trust it,' said Sam, 'not till I was dying of thirst. There's a wicked feeling about this place.' He sniffed. 'And a smell, I fancy. Do you notice it? A queer kind of a smell, stuffy. I don't like it.'

'I don't like anything here at all.' said Frodo, `step or stone, breath or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our path is laid.'

'Yes, that's so,' said Sam. `And we shouldn't be here at all, if we'd known more about it before we started. But I suppose it's often that way. The brave things in the old tales and songs, Mr. Frodo: adventures, as I used to call them. I used to think that they were things the wonderful folk of the stories went out and looked for, because they wanted them, because they were exciting and life was a bit dull, a kind of a sport, as you might say. But that's not the way of it with the tales that really mattered, or the ones that stay in the mind. Folk seem to have been just landed in them, usually - their paths were laid that way, as you put it. But I expect they had lots of chances, like us, of turning back, only they didn't. And if they had, we shouldn't know, because they'd have been forgotten. We hear about those as just went on - and not all to a good end, mind you; at least not to what folk inside a story and not outside it call a good end. You know, coming home, and finding things all right, though not quite the same - like old Mr Bilbo. But those aren't always the best tales to hear, though they may be the best tales to get landed in! I wonder what sort of a tale we've fallen into? '

`I wonder,' said Frodo. 'But I don't know. And that's the way of a real tale. Take any one that you're fond of. You may know, or guess, what kind of a tale it is, happy-ending or sad-ending, but the people in it don't know. And you don't want them to.'

'No, sir, of course not. Beren now, he never thought he was going to get that Silmaril from the Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet he did, and that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours. But that's a long tale, of course, and goes on past the happiness and into grief and beyond it - and the Silmaril went on and came to Eärendil. And why, sir, I never thought of that before! We've got - you've got some of the light of it in that star-glass that the Lady gave you! Why, to think of it, we're in the same tale still! It's going on. Don't the great tales never end? '

'No, they never end as tales,' said Frodo. `But the people in them come, and go when their part's ended. Our part will end later - or sooner.'

'And then we can have some rest and some sleep,' said Sam. He laughed grimly. 'And I mean just that, Mr. Frodo. I mean plain ordinary rest, and sleep, and waking up to a morning's work in the garden. I'm afraid that's all I'm hoping for all the time. All the big important plans are not for my sort. Still, I wonder if we shall ever be put into songs or tales. We're in one, or course; but I mean: put into words, you know, told by the fireside, or read out of a great big book with red and black letters, years and years afterwards. And people will say: "Let's hear about Frodo and the Ring! " And they'll say: "Yes, that's one of my favourite stories. Frodo was very brave. wasn't he, dad?" "Yes, my boy, the famousest of the hobbits, and that's saying a lot."'

`It's saying a lot too much,' said Frodo, and he laughed, a long clear laugh from his heart. Such a sound had not been heard in those places since Sauron came to Middle-earth. To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the stones were listening and the tall rocks leaning over them. But Frodo did not heed them; he laughed again. 'Why, Sam,' he said, 'to hear you somehow makes me as merry as if the story was already written. But you've left out one of the chief characters: Samwise the stouthearted. "I want to hear more about Sam, dad. Why didn't they put in more of his talk, dad? That's what I like, it makes me laugh. And Frodo wouldn't have got far without Sam, would he, dad? " '

`Now, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'you shouldn't make fun. I was serious. '

`So was I,' said Frodo, 'and so I am. We're going on a bit too fast. You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the story, and it is all too likely that some will say at this point: "Shut the book now, dad; we don't want to read any more." '

`Maybe,' said Sam, 'but I wouldn't be one to say that. Things done and over and made into part of the great tales are different. Why, even Gollum might be good in a tale, better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he used to like tales himself once, by his own account. I wonder if he thinks he's the hero or the villain?

`Gollum!' he called. `Would you like to be the hero - now where's he got to again?'

There was no sign of him at the mouth of their shelter nor in the shadows near. He had refused their food, though he had, as usual, accepted a mouthful of water; and then he had seemed to curl up for a sleep: They had supposed that one at any rate of his objects in his long absence the day before had been to hunt for food to his own liking; and now he had evidently slipped off again while they talked. But what for this time?

`I don't like his sneaking off without saying,' said Sam. 'And least of all now. He can't be looking for food up here, not unless there's some kind of rock he fancies. Why, there isn't even a bit of moss! '

`It's no good worrying about him now,' said Frodo. `We couldn't have got so far, not even within sight of the pass, without him, and so we'll have to put up with his ways. If he's false, he's false.'

'All the same, I'd rather have him under my eye,' said Sam. 'All the more so, if he's false. Do you remember he never would say if this pass was guarded or no? And now we see a tower there - and it may be deserted, and it may not. Do you think he's gone to fetch them, Orcs or whatever they are?'

`No, I don't think so,' answered Frodo. 'Even if he's up to some wickedness, and I suppose that's not unlikely, I don't think it's that: not to fetch Orcs, or any servants of the Enemy. Why wait till now, and go through all the labour of the climb, and come so near the land he fears? He could probably have betrayed us to Orcs many times since we met him. No, if it's anything, it will be some little private trick of his own-that he thinks is quite secret.'

`Well, I suppose you're right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'Not that it comforts me mightily. I don't make no mistake: I don't doubt he'd hand me over to Orcs as gladly as kiss his hand. But I was forgetting - his Precious. No, I suppose the whole time it's been The Precious for poor Sméagol. That's the one idea in all his little schemes, if he has any. But how bringing us up here will help him in that is more than I can guess.'

'Very likely he can't guess himself,' said Frodo. `And I don't think he's got just one plain scheme in his muddled head. I think he really is in part trying to save the Precious from the Enemy. as long as he can. For that would be the last disaster for himself too. if the Enemy got it. And in the other part, perhaps, he's just biding his time and waiting on chance.'

'Yes, Slinker and Stinker, as I've said before,' said Sam. 'But the nearer they get to the Enemy's land the more like Stinker Slinker will get. Mark my words: if ever we get to the pass, he won't let us really take the precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble.'

`We haven't got there yet,' said Frodo.

'No, but we'd better keep our eyes skinned till we do. If we're caught napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quick. Not but what it would be safe for you to have a wink now, master. Safe, if you lay close to me. I'd be dearly glad to see you have a sleep. I'd keep watch over you; and anyway, if you lay near, with my arm round you, no one could come pawing you without your Sam knowing it.'

`Sleep!' said Frodo and sighed, as if out of a desert he had seen a mirage of cool green. 'Yes, even here I could sleep.'

`Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.'

And so Gollum found them hours later, when he returned, crawling and creeping down the path out of the gloom ahead. Sam sat propped against the stone, his head dropping sideways and his breathing heavy. In his lap lay Frodo's head, drowned deep in sleep; upon his white forehead lay one of Sam's brown hands, and the other lay softly upon his master's breast. Peace was in both their faces.

Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean hungry face. The gleam faded from his eyes, and they went dim and grey, old and tired. A spasm of pain seemed to twist him, and he turned away, peering back up towards the pass, shaking his head, as if engaged in some interior debate. Then he came back, and slowly putting out a trembling hand, very cautiously he touched Frodo's knee - but almost the touch was a caress. For a fleeting moment, could one of the sleepers have seen him, they would have thought that they beheld an old weary hobbit, shrunken by the years that had carried him far beyond his time, beyond friends and kin, and the fields and streams of youth, an old starved pitiable thing.

But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in his sleep, and immediately Sam was wide awake. The first thing he saw was Gollum - `pawing at master,' as he thought.

`Hey you!' he said roughly. `What are you up to?'

'Nothing, nothing,' said Gollum softly. `Nice Master!'

`I daresay,' said Sam. 'But where have you been to - sneaking off and sneaking back, you old villain? '

Gollum withdrew himself, and a green glint flickered under his heavy lids. Almost spider-like he looked now, crouched back on his bent limbs, with his protruding eyes. The fleeting moment had passed, beyond recall. `Sneaking, sneaking!' he hissed. 'Hobbits always so polite, yes. O nice hobbits! Sméagol brings them up secret ways that nobody else could find. Tired he is, thirsty he is, yes thirsty; and he guides them and he searches for paths, and they say sneak, sneak. Very nice friends, O yes my precious, very nice.'

Sam felt a bit remorseful, though not more trustful. 'Sorry.' he said. 'I'm sorry, but you startled me out of my sleep. And I shouldn't have been sleeping, and that made me a bit sharp. But Mr. Frodo. he's that tired, I asked him to have a wink; and well, that's how it is. Sorry. But where have you been to? '

`Sneaking,' said Gollum, and the green glint did not leave his eyes.

'O very well,' said Sam, `have it your own way! I don't suppose it's so far from the truth. And now we'd better all be sneaking along together. What's the time? Is it today or tomorrow? '

'It's tomorrow,' said Gollum, 'or this was tomorrow when hobbits went to sleep. Very foolish, very dangerous-if poor Sméagol wasn't sneaking about to watch.'

`I think we shall get tired of that word soon,' said Sam. 'But never mind. I'll wake master up.' Gently he smoothed the hair back from Frodo's brow, and bending down spoke softly to him.

`Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up! '

Frodo stirred and opened his eyes, and smiled, seeing Sam's face bending over him. `Calling me early aren't you, Sam?' he said. `It's dark still! '

'Yes it's always dark here,' said Sam. `But Gollum's come back Mr. Frodo, and he says it's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The last lap.'

Frodo drew a deep breath and sat up. `The last lap! ' he said. 'Hullo, Sméagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest? '

`No food, no rest, nothing for Sméagol,' said Gollum. `He's a sneak.'

Sam clicked his tongue, but restrained himself.

'Don't take names to yourself, Sméagol,' said Frodo. 'It's unwise whether they are true or false.'

`Sméagol has to take what's given him,' answered Gollum. 'He was given that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows so much.'

Frodo looked at Sam. 'Yes sir,' he said. `I did use the word, waking up out of my sleep sudden and all and finding him at hand. I said I was sorry, but I soon shan't be.'

'Come, let it pass then,' said Frodo. 'But now we seem to have come to the point, you and I, Sméagol. Tell me. Can we find the rest of the way by ourselves? We're in sight of the pass, of a way in, and if we can find it now, then I suppose our agreement can be said to be over. You have done what you promised, and you're free: free to go back to food and rest, wherever you wish to go, except to servants of the Enemy. And one day I may reward you, I or those that remember me.'

`No, no, not yet,' Gollum whined. `O no! They can't find the way themselves, can they? O no indeed. There's the tunnel coming. Sméagol must go on. No rest. No food. Not yet.'



Chapter 9
Shelob's Lair
It may indeed have been daytime now, as Gollum said, but the hobbits could see little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky above was less utterly black, more like a great roof of smoke; while instead of the darkness of deep night, which lingered still in cracks and holes, a grey blurring shadow shrouded the stony world about them. They passed on, Gollum in front and the hobbits now side by side, up the long ravine between the piers and columns of torn and weathered rock, standing like huge unshapen statues on either hand. There was no sound. Some way ahead, a mile or so, perhaps, was a great grey wall, a last huge upthrusting mass of mountain-stone. Darker it loomed, and steadily it rose as they approached, until it towered up high above them, shutting out the view of all that lay beyond. Deep shadow lay before its feet. Sam sniffed the air.

`Ugh! That smell!' he said. `It's getting stronger and stronger.'

Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of it they saw the opening of a cave. `This is the way in,' said Gollum softly. `This is the entrance to the tunnel.' He did not speak its name: Torech Ungol, Shelob's Lair. Out of it came a stench, not the sickly odour of decay in the meads of Morgul, but a foul reek, as if filth unnameable were piled and hoarded in the dark within.

`Is this the only way, Sméagol? ' said Frodo.

'Yes, yes,' he answered. 'Yes, we must go this way now.'

'D'you mean to say you've been through this hole?' said Sam. `Phew! But perhaps you don't mind bad smells.'

Gollum's eyes glinted. `He doesn't know what we minds, does he precious? No, he doesn't. But Sméagol can bear things. Yes. He's been through. O yes, right through. It's the only way.'

`And what makes the smell, I wonder,' said Sam. `It's like - well, I wouldn't like to say. Some beastly hole of the Orcs, I'll warrant, with a hundred years of their filth in it.'

'Well,' said Frodo, 'Orcs or no, if it's the only way, we must take it.'

Drawing a deep breath they passed inside. In a few steps they were in utter and impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages of Moria had Frodo or Sam known such darkness, and if possible here it was deeper and denser. There, there were airs moving, and echoes, and a sense of space. Here the air was still, stagnant, heavy, and sound fell dead. They walked as it were in a black vapour wrought of veritable darkness itself that, as it was breathed, brought blindness not only to the eyes but to the mind, so that even the memory of colours and of forms and of any light faded out of thought. Night always had been, and always would be, and night was all.

But for a while they could still feel, and indeed the senses of their feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls felt, to their surprise, smooth, and the floor, save for a step now and again, was straight and even, going ever up at the same stiff slope. The tunnel was high and wide, so wide that, though the hobbits walked abreast, only touching the side-walls with their outstretched hands, they were separated, cut off alone in the darkness.

Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While they were still able to give heed to such things, they could hear his breath hissing and gasping just in front of them. But after a time their senses became duller, both touch and hearing seemed to grow numb, and they kept on, groping, walking, on and on, mainly by the force of the will with which they had entered, will to go through and desire to come at last to the high gate beyond.

Before they had gone very far, perhaps, but time and distance soon passed out of his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling the wall, was aware that there was an opening at the side: for a moment he caught a faint breath of some air less heavy, and then they passed it by.

'There's more than one passage here,' he whispered with an effort: it seemed hard to make his breath give any sound. `It's as orc-like a place as ever there could be! '

After that, first he on the right, and then Frodo on the left, passed three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but there was as yet no doubt of the main way, for it was straight, and did not turn, and still went steadily up. But how long was it, how much more of this would they have to endure, or could they endure? The breathlessness of the air was growing as they climbed; and now they seemed often in the blind dark to sense some resistance thicker than the foul air. As they thrust forward they felt things brush against their heads, or against their hands, long tentacles, or hanging growths perhaps: they could not tell what they were. And still the stench grew. It grew, until almost it seemed to them that smell was the only clear sense left to them. and that was for their torment. One hour, two hours, three hours: how many had they passed in this lightless hole? Hours-days, weeks rather. Sam left the tunnel-side and shrank towards Frodo, and their hands met and clasped. and so together they still went on.

At length Frodo, groping along the left-hand wall, came suddenly to a void. Almost he fell sideways into the emptiness. Here was some opening in the rock far wider than any they had yet passed; and out of it came a reek so foul, and a sense of lurking malice so intense, that Frodo reeled. And at that moment Sam too lurched and fell forwards.

Fighting off both the sickness and the fear, Frodo gripped Sam's hand. `Up! ' he said in a hoarse breath without voice. 'It all comes from here, the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick! '

Calling up his remaining strength and resolution, he dragged Sam to his feet, and forced his own limbs to move. Sam stumbled beside him. One step, two steps, three steps-at last six steps. Maybe they had passed the dreadful unseen opening, but whether that was so or not, suddenly it was easier to move, as if some hostile will for the moment had released them. They struggled on, still hand in hand.

But almost at once they came to a new difficulty. The tunnel forked, or so it seemed, and in the dark they could not tell which was the wider way, or which kept nearer to the straight. Which should they take, the left, or the right? They knew of nothing to guide them, yet a false choice would almost certainly be fatal.

`Which way has Gollum gone? ' panted Sam. 'And why didn't he wait? '

`Sméagol! ' said Frodo, trying to call. 'Sméagol! ' But his voice croaked, and the name fell dead almost as it left his lips. There was no answer, not an echo, not even a tremor of the air.

`He's really gone this time, I fancy,' muttered Sam. `I guess this is just exactly where he meant to bring us. Gollum! If ever I lay hands on you again, you'll be sorry for it.'

Presently, groping and fumbling in the dark, they found that the opening on the left was blocked: either it was a blind, or else some great stone had fallen in the passage. 'This can't be the way,' Frodo whispered. 'Right or wrong, we must take the other.'

'And quick! ' Sam panted. 'There's something worse than Gollum about. I can feel something looking at us.'

They had not gone more than a few yards when from behind them came a sound, startling and horrible in the heavy padded silence: a gurgling, bubbling noise, and a long venomous hiss. They wheeled round, but nothing could be seen. Still as stones they stood, staring, waiting for they did not know what.

`It's a trap!' said Sam, and he laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword; and as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow whence it came. 'I wish old Tom was near us now!' he thought. Then as he stood, darkness about him and a blackness of despair and anger in his heart. it seemed to him that he saw a light: a light in his mind, almost unbearably bright at first, as a sun-ray to the eyes of one long hidden in a windowless pit. Then the light became colour: green, gold, silver, white. Far off, as in a little picture drawn by elven-fingers he saw the Lady Galadriel standing on the grass in Lórien, and gifts were in her hands. And you, Ring-bearer, he heard her say, remote but clear, for you I have prepared this.

The bubbling hiss drew nearer, and there was a creaking as of some great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A reek came on before it. 'Master, master!' cried Sam, and the life and urgency came back into his voice. 'The Lady's gift! The star-glass! A light to you in dark places, she said it was to be. The star-glass!'

`The star-glass?' muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly comprehending. `Why yes! Why had I forgotten it? A light when all other lights go out! And now indeed light alone can help us.'

Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held aloft the Phial of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as a rising star struggling in heavy earthward mists, and then as its power waxed, and hope grew in Frodo's mind, it began to burn, and kindled to a silver flame, a minute heart of dazzling light, as though Eärendil had himself come down from the high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon his brow. The darkness receded from it until it seemed to shine in the centre of a globe of airy crystal, and the hand that held it sparkled with white fire.

Frodo gazed in wonder at this marvellous gift that he had so long carried, not guessing its full worth and potency. Seldom had he remembered it on the road, until they came to Morgul Vale, and never had he used it for fear of its revealing light. Aiya Eärendil Elenion Ancalima! he cried, and knew not what he had spoken; for it seemed that another voice spoke through his, clear, untroubled by the foul air of the pit.

But other potencies there are in Middle-earth, powers of night, and they are old and strong. And She that walked in the darkness had heard the Elves cry that cry far back in the deeps of time, and she had not heeded it, and it did not daunt her now. Even as Frodo spoke he felt a great malice bent upon him, and a deadly regard considering him. Not far down the tunnel, between them and the opening where they had reeled and stumbled, he was aware of eyes growing visible, two great clusters of many-windowed eyes - the coming menace was unmasked at last. The radiance of the star-glass was broken and thrown back from their thousand facets, but behind the glitter a pale deadly fire began steadily to glow within, a flame kindled in some deep pit of evil thought. Monstrous and abominable eyes they were, bestial and yet filled with purpose and with hideous delight, gloating over their prey trapped beyond all hope of escape.

Frodo and Sam, horror-stricken, began slowly to back away, their own gaze held by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes; but as they backed so the eyes advanced. Frodo's hand wavered, and slowly the Phial drooped. Then suddenly, released from the holding spell to run a little while in vain panic for the amusement of the eyes, they both turned and fled together; but even as they ran Frodo looked back and saw with terror that at once the eyes came leaping up behind. The stench of death was like a cloud about him.

'Stand! stand! ' he cried desperately. `Running is no use.'

Slowly the eyes crept nearer.

`Galadriel! ' he called, and gathering his courage he lifted up the Phial once more. The eyes halted. For a moment their regard relaxed, as if some hint of doubt troubled them. Then Frodo's heart flamed within him, and without thinking what he did, whether it was folly or despair or courage, he took the Phial in his left hand, and with his right hand drew his sword. Sting flashed out, and the sharp elven-blade sparkled in the silver light, but at its edges a blue fire flicked. Then holding the star aloft and the bright sword advanced, Frodo, hobbit of the Shire, walked steadily down to meet the eyes.

They wavered. Doubt came into them as the light approached. One by one they dimmed, and slowly they drew back. No brightness so deadly had ever afflicted them before. From sun and moon and star they had been safe underground, but now a star had descended into the very earth. Still it approached, and the eyes began to quail. One by one they all went dark; they turned away, and a great bulk, beyond the light's reach, heaved its huge shadow in between. They were gone.

'Master, master!' cried Sam. He was close behind, his own sword drawn and ready. 'Stars and glory! But the Elves would make a song of that, if ever they heard of it! And may I live to tell them and hear them sing. But don't go on, master. Don't go down to that den! Now's our only chance. Now let's get out of this foul hole!'

And so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for as they went the floor of the tunnel rose steeply, and with every stride they climbed higher above the stenches of the unseen lair, and strength returned to limb and heart. But still the hatred of the Watcher lurked behind them, blind for a while, perhaps, but undefeated, still bent on death. And now there came a flow of air to meet them, cold and thin. The opening, the tunnel's end, at last it was before them. Panting, yearning for a roofless place, they flung themselves forward, and then in amazement they staggered, tumbling back. The outlet was blocked with some barrier, but not of stone: soft and a little yielding it seemed, and yet strong and impervious; air filtered through, hut not a glimmer of any light. Once more they charged and were hurled back.

Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and before him he saw a greyness which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce and did not illuminate, as if it were a shadow that being cast by no light, no light could dissipate. Across the width and height of the tunnel a vast web was spun, orderly as the web of some huge spider, but denser-woven and far greater, and each thread was as thick as rope.

Sam laughed grimly. `Cobwebs! ' he said. `Is that all? Cobwebs! But what a spider! Have at 'em, down with 'em! '

In a fury he hewed at them with his sword, but the thread that he struck did not break. It gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked bowstring, turning the blade and tossing up both sword and arm. Three times Sam struck with all his force, and at last one single cord of all the countless cords snapped and twisted, curling and whipping through the air. One end of it lashed Sam's hand, and he cried out in pain, starting back and drawing his hand across his mouth.

`It will take days to clear the road like this,' he said. `What's to be done? Have those eyes come back? '

`No, not to be seen,' said Frodo. `But I still feel that they are looking at me, or thinking about me: making some other plan, perhaps. If this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly come again.'

`Trapped in the end! ' said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above weariness and despair. `Gnats in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite that Gollum and bite him quick! '

'That would not help us now,' said Frodo. `Come! Let us see what Sting can do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines of Beleriand where it was forged. But you must be the guard and hold back the eyes. Here, take the star-glass. Do not be afraid. Hold it up and watch!'

Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey net, and hewed it with a wide sweeping stroke, drawing the bitter edge swiftly across a ladder of close-strung cords, and at once springing away. The blue-gleaming blade shore through them like a scythe through grass, and they leaped and writhed and then hung loose. A great rent was made.

Stroke after stroke he dealt, until at last all the web within his reach was shattered, and the upper portion blew and swayed like a loose veil in the incoming wind. The trap was broken.

`Come! ' cried Frodo. `On! On! ' Wild joy at their escape from the very mouth of despair suddenly filled all his mind. His head whirled as with a draught of potent wine. He sprang out, shouting as he came.

It seemed light in that dark land to his eyes that had passed through the den of night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinner, and the last hours of a sombre day were passing; the red glare of Mordor had died away in sullen gloom. Yet it seemed to Frodo that he looked upon a morning of sudden hope. Almost he had reached the summit of the wall. Only a little higher now. The Cleft, Cirith Ungol, was before him, a dim notch in the black ridge, and the horns of rock darkling in the sky on either side. A short race, a sprinter's course and he would be through!

`The pass, Sam! ' he cried, not heeding the shrillness of his voice, that released from the choking airs of the tunnel rang out now high and wild. 'The pass! Run, run, and we'll be through-through before any one can stop us! '

Sam came up behind as fast as he could urge his legs; but glad as he was to be free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on glancing back at the dark arch of the tunnel, fearing to see eyes, or some shape beyond his imagining, spring out in pursuit. Too little did he or his master know of the craft of Shelob. She had many exits from her lair.

There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider-form, even such as once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under the Sea, such as Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror in Doriath, and so came to Lúthien upon the green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight long ago. How Shelob came there, flying from ruin, no tale tells, for out of the Dark Years few tales have come. But still she was there, who was there before Sauron, and before the first stone of Barad-dûr; and she served none but herself, drinking the blood of Elves and Men, bloated and grown fat with endless brooding on her feasts, weaving webs of shadow; for all living things were her food, and her vomit darkness. Far and wide her lesser broods, bastards of the miserable mates, her own offspring, that she slew, spread from glen to glen, from the Ephel Dúath to the eastern hills, to Dol Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood. But none could rival her, Shelob the Great, last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world.

Already, years before, Gollum had beheld her, Sméagol who pried into all dark holes, and in past days he had bowed and worshipped her, and the darkness of her evil will walked through all the ways of his weariness beside him, cutting him off from light and from regret. And he had promised to bring her food. But her lust was not his lust. Little she knew of or cared for towers, or rings, or anything devised by mind or hand, who only desired death for all others, mind and body, and for herself a glut of life. alone, swollen till the mountains could no longer hold her up and the darkness could not contain her.

But that desire was yet far away, and long now had she been hungry, lurking in her den, while the power of Sauron grew, and light and living things forsook his borders; and the city in the valley was dead, and no Elf or Man came near, only the unhappy Orcs. Poor food and wary. But she must eat, and however busily they delved new winding passages from the pass and from their tower, ever she found some way to snare them. But she lusted for sweeter meat. And Gollum had brought it to her.

`We'll see, we'll see,' he said often to himself, when the evil mood was on him, as he walked the dangerous road from Emyn Muil to Morgul Vale, 'we'll see. It may well be, O yes, it may well be that when She throws away the bones and the empty garments, we shall find it, we shall get it, the Precious, a reward for poor Sméagol who brings nice food. And we'll save the Precious, as we promised. O yes. And when we've got it safe, then She'll know it, O yes, then we'll pay Her back, my precious. Then we'll pay everyone back! '

So he thought in an inner chamber of his cunning, which he still hoped to hide from her, even when he had come to her again and had bowed low before her while his companions slept.

And as for Sauron: he knew where she lurked. It pleased him that she should dwell there hungry but unabated in malice, a more sure watch upon that ancient path into his land than any other that his skill could have devised. And Orcs, they were useful slaves, but he had them in plenty. If now and again Shelob caught them to stay her appetite, she was welcome: he could spare them. And sometimes as a man may cast a dainty to his cat (his cat he calls her, but she owns him not) Sauron would send her prisoners that he had no better uses for: he would have them driven to her hole, and report brought back to him of the play she made.

So they both lived, delighting in their own devices, and feared no assault, nor wrath, nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet had any fly escaped from Shelob's webs, and the greater now was her rage and hunger.

But nothing of this evil which they had stirred up against them did poor Sam know, except that a fear was growing on him, a menace which he could not see; and such a weight did it become that it was a burden to him to run, and his feet seemed leaden.

Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and his master was in a fey mood running heedlessly to meet them. Turning his eyes away from the shadow behind and the deep gloom beneath the cliff upon his left, he looked ahead, and he saw two things that increased his dismay. He saw that the sword which Frodo still held unsheathed was glittering with blue flame; and he saw that though the sky behind was now dark. still the window in the tower was glowing red.

`Orcs! ' he muttered. `We'll never rush it like this. There's Orcs about, and worse than Orcs.' Then returning quickly to his long habit of secrecy, he closed his hand about the precious Phial which he still bore. Red with his own living blood his hand shone for a moment, and then he thrust the revealing light deep into a pocket near his breast and drew his elven-cloak about him. Now he tried to quicken his pace. His master was gaining on him; already he was some twenty strides ahead, flitting on like a shadow; soon he would be lost to sight in that grey world.






Hardly had Sam hidden the light of the star-glass when she came. A little way ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing from a black hole of shadow under the cliff, the most loathly shape that he had ever beheld, horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream. Most like a spider she was, but huger than the great hunting beasts, and more terrible than they because of the evil purpose in her remorseless eyes. Those same eyes that he had thought daunted and defeated, there they were lit with a fell light again, clustering in her out-thrust head. Great horns she had, and behind her short stalk-like neck was her huge swollen body, a vast bloated bag, swaying and sagging between her legs; its great bulk was black, blotched with livid marks, but the belly underneath was pale and luminous and gave forth a stench. Her legs were bent, with great knobbed joints high above her back, and hairs that stuck out like steel spines, and at each leg's end there was a claw.

As soon as she had squeezed her soft squelching body and its folded limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a horrible speed, now running on her creaking legs, now making a sudden bound. She was between Sam and his master. Either she did not see Sam, or she avoided him for the moment as the bearer of the light` and fixed all her intent upon one prey, upon Frodo, bereft of his Phial, running heedless up the path, unaware yet of his peril. Swiftly he ran, but Shelob was swifter; in a few leaps she would have him.

Sam gasped and gathered all his remaining breath to shout. 'Look out behind! ' he yelled. 'Look out master! I'm' - but suddenly his cry was stifled.

A long clammy hand went over his mouth and another caught him by the neck, while something wrapped itself about his leg. Taken off his guard he toppled backwards into the arms of his attacker.

`Got him! ' hissed Gollum in his ear. `At last, my precious, we've got him, yes, the nassty hobbit. We takes this one. She'll get the other. O yes, Shelob will get him, not Sméagol: he promised; he won't hurt Master at all. But he's got you, you nassty filthy little sneak!' He spat on Sam's neck.

Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was in deadly peril, gave to Sam a sudden violence and strength that was far beyond anything that Gollum had expected from this slow stupid hobbit, as he thought him. Not Gollum himself could have twisted more quickly or more fiercely. His hold on Sam's mouth slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged forward again, trying to tear away from the grip on his neck. His sword was still in his hand, and on his left arm, hanging by its thong, was Faramir's staff. Desperately he tried to turn and stab his enemy. But Gollum was too quick. His long right arm shot out, and he grabbed Sam's wrist: his fingers were like a vice; slowly and relentlessly he bent the hand down and forward, till with a cry of pain Sam released the sword and it fell to the ground; and all the while Gollum's other hand was tightening on Sam's throat.

Then Sam played his last trick. With all his strength he pulled away and got his feet firmly planted; then suddenly he drove his legs against the ground and with his whole force hurled himself backwards.

Not expecting even this simple trick from Sam, Gollum fell over with Sam on top, and he received the weight of the sturdy hobbit in his stomach. A sharp hiss came out of him, and for a second his hand upon Sam's throat loosened; but his fingers still gripped the sword-hand. Sam tore himself forward and away, and stood up, and then quickly he wheeled away to his right, pivoted on the wrist held by Gollum. Laying hold of the staff with his left hand, Sam swung it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on Gollum's outstretched arm, just below the elbow.

With a squeal Gollum let go. Then Sam waded in; not waiting to change the staff from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Quick as a snake Gollum slithered aside. and the stroke aimed at his head fell across his back. The staff cracked and broke. That was enough for him. Grabbing from behind was an old game of his, and seldom had he failed in it. But this time, misled by spite, he had made the mistake of speaking and gloating before he had both hands on his victim's neck. Everything had gone wrong with his beautiful plan, since that horrible light had so unexpectedly appeared in the darkness. And now he was face to face with a furious enemy, little less than his own size. This fight was not for him. Sam swept up his sword from the ground and raised it. Gollum squealed, and springing aside on to all fours, he jumped away in one big bound like a frog. Before Sam could reach him, he was off, running with amazing speed back towards the tunnel.

Sword in hand Sam went after him. For the moment he had forgotten everything else but the red fury in his brain and the desire to kill Gollum. But before he could overtake him, Gollum was gone. Then as the dark hole stood before him and the stench came out to meet him, like a clap of thunder the thought of Frodo and the monster smote upon Sam's mind. He spun round, and rushed wildly up the path, calling and calling his master's name. He was too late. So far Gollum's plot had succeeded.



Chapter 10
The Choices of Master Samwise
Frodo was lying face upward on the ground and the monster was bending over him, so intent upon her victim that she took no heed of Sam and his cries, until he was close at hand. As he rushed up he saw that Frodo was already bound in cords, wound about him from ankle to shoulder, and the monster with her great forelegs was beginning half to lift, half to drag his body away.

On the near side of him lay, gleaming on the ground, his elven-blade, where it had fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait to wonder what was to be done, or whether he was brave, or loyal, or filled with rage. He sprang forward with a yell, and seized his master's sword in his left hand. Then he charged. No onslaught more fierce was ever seen in the savage world of beasts; where some desperate small creature armed with little teeth alone, will spring upon a tower of horn and hide that stands above its fallen mate.

Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she turned slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost before she was aware that a fury was upon her greater than any she had known in countless years, the shining sword bit upon her foot and shore away the claw. Sam sprang in, inside the arches of her legs, and with a quick upthrust of his other hand stabbed at the clustered eyes upon her lowered head. One great eye went dark.

Now the miserable creature was right under her, for the moment out of the reach of her sting and of her claws. Her vast belly was above him with its putrid light, and the stench of it almost smote him down. Still his fury held for one more blow, and before she could sink upon him, smothering him and all his little impudence of courage, he slashed the bright elven-blade across her with desperate strength.

But Shelob was not as dragons are, no softer spot had she save only her eyes. Knobbed and pitted with corruption was her age-old hide, but ever thickened from within with layer on layer of evil growth. The blade scored it with a dreadful gash, but those hideous folds could not be pierced by any strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf should forge the steel or the hand of Beren or of Túrin wield it. She yielded to the stroke, and then heaved up the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head. Poison frothed and bubbled from the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge bulk down on him again. Too soon. For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping his own sword, with both hands he held the elven-blade point upwards, fending off that ghastly roof; and so Shelob, with the driving force of her own cruel will, with strength greater than any warrior's hand, thrust herself upon a bitter spike. Deep, deep it pricked, as Sam was crushed slowly to the ground.

No such anguish had Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in all her long world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor the most savage Orc entrapped, had ever thus endured her, or set blade to her beloved flesh. A shudder went through her. Heaving up again, wrenching away from the pain, she bent her writhing limbs beneath her and sprang backwards in a convulsive leap.

Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses reeling in the foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the mist before his eyes he was aware dimly of Frodo's face and stubbornly he fought to master himself and to drag himself out of the swoon that was upon him. Slowly he raised his head and saw her, only a few paces away, eyeing him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom, and a green ooze trickling from below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed upon the ground, the great bows of her legs quivering, as she gathered herself for another spring-this time to crush and sting to death: no little bite of poison to still the struggling of her meat; this time to slay and then to rend.

Even as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing his death in her eyes, a thought came to him, as if some remote voice had spoken. and he fumbled in his breast with his left hand, and found what he sought: cold and hard and solid it seemed to his touch in a phantom world of horror, the Phial of Galadriel.

'Galadriel! ' he said faintly, and then he heard voices far off but clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved shadows of the Shire, and the music of the Elves as it came through his sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond.

Gilthoniel A Elbereth!

And then his tongue was loosed and his voice cried in a language which he did not know:

A Elbereth Gilthoniel

o menel palan-diriel,

le nallon sí di'nguruthos!

A tiro nin, Fanuilos!

And with that he staggered to his feet and was Samwise the hobbit, Hamfast's son, again.

`Now come, you filth!' he cried. `You've hurt my master, you brute, and you'll pay for it. We're going on; but we'll settle with you first. Come on, and taste it again!'

As if his indomitable spirit had set its potency in motion, the glass blazed suddenly like a white torch in his hand. It flamed like a star that leaping from the firmament sears the dark air with intolerable light. No such terror out of heaven had ever burned in Shelob's face before. The beams of it entered into her wounded head and scored it with unbearable pain, and the dreadful infection of light spread from eye to eye. She fell back beating the air with her forelegs, her sight blasted by inner lightnings, her mind in agony. Then turning her maimed head away, she rolled aside and began to crawl, claw by claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind.

Sam came on. He was reeling like a drunken man, but he came on. And Shelob cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered as she tried to hasten from him. She reached the hole, and squeezing down, leaving a trail of green-yellow slime, she slipped in, even as Sam hewed a last stroke at her dragging legs. Then he fell to the ground.

Shelob was gone; and whether she lay long in her lair, nursing her malice and her misery, and in slow years of darkness healed herself from within, rebuilding her clustered eyes, until with hunger like death she spun once more her dreadful snares in the glens of the Mountains of Shadow, this tale does not tell.

Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening of the Nameless Land fell upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master.

'Master, dear master,' he said, but Frodo did not speak. As he had run forward, eager, rejoicing to be free, Shelob with hideous speed had come behind and with one swift stroke had stung him in the neck. He lay now pale, and heard no voice. and did not move.

`Master, dear master! ' said Sam, and through a long silence waited. listening in vain.

Then as quickly as he could he cut away the binding cords and laid his head upon Frodo's breast and to his mouth, but no stir of life could he find, nor feel the faintest flutter of the heart. Often he chafed his master's hands and feet, and touched his brow, but all were cold.

`Frodo, Mr. Frodo! ' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone! It's your Sam calling. Don't go where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo! O wake up, Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!'

Then anger surged over hint, and he ran about his master's body in a rage, stabbing the air, and smiting the stones, and shouting challenges. Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo's face, pale beneath him in the dusk. And suddenly he saw that he was in the picture that was revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in Lórien: Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Or fast asleep he had thought then. `He's dead! ' he said. 'Not asleep, dead! ' And as he said it, as if the words had set the venom to its work again. it seemed to him that the hue of the face grew livid green.

And then black despair came down on him, and Sam bowed to the ground, and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into his heart, and he knew no more.

When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about him; but for how many minutes or hours the world had gone dragging on he could not tell. He was still in the same place, and still his master lay beside him dead. The mountains had not crumbled nor the earth fallen into ruin.

'What shall I do, what shall I do? ' he said. `Did I come all this way with him for nothing? ' And then he remembered his own voice speaking words that at the time he did not understand himself, at the beginning of their journey: I have something to do before the end. I must see it through, sir, if you understand.

`But what can I do? Not leave Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on the top of the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?' he repeated, and for a moment doubt and fear shook him. `Go on? Is that what I've got to do? And leave him?'

Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body, and folded his cold hands upon his breast, and wrapped his cloak about him; and he laid his own sword at one side, and the staff that Faramir had given at the other.

'If I'm to go on,' he said, `then I must take your sword, by your leave, Mr. Frodo, but I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the old king in the barrow; and you've got your beautiful mithril coat from old Mr. Bilbo. And your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did lend it to me and I'll need it, for I'll be always in the dark now. It's too good for me, and the Lady gave it to you, but maybe she'd understand. Do you understand, Mr. Frodo? I've got to go on.'

But he could not go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could not release it. And time went by and still he knelt, holding his master's hand, and in his heart keeping a debate.

Now he tried to find strength to tear himself away and go on a lonely journey - for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger would bear him down all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him at last: Gollum. Then Gollum would die in a corner. But that was not what he had set out to do. It would not be worth while to leave his master for that. It would not bring him back. Nothing would. They had better both be dead together. And that too would be a lonely journey.

He looked on the bright point of the sword. He thought of the places behind where there was a black brink and an empty fall into nothingness. There was no escape that way. That was to do nothing, not even to grieve. That was not what he had set out to do. 'What am I to do then? ' he cried again, and now he seemed plainly to know the hard answer: see it through. Another lonely journey, and the worst.

`What? Me, alone, go to the Crack of Doom and all? ' He quailed still, but the resolve grew. `What? Me take the Ring from him? The Council gave it to him.'

But the answer came at once: `And the Council gave him companions, so that the errand should not fail. And you are the last of all the Company. The errand must not fail.'

`I wish I wasn't the last,' he groaned. `I wish old Gandalf was hare or somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind? I'm sure to go wrong. And it's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.'

'But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been put forward. And as for not being the right and proper person, why, Mr. Frodo wasn't as you might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn't choose themselves.'

`Ah well, I must make up my own mind. I will make it up. But I'll be sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over.

'Let me see now: if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that Thing's on him, well, the Enemy will get it. And that's the end of all of us, of Lorien, and Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And there s no time to lose, or it'll be the end anyway. The war's begun, and more than likely things are all going the Enemy's way already. No chance to go back with It and get advice or permission. No, it's sit here till they come and kill me over master's body, and gets It: or take It and go.' He drew a deep breath. 'Then take It, it is! '

He stooped. Very gently he undid the clasp at the neck and slipped his hand inside Frodo's tunic; then with his other hand raising the head, he kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over it. And then the head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came over the still face, and by that more than by all other tokens Sam was convinced at last that Frodo had died and laid aside the Quest.

`Good-bye, master, my dear! ' he murmured. 'Forgive your Sam. He'll come back to this spot when the job's done - if he manages it. And then he'll not leave you again. Rest you quiet till I come; and may no foul creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish, I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye! '

And then he bent his own neck and put the chain upon it, and at once his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of the Ring, as if a great stone had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became less, or new strength grew in him, he raised his head, and then with a great effort got to his feet and found that he could walk and bear his burden. And for a moment he lifted up the Phial and looked down at his master, and the light burned gently now with the soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and in that light Frodo's face was fair of hue again, pale but beautiful with an elvish beauty, as of one who has long passed the shadows. And with the bitter comfort of that last sight Sam turned and hid the light and stumbled on into the growing dark.

He had not far to go. The tunnel was some way behind; the Cleft a couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in the dusk` a deep rut worn in ages of passage, running now gently up in a long trough with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came to a long flight of broad shallow steps. Now the orc-tower was right above him, frowning black, and in it the red eye glowed. Now he was hidden in the dark shadow under it. He was coming to the top of the steps and was in the Cleft at last.

'I've made up my mind,' he kept saying to himself. But he had not. Though he had done his best to think it out, what he was doing was altogether against the grain of his nature. `Have I got it wrong? ' he muttered. `What ought I to have done? '

As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the actual summit, before he looked at last on the path descending into the Nameless Land. he turned. For a moment, motionless in intolerable doubt, he looked back. He could still see, like a small blot in the gathering gloom, the mouth of the tunnel; and he thought he could see or guess where Frodo lay. He fancied there was a glimmer on the ground down there, or perhaps it was some trick of his tears, as he peered out at that high stony place where all his life had fallen in ruin.

'If only I could have my wish, my one wish,' he sighed, `to go back and find him! ' Then at last he turned to the road in front and took a few steps: the heaviest and the most reluctant he had ever taken.

Only a few steps; and now only a few more and he would be going down and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly he heard cries and voices. He stood still as stone. Orc-voices. They were behind him and before him. A noise of tramping feet and harsh shouts: Orcs were coming up to the Cleft from the far side, from some entry to the tower, perhaps. Tramping feet and shouts behind. He wheeled round. He saw small red lights, torches, winking away below there as they issued from the tunnel. At last the hunt was up. The red eye of the tower had not been blind. He was caught.

Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was very near. In a minute they would reach the top and be on him. He had taken too long in making up his mind, and now it was no good. How could he escape, or save himself, or save the Ring? The Ring. He was not aware of any thought or decision. He simply found himself drawing out the chain and taking the Ring in his hand. The head of the orc-company appeared in the Cleft right before him. Then he put it on.

The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an hour of thought. At once he was aware that hearing was sharpened while sight was dimmed, but otherwise than in Shelob's lair. All things about him now were not dark but vague; while he himself was there in a grey hazy world, alone, like a small black solid rock and the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was like an orb of hot gold. He did not feel invisible at all, but horribly and uniquely visible; and he knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for him.

He heard the crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul Vale; and down away under the rock the bubbling misery of Shelob, groping, lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the cries of the Orcs as they came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in his ears, the crash of the feet and the rending clamour of the Orcs before him. He shrank against the cliff. But they marched up like a phantom company, grey distorted figures in a mist, only dreams of fear with pale flames in their hands. And they passed him by. He cowered, trying to creep away into some cranny and to hide.

He listened. The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had sighted one another, and both parties were now hurrying and shouting. He heard them both clearly, and he understood what they said. Perhaps the Ring gave understanding of tongues, or simply understanding, especially of the servants of Sauron its maker, so that if he gave heed, he understood and translated the thought to himself. Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in power as it approached the places of its forging; but one thing it did not confer, and that was courage. At present Sam still thought only of hiding, of lying low till all was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He could not tell how near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.

'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already? '

'Orders, you lubber. And what are you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? '

'Orders to you. I'm in command of this pass. So speak civil. What's your report? '

'Nothing.'

`Hai! hai! yoi!' A yell broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The Orcs lower down had suddenly seen something. They began to run. So did the others.

`Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in the road. A spy, a spy! ' There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.

With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood. They had seen his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make the blood run cold. It could not be borne. He sprang up. He flung the Quest and all his decisions away, and fear and doubt with them. He knew now where his place was and had been: at his master's side, though what he could do there was not clear. Back he ran down the steps, down the path towards Frodo.

`How many are there?' he thought. `Thirty or forty from the tower at least, and a lot more than that from down below, I guess. How many can I kill before they get me? They'll see the flame of the sword, as soon as I draw it, and they'll get me sooner or later. I wonder if any song will ever mention it: How Samwise fell in the High Pass and made a wall of bodies round his master. No, no song. Of course not, for the Ring'll be found, and there'll be no more songs. I can't help it. My place is by Mr. Frodo. They must understand that - Elrond and the Council, and the great Lords and Ladies with all their wisdom. Their plans have gone wrong. I can't be their Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.'

But the Orcs were out of his dim sight now. He had had no time to consider himself, but now he realized that he was weary, weary almost to exhaustion: his legs would not carry him as he wished. He was too slow. The path seemed miles long. Where had they all got to in the mist?

There they were again! A good way ahead still. A cluster of figures round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting this way and that, bent like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt.

'Come on, Sam! ' he said, `or you'll be too late again.' He loosened the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then-

There was a wild clamour, hooting and laughing, as something was lifted from the ground. 'Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up! '

Then a voice shouted: `Now off! The quick way. Back to the Undergate! She'll not trouble us tonight by all the signs.' The whole band of orc-figures began to move. Four in the middle were carrying a body high on their shoulders. `Ya hoi! '

They had taken Frodo's body. They were off. He could not catch them up. Still he laboured on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were passing in. Those with the burden went first, and behind them there was a good deal of struggling and jostling. Sam came on. He drew the sword, a flicker of blue in his wavering hand, but they did not see it. Even as he came panting up, the last of them vanished into the black hole.

For a moment he stood, gasping, clutching his breast. Then he drew his sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears. 'Curse the filth! ' he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.

It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if he had stepped out of a thin mist into a heavier fog. His weariness was growing but his will hardened all the more. He thought he could see the light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this tunnel they knew well.; for in spite of Shelob they were forced to use it often as the swiftest way from the Dead City over the mountains. In what far-off time the main tunnel and the great round pit had been made, where Shelob had taken up her abode in ages past. they did not know: but many byways they had themselves delved about in on either side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro on the business of their masters. Tonight they did not intend to go far down. but were hastening to find a side-passage that led back to their watch-tower on the cliff. Must of them were gleeful, delighted with what they had found and seen, and as they ran they gabbled and yammered after the fashion of their kind. Sam heard the noise of their harsh voices, flat and hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices from among all the rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The captains of the two parties seemed to be bringing up the rear, debating as they went.

'Can't you stop your rabble making such a racket, Shagrat? ' grunted the one. `We don't want Shelob on us.'

`Go on, Gorbag! Yours are making more than half the noise,' said the other. `But let the lads play! No need to worry about Shelob for a bit, I reckon. She's sat on a nail, it seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't you see: a nasty mess all the way back to that cursed crack of hers? If we've stopped it once, we've stopped it a hundred times. So let 'em laugh. And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that Lugbúrz wants.'

'Lugbúrz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me, but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that? '

'Don't know till we've had a look.'

'Oho! So they haven't told you what to expect? They don't tell us all they know, do they? Not by half. But they can make mistakes, even the Top Ones can.'

`Sh, Gorbag!' Shagrat's voice was lowered, so that even with his strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just catch what was said. 'They may, but they've got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as not. But there's no doubt about it, they're troubled about something. The Nazgûl down below are, by your account; and Lugbúrz is too. Something nearly slipped.'

`Nearly, you say! ' said Gorbag.

`All right,' said Shagrat, `but we'll talk of that later: Wait till we get to the Under-way. There's a place there where we can talk a bit, while the lads go on.'

Shortly afterwards Sam saw the torches disappear. Then there was a rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as he could guess the Orcs had turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo and he had tried and found blocked. It was still blocked.

There seemed to be a great stone in the way, but the Orcs had got through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other side. They were still running along, deeper and deeper into the mountain, back towards the tower. Sam felt desperate. They were carrying off his master's body for some foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and he threw himself against it, but it did not yield. Then not far inside, or so he thought, he heard the two captains' voices talking again. He stood still listening for a little hoping perhaps to learn something useful. Perhaps Gorbag, who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would come out, and he could then slip in.

`No, I don't know,' said Gorbag's voice. `The messages go through quicker than anything could fly, as a rule. But I don't enquire how it's done. Safest not to. Grr! Those Nazgûl give me the creeps. And they skin the body off you as soon as look at you, and leave you all cold in the dark on the other side. But He likes 'em; they're His favourites nowadays, so it's no use grumbling. I tell you, it's no game serving down in the city.'

`You should try being up here with Shelob for company,' said Shagrat.

'I'd like to try somewhere where there's none of 'em. But the war's on now, and when that's over things may be easier.'

`It's going well, they say.'

'They would.' grunted Gorbag. `We'll see. But anyway, if it does go well, there should be a lot more room. What d'you say? - if we get a chance, you and me'll slip off and set up somewhere on our own with a few trusty lads, somewhere where there's good loot nice and handy, and no big bosses.'

'Ah! ' said Shagrat. `Like old times.'

`Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As I said, the Big Bosses, ay,' his voice sank almost to a whisper, `ay, even the Biggest, can make mistakes. Something nearly slipped you say. I say, something has slipped. And we've got to look out. Always the poor Uruks to put slips right, and small thanks. But don't forget: the enemies don't love us any more than they love Him, and if they get topsides on Him, we're done too. But see here: when were you ordered out? '

`About an hour ago, just before you saw us. A message came: Nazgûl uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to head of Stairs. I came at once.'

'Bad business,' said Gorbag. `See here - our Silent Watchers were uneasy more than two days ago. that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out for another day, nor any message sent to Lugbúrz either: owing to the Great Signal going up, and the High Nazgûl going off to the war, and all that. And then they couldn't get Lugbúrz to pay attention for a good while, I'm told.'

`The Eye was busy elsewhere, I suppose,' said Shagrat. `Big things going on away west, they say.'

'I daresay,' growled Gorbag. `But in the meantime enemies have got up the Stairs. And what were you up to? You're supposed to keep watch, aren't you, special orders or no? What are you for?'

`That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right. We knew there were funny things going on.'

`Very funny! '

`Yes, very funny: lights and shouting and all. But Shelob was on the go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.'

`Her Sneak? What's that? '

`You must have seen him: little thin black fellow; like a spider himself, or perhaps more like a starved frog. He's been here before. Came out of Lugbúrz the first time, years ago, and we had word from High Up to let him pass. He's been up the Stairs once or twice since then, but we've left him alone: seems to have some understanding with Her Ladyship. I suppose he's no good to eat: she wouldn't worry about words from High Up. But a fine guard you keep in the valley: he was up here a day before all this racket. Early last night we saw him. Anyway my lads reported that Her Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good enough for me, until the message came. I thought her Sneak had brought her a toy. or that you'd perhaps sent her a present, a prisoner of war or something. I don't interfere when she's playing. Nothing gets by Shelob when she's on the hunt.'

'Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you I'm not easy in my mind. Whatever came up the Stairs, did get by. It cut her web and got clean out of the hole. That's something to think about! '

`Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she? '

`Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if he was the only one then she'd have had him off to her larder long before, and there he'd be now. And if Lugbúrz wanted him, you'd have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there was more than one.'

At this point Sam began to listen more attentively and pressed his ear against the stone.

'Who cut the cords she'd put round him, Shagrat? Same one as cut the web. Didn't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I reckon. And where is he? Where is he, Shagrat? '

Shagrat made no reply.

`You may well put your thinking cap on, if you've got one. It's no laughing matter. No one, no one has ever stuck a pin in Shelob before, as you should know well enough. There's no grief in that; but think-there's someone loose hereabouts as is more dangerous than any other damned rebel that ever walked since the bad old times, since the Great Siege. Something has slipped.'

`And what is it then? ' growled Shagrat.

`By all the signs, Captain Shagrat, I'd say there's a large warrior loose, Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well maybe: and he's loose in your bounds, too, and you've never spotted him. Very funny indeed! ' Gorbag spat. Sam smiled grimly at this description of himself.

'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy view.' said Shagrat. 'You can read the signs how you like, but there may be other ways to explain them. Anyhow. I've got watchers at every point, and I'm going to deal with one thing at a time. When I've had a look at the fellow we have caught, then I'll begin to worry about something else.'

`It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag. 'He may have had nothing to do with the real mischief. The big fellow with the sharp sword doesn't seem to have thought him worth much anyhow - just left him lying: regular elvish trick.'

`We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go and have a look at the prisoner!

`What are you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first. If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.'

'Now, now,' growled Shagrat. 'I have my orders. And it's more than my belly's worth, or yours, to break 'em. Any trespasser found by the guard is to be held at the tower. Prisoner is to be stripped. Full description of every article, garment, weapon, letter, ring. or trinket is to be sent to Lugbúrz at once, and to Lugbúrz only. And the prisoner is to be kept safe and intact, under pain of death for every member of the guard, until He sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough, and that's what I'm going to do.'

'Stripped, eh? ' said Gorbag. 'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all? '

`No, none of that. He's for Lugbúrz, I tell you. He's wanted safe and whole.'

'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion now. What Lugbúrz will do with such stuff I can't guess. He might as well go in the pot.'

'You fool,' snarled Shagrat. 'You've been talking very clever, but there's a lot you don't know, though most other folk do. You'll be for the pot or for Shelob, if you don't take care. Carrion! Is that all you know of Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords, she's after meat. She doesn't eat dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't dead! '

Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if the whole dark world was turning upside down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware of the comment: 'You fool, he isn't dead, and your heart knew it. Don't trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part of you. The trouble with you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? ' Fur the moment nothing, but to prop himself against the unmoving stone and listen, listen to the vile orc-voices.

`Garn!' said Shagrat. 'She's got more than one poison. When she's hunting, she just gives 'em a dab in the neck and they go as limp as boned fish, and then she has her way with them. D'you remember old Ufthak? We lost him for days. Then we found him in a corner; hanging up he was, but he was wide awake and glaring. How we laughed! She'd forgotten him, maybe, but we didn't touch him-no good interfering with Her. Nar - this little filth, he'll wake up, in a few hours; and beyond feeling a bit sick for a hit, he'll be all right. Or would be, if Lugbúrz would let him alone. And of course, beyond wondering where he is and what's happened to him.'

'And what's going to happen to him,' laughed Gorbag. 'We can tell him a few stories at any rate, if we can't do anything else. I don't suppose he's ever been in lovely Lugbúrz, so he may like to know what to expect. This is going to be more funny than I thought. Let's go!'

`There's going to be no fun, I tell you,' said Shagrat. 'And he's got to be kept safe, or we're all as good as dead.'

`All right! But if I were you, I'd catch the big one that's loose, before you send in any report to Lugbúrz. It won't sound too pretty to say you've caught the kitten and let the cat escape.'

The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was on him. `I got it all wrong! ' he cried. `I knew I would. Now they've got him, the devils! the filth! Never leave your master, never, never: that was my right rule. And I knew it in my heart. May I be forgiven! Now I've got to get back to him. Somehow, somehow! '

He drew his sword again and beat on the stone with the hilt, but it only gave out a dull sound. The sword, however, blazed so brightly now that he could see dimly in its light. To his surprise he noticed that the great block was shaped like a heavy door, and was less than twice his own height. Above it was a dark blank space between the top and the low arch of the opening. It was probably only meant to be a stop against the intrusion of Shelob, fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt beyond the reach of her cunning. With his remaining strength Sam leaped and caught the top, scrambled up, and dropped; and then he ran madly, sword blazing in hand, round a bend and up a winding tunnel.

The news that his master was still alive roused him to a last effort beyond thought of weariness. He could not see anything ahead. for this new passage twisted and turned constantly; but he thought he was catching the two Orcs up: their voices were growing nearer again. Now they seemed quite close.

`That's what I'm going to do,' said Shagrat in angry tones. 'Put him right up in the top chamber.'

`What for? ' growled Gorbag. `Haven't you any lock-ups down below? '

`He's going out of harm's way, I tell you,' answered Shagrat. 'See? He's precious. I don't trust all my lads, and none of yours; nor you neither, when you're mad for fun. He's going where I want him, and where you won't come, if you don't keep civil. Up to the top, I say. He'll be safe there.'

`Will he?' said Sam. 'You're forgetting the great big elvish warrior that's loose!' And with that he raced round the last corner, only to find that by some trick of the tunnel, or of the hearing which the Ring gave him, he had misjudged the distance.

The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could see them now, black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at last, up an incline; and at the end, wide open, were great double doors, leading probably to deep chambers far below the high horn of the tower. Already the Orcs with their burden had passed inside. Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing near the gate.

Sam heard a burst of hoarse singing, blaring of horns and banging of gongs, a hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold.

Sam yelled and brandished Sting, but his little voice was drowned in the tumult. No one heeded him.

The great doors slammed to. Boom. The bars of iron fell into place inside. Clang. The gate was shut. Sam hurled himself against the bolted brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground. He was out in the darkness. Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy.

Here ends the second part of the history of the War of the Ring.



The third part tells of the last defence against the Shadow, and the end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in The Return of the King.
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/




HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY



MANIFESTO



OF TBS



Communist Party



BY

KARL MARX and FREDERICK ENGELS



Authorized English Translation: Edited and
Annotated by Frederick Engels



CHICAGO

CHARLES H. KERR & COMPANY

1906



>oc fZo.li. Z2.<?$



-e^-^h^- .l^.n"^/^ •



<3




PREFACE.

The "Manifesto" was published as the
platform of the "Communist League," a
workingmen's association, first exclusively
German, later on international, and, under
the political conditions of the Continent be-
fore 1848, unavoidably a secret society. At
a Congress of the League, held in London in
November, 1847, Marx and Engels were com-
missioned to prepare for publication a com-
plete theoretical and practical party-pro-
gramme. Drawn up in German, in January,
1848, the manuscript was sent to the printer
in London a few weeks before the French
revolution of February 24th. A French
translation was brought out in Paris, shortly
before the insurrection of June, 1848. The
first English translation, by Miss Helen
Macfarlane, appeared in George Julian Har-
ney's "Bed Republican," London, 1850. A
Danish and a Polish edition had also been
published.

The defeat of the Parisian insurrection of)
June, 1848, — the first great battle between
Proletariat and Bourgeoisie— drove again into
the background, for a time, the social and
political aspirations of the European work-
ing class. Thenceforth the struggle for su-
premacy was again, as it had been before the
revolution of February, solely between dif-
S



4 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

ferent sections of the propertied class; the
working class was reduced to a fight for po-
litical elbow-room, and to the position of ex-
treme wing of the Middle-class Radicals.
Wherever independent proletarian move-
ments continued to show signs of life, they
were ruthlessly hunted down. Thus the
Prussian police hunted out the Central Board
of the Communist League, then located in
Cologne. The members were arrested, and,
after eighteen months' imprisonment, they
were tried in October, 1852. This celebrated
"Cologne Communist trial" lasted from Oc-
tober 4th till November 12th; seven of the
prisoners were sentenced to terms of im-
prisonment in a fortress, varying from three
to six years. Immediately after the sentence
the League was formally dissolved by the
remaining members. As to the "Manifesto,"
it seemed thenceforth to be doomed to obliv-
ion.

When the European working class had re-
covered sufficient strength for another attack
on the ruling classes, the International
Working Men's Association sprang up. But
this association, formed with the express
aim of welding into one body the whole mili-
tant proletariat of Europe and America,
could not at once proclaim the principles laid
down in the "Manifesto." The International
was bound to have a programme broad
enough to be acceptable to the English
Trades' Unions, to the followers of Proudhon
in France, Belgium, Italy, and Spain, and to



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 5

the £a«salleans* in Germany. Marx, who
drew up this programme to the satisfaction
of all parties, entirely trusted to the intel-
lectual development of the working-class,
which was sure to result from combined ac-
tion and mutual discussion. The very events
and vicissitudes of the struggle against
Capital, the defeats even more than the vic-
tories, could not help bringing home to
men's minds the insufficiency of their vari-
ous favourite nostrums, and preparing the
way for a more complete insight into the
true conditions of working-class emancipa-
tion. And Marx was right. The Interna-
tional, on its breaking up in 1874, left the
workers quite different men from what it
had found them in 1864. Froudhonism in
France, Lasalleanism in Germany were dy-
ing out, and even the Conservative English
Trades' Unions, though most of them had
long since severed their connexion with the
International, were gradually advancing to-
wards that point at which, last year at Swan-
sea, their Fresident could say in their name
"Continental Socialism has lost its terrors
for us." In fact: the principles of the "Man-
ifesto" had made considerable headway
among the working men of all countries.

The Manifesto itself thus came to the
front again. The German text had been,

♦Laesalle personally, to us, always acknowledged
himself to be a disciple of Marx, and, as such,
stood on the ground of the "Manifesto." But In
his public agitation, 1860-64, he did not go beyond
demanding co-operative workshops supported by
State credit.



6 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

since 1850, reprinted several times in Switz-
erland, England and America. In 1872, it
was translated into English in New York,
where the translation was published in
"Woodhull and Clafiin's Weekly." From
this English version, a French one was made
in "Le Socialiste" of New York. Since then
at least two more English translations, more
or less mutilated, have been brought out in
America, and one of them has been reprinted
in England. The first Russian translation,
made by Bakounine, was published at Her-
zen's "Kolokol" office in Geneva, about 1863;
a second one, by the heroic Vera Zasulitch,
also in Geneva, 1882. A new Danish edi-
tion is to be found in "Socialdemokratisk
Bibliothek," Copenhagen, 1885; a fresh
French translation in "Le Socialiste,*' Paris,
1886. From this latter a Spanish version
was prepared and published in Madrid, 1886.
The German reprints are not to be counted,
there have been twelve altogether at the
least. An Armenian translation, which was
to be published in Constantinople some
months ago, did not see the light, I am told,
because the publisher was afraid of bringing
out a book with the name of Marx on it,
while the translator declined to call it his
own production. Of further translations into
other languages I have heard, but have not
seen them. Thus the history of the Mani-
festo reflects, to a great extent, the history
of the modern working-class movement; at
present it . is undoubtedly the most wide-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 7

spread, the most international production of
all Socialist Literature, the common plat-
form acknowledged by millions of working
men from Siberia to California.

Yet, when it was written, we could not
have called it a Socialist Manifesto. By
Socialists, in 1847, were understood, on the
one hand, the adherents of the various Uto-
pian systems: Owenites in England, Four-
ierists in France, both of them already re-
duced to the position of mere sects, and
gradually dying out; on the other hand, the
most multifarious social quacks, who, by all
manners of tinkering, professed to redress,
without any danger to capital and profit, all
sorts of social grievances, in both cases men
outside the working class movement, and
looking rather to the "educated" classes for
support. Whatever portion of the working
class had become convinced of the insuf-
ficiency of mere political revolutions, and
had proclaimed the necessity of a total social
change, that portion, then, called itself Com-
munist. It was a crude, rough-hewn, purely
instinctive sort of Communism; still, it
touched the cardinal point and was power-
ful enough amongst the working class to
produce the Utopian Communism, in France,
of Cabet, and in Germany, of Weitling.
Thus, Socialism was, in 1847, a middle-class
movement, Communism a working class
movement. Socialism was, on the Continent
at least, "respectable"; Communism was the
very opposite. And as our notion, from the



8 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

very beginning, was that "the emancipa-
tion of the working class must be the act of
the working class itself/ 9 there could be no
doubt as to which of the two names we must
take. Moreover, we have, ever since, been
far from repudiating it.

The "Manifesto" being our joint produc-
tion, I consider myself bound to state that
the fundamental proposition which forms its
nucleus, belongs to Marx. That proposi-
tion is: that in every historical epoch, the
prevailing mode of economic production and
exchange, and the social organisation neces-
sarily following from it, form the basis upon
which is built up, and from which alone can
be explained, the political and intellectual
history of that epoch; that consequently the
whole history of mankind (since the dissolu-
tion of primitive tribal society, holding land
in common ownership) has been a history of
olass struggles, contests between exploiting
and exploited, ruling and oppressed classes;
that the history of these class struggles forms
a series of evolution in which, now-a-days,
a stage has been reached where the exploited
and oppressed class — the proletariat— cannot
attain its emancipation from the sway of the
exploiting and ruling class — the bourgeoisie
— without, at the same time, and once and
for all, emancipating society at large from
all exploitation, oppression, class-distinc-
tions and class-struggles.

This proposition which, in my opinion, is
destined to do for history what Darwin's



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 9

theory has done for biology, we, both of us,
had been gradually approaching for some
years before 1845. How far I had indepen-
dently progressed towards it, is best shown
by my "Condition of the Working Class in
England."* But when I again met Marx
at Brussels, in spring, 1845, he had it ready
worked out, and put it before me, in terms
almost as clear as those in which I have
stated it here.

From our joint preface to the German edi-
tion of 1872, I quote the following:

"However much the state of things may
have altered during the last 25 years, the
general principles laid down in this Mani-
festo are, on the whole, as correct to-day as
ever. Here and there some detail might be
improved. The practical application of the
principles will depend, as the manifesto it-
self states, everywhere and at all times, on
the historical conditions for the time being
existing, and, for that reason, no special
stress is laid on the revolutionary measures
proposed at the end of Section H. That pas-
sage would, in many respects, be very dif-
ferently worded to-day. In view of the
gigantic strides of Modern Industry since
1848, and of the accompanying improved
and extended organisation of the working-
class, in view of the practical experience
gained, first in the February revolution, and
then, still more, in the Paris Commune,

♦The Condition of the Working Class in England
in 1844. By Frederick Engels. Translated by
Florence K. Wischnewetzky— London, Swan, Son-
nenschein & Co.



10 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

where the proletariat for the first tixnt li«i«
political power for two whole months, this
programme has in some details become
antiquated. One thing especially was proved
by the Commune, viz., that "the work-
ing-class cannot simply lay hold of the
ready-made State machinery, and wield
it for its own purposes. 9 ' (See "The Civil
War in France; Address of the Gen-
eral Council of the International Work-
ing-men's Association," London, Truelove,
1871, p. 15, where this point is further
developed). Further, it is self-evident, that
the criticism of socialist literature is defi-
cient in relation to the present time, because
it comes down only to 1847; also, that the
remarks on the relation of the Communists
to the various opposition-parties (Section
IV.), although in principle still correct, yet
in practice are antiquated, because the po-
litical situation has been entirely changed,
and the progress of history has swept from
off the earth the greater portion of the po-
litical parties there enumerated.

But then, the Manifesto has become a his-
torical document which we have no longer
any right to alter."

The present translation is by Mr. Samuel
Moore, the translator of the greater portion
of Marx's "Capital." We have revised it in
common, and I have added a few notes ex-
planatory of historical allusions.

Frederick Engels.

London, 80th January, 1888.



Manifesto of the Communist Party.

BY

KARL MARX and FREDERICK ENCELS.



A SPECTRE is haunting Europe — the spec-
tre of Communism. All the Powers of old
Europe have entered into a holy alliance to
exorcise this spectre; Pope and Czar, Metter-
nich and Guizot, French Radicals and Ger-
man police-spies.

Where is the party in opposition that has
not been decried as communistic by its op-
ponents in power P Where the Opposition
that has not hurled back the branding re-
proach of Communism, against the more ad-
vanced opposition parties, as well as against
its re-actionary adversaries?

Two things result from this fact.

I. Communism is already acknowledged
by all European Powers to be itself a Power.

II. It is high time that Communists
should openly, in the face of the whole
world, publish their views, their aims, their
tendencies, and meet this nursery tale of the
Spectre of Communism with a Manifesto of
the party itself.

To this end, Communists of various nation-
alities have assembled in London, and
11



12 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

sketched the following manifesto, to be pub-
lished in the English, French, German,
Italian, Flemish and Danish languages.



BOTTBOEOIS AND PROLETARIANS.*

The history of all hitherto existing so-
cietyt is the history of class struggles.

Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian,
lord and serf, guild-master t and journey-
man, in a word, oppressor and oppressed,
stood in constant opposition to one another,
carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden,
now open fight, a fight that each time ended,

•By bourgeoisie Is meant the class of modern
Capitalists, owners of the means of social produc-
tion and employers of wage-labour. By prole-
tariat, the class of modern wage-labourers who,
having no means of production of their own, are
reduced to selling their labour-power in order to
live.

tThat is, all written history. In 1847, the pre-
history of society, the social organization existing
Erevlous to recorded history, was all but un-
nown. Since then, Haxthausen discovered com-
mon ownership of land in Russia, Maurer proved
it to be the social foundation from which all
Teutonic races started in history* and by and bye
village communities were found to be, or to have
been, the primitive form of society everywhere
from India to Ireland. The inner organization of
this primitive Communistic society was laid bare,
in its typical form, by Morgan's crowning dis-
covery of the true nature of the gens and its
relation to the tribe. With the dissolution of these
primaeval communities society begins to be dif-
ferentiated into separate and finally antagonistic
classes. I have attempted to retrace this process
of dissolution in: "Der Uraprung der Familie dea,
Privateigenthums und des Staats," 2nd edit.,
Stuttgart 1886.

X Guild-master, that is a full member of a guild,
a master within, not a head of. a guild.



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 13

either in a revolutionary re-constitution of
society at large, or in the common ruin of
the contending classes.

In the earlier epochs of history, we find
almost everywhere a complicated arrange-
ment of society into various orders, a mani-
fold gradation of social rank. In ancient
Home we have patricians, knights, plebeians,
slaves; in the middle ages, feudal lords, vas-
sals, guild-masters, Journeymen, apprentices,
serfs; in almost all of these classes, again,
subordinate gradations.

The modern bourgeois society that has
sprouted from the ruins of feudal society,
has not done away with class antagonisms.
It has but established new classes, new con-
ditions of oppression, new forms of struggle
in place of the old ones.

Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie,
possesses, however, this distinctive feature;
it has simplified the class antagonisms. So-
ciety as a whole is more and more splitting
up into two great hostile camps, into two
great classes directly facing each other:
Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.

From the serfs of the middle ages sprang
the chartered burghers of the earliest towns.
From these burgesses the first elements of
the bourgeoisie were developed.

The discovery of America, the rounding of
the Cape, opened up fresh ground for the
rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chi-
nese markets, the colonisation of America,
trade with the colonies, the increase in the



14 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

means of exchange and in commodities gen-
erally, gave to commerce, to navigation, to
industry, an impulse never before known,
and thereby, to the revolutionary element in
the tottering feudal society, a rapid develop-
ment.

The feudal system of industry, under
which industrial production was monopolised
by close guilds, now no longer sufficed for
the growing wants of the new markets. The
manufacturing system took its place. The
guild-masters were pushed on one side by
the manufacturing middle-class; division of
labour between the different corporate guilds
vanished in the face of division of labour
in each single workshop.

Meantime the markets kept ever growing,
the demand, ever rising. Even manufacture
no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and
machinery revolutionised industrial produc-
tion. The place of manufacture was taken
by the giant, Modern Industry, the place of
the industrial middle-class, by industrial
millionaires, the leaders of whole industrial
armies, the modern bourgeois.

Modern industry has established the
world-market, for which the discovery of
America paved the way. This market has
given an immense development to commerce,
to navigation, to communication by land.
This development has, in its turn, reacted on
the extension of industry; and in proportion
as industry, commerce, navigation, railways
extended, in the same proportion the hour-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 15

geoisie developed, increased its capital, and
pushed into the background every class
handed down from the Middle Ages.

We see, therefore, how the modern bour-
geoisie is itself the product of a long course
of development, of a series of revolutions in
the modes of production and of exchange.

Each step in the development of the bour-
geoisie was accompanied by a corresponding
political advance of that class. An op-
pressed class under the sway of the feudal
nobility, an armed and self-governing asso-
ciation in the mediaeval commune, * here in-
dependent urban republic (as in Italy and
Germany), there taxable "third estate" of
the monarchy (as in France), afterwards, in
the period of manufacture proper, serving
either the semi-feudal or the absolute mon-
archy as a counterpoise against the nobility,
and, in fact, corner stone of the great mon-
archies in general, the bourgeoisie has at
last, since the establishment of Modern In-
dustry and of the world-market, conquered
for itself, in the modern representative State,
exclusive political sway. The executive of
the modern State is but a committee for
managing the common affairs of the whole
bourgeoisie.

♦"Commune" was the name taken, in France, by
the nascent towns even before they had conquered
from their feudal lords and masters, local self-
government and political rights as "the Third
Estate." Generally speaking, for the economical
development of the bourgeoisie, England is here
taken as the typical country, for its political de-
velopment, France.



16 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a
most revolutionary part.
' The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the
upper hand, has put an end to all feudal,
patriarchal, idyllic relations. It has piti-
lessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties
that bound man to his "natural superiors,"
and has left remaining no other nexus be-
tween man and man than naked self-inter-
est, than callous "cash payment." It has
drowned the most heavenly ecstaciea of re-
ligious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of
Philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water
of egotistical calculation. It has resolved
personal worth into exchange value, and in
place of the numberless indefeasible char-
tered freedoms, has set up that single, un-
conscionable freedom — Free Trade. In one
word, for exploitation, veiled by religious
and political illusions, it has substituted
naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.

The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halt
every occupation hitherto honoured a
looked up to with reverent awe. It has con-
verted the physician, the lawyer, the priest,
the poet, the man of science, into its paid
wage-labourers.

Number of persons of

all ages employed

in the respective

industries.


Industries compared
as regards health.


Death-rate per 100,000 men

in the respective industries

between the stated ages


Age 25-35.


Age 35- 45.


Age 45-55.


958,265


Agriculture in
England & Wales


743


805


1,145


22,301 men
12,379 women


London tailors


958


1,262


2,093


13,803


London printers


894


1,747


2,367



D. Modern Domestic Industry

I now come to the so-called domestic industry. In order to get an idea of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital conducts its exploitation in
the background of modern mechanical industry, one must go to the apparently quite idyllic trade of nail-making, [1791 carried on in a few remote
villages of England. In this place, however, it will be enough to give a few examples from those branches of the lace-making and straw-plaiting
industries that are not yet carried on by the aid of machinery, and that as yet do not compete with branches carried on in factories or in
manufactories.

Of the 150,000 persons employed in England in the production of lace, about 10,000 fall under the authority of the Factory Act, 1861. Almost
the whole of the remaining 140,000 are women, young persons, and children of both sexes, the male sex, however, being weakly represented.
The state of health of this cheap material for exploitation will be seen from the following table, computed by Dr. Trueman, physician to the
Nottingham General Dispensary. Out of 686 female patients who were lace-makers, most of them between the ages of 17 and 24, the number of
consumptive ones were:



1852.


- 1


in


45


1857.


- 1


in


13.




1853.


- 1


in


28


1858.


- 1


in


15.




1854.


- 1


in


17


1859.


- 1


in


9.




1855.


- 1


in


18


1860.


- 1


in


8.




1856.


- 1


in


15


1861.


- 1


in


8.


[1801



This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for the most optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker of lies among the
Free-trade bagmen of Germany.

The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the lace, so far as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in England. The branches
that we are now about to examine, solely with regard to those of the workpeople who work at home, and not those who work in manufactories or
warehouses, fall into two divisions, viz. (1), finishing; (2), mending. The former gives the finishing touches to the machine-made lace, and
includes numerous sub-divisions.

The lace finishing is done either in what are called "mistresses' houses," or by women in their own houses, with or without the help of their
children. The women who keep the "mistresses' houses" are themselves poor. The workroom is in a private house. The mistresses take orders
from manufacturers, or from warehousemen, and employ as many women, girls, and young children as the size of their rooms and the fluctuating
demand of the business will allow. The number of the workwomen employed in these workrooms varies from 20 to 40 in some, and from 10 to
20 in others. The average age at which the children commence work is six years, but in many cases it is below five. The usual working-hours are
from 8 in the morning till eight in the evening, with 1 1/2 hours for meals, which are taken at irregular intervals, and often in the foul
workrooms. When business is brisk, the labour frequently lasts from 8 or even 6 o'clock in the morning till 10, 11, or 12 o'clock at night. In



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (27 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

English barracks the regulation space allotted to each soldier is 500-600 cubic feet, and in the military hospitals 1,200 cubic feet. But in those
finishing sties there are but 67 to 100 cubic feet to each person. At the same time the oxygen of the air is consumed by gas-lights. In order to
keep the lace clean, and although the floor is tiled or gagged, the children are often compelled, even in winter, to pull off their shoes. "It is not at
all uncommon in Nottingham to find 14 to 20 children huddled together in a small room, of, perhaps, not more than 12 feet square, and
employed for 15 hours out of the 24, at work that of itself is exhausting, from its weariness and monotony, and is besides carried on under every
possible unwholesome condition.... Even the very youngest children work with a strained attention and a rapidity that is astonishing, hardly ever
giving their fingers rest or glowering their motion. If a question be asked them, they never raise their eyes from their work from fear of losing a
single moment." The "long stick" is used by the mistresses as a stimulant more and more as the workinghours are prolonged. "The children
gradually tire and become as restless as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupation that is monotonous, eye-straining, and
exhausting from the uniformity in the posture of the body. Their work is like slavery." [181] When women and their children work at home,
which now-a-days means in a hired room, often in a garret, the state of things is, if possible, still worse. This sort of work is given out within a
circle of 80 miles radius from Nottingham. On leaving the warehouses at 9 or 10 o'clock at night, the children are often given a bundle of lace to
take home with them and finish. The Pharisee of a capitalist represented by one of his servants, accompanies this action, of course, with the
unctuous phrase: "That's for mother," yet he knows well enough that the poor children must sit up and help. [1821

Pillow lace-making is chiefly carried on in England in two agricultural districts; one, the Honiton lace district, extending from 20 to 30 miles
along the south coast of Devonshire, and including a few places in North Devon; the other comprising a great part of the counties of
Buckingham, Bedford, and Northampton, and also the adjoining portions of Oxfordshire and Huntingdonshire. The cottages of the agricultural
labourers are the places where the work is usually carried on. Many manufacturers employ upwards of 3,000 of these lace-makers, who are
chiefly children and young persons of the female sex exclusively. The state of things described as incidental to lace finishing is here repeated,
save that instead of the "mistresses' houses," we find what are called "lace-schools," kept by poor women in their cottages. From their fifth year
and often earlier, until their twelfth or fifteenth year, the children work in these schools; during the first year the very young ones work from four
to eight hours, and later on, from six in the morning till eight and ten o'clock at night. "The rooms are generally the ordinary living rooms of
small cottages, the chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates kept warm by their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in
winter. In other cases, these so-called school-rooms are like small store-rooms without fire-places.... The over-crowding in these dens and the
consequent vitiation of the air are often extreme. Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, privies, decomposing substances, and other filth
usual in the purlieus of the smaller cottages." With regard to space: "In one lace-school 18 girls and a mistress, 35 cubic feet to each person; in
another, where the smell was unbearable, 18 persons and 24 1/2 cubic feet per head. In this industry are to be found employed children of 2 and
2 1/2 years." [183]

Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and Bedford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part of Hertfordshire and
the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. In 1861, there were 40,043 persons employed in straw-plaiting and straw-hat making; of these 3,815
were males of all ages, the rest females, of whom 14,913, including about 7,000 children, were under 20 years of age. In the place of the
lace-schools we find here the "straw-plait schools." The children commence their instruction in straw-plaiting generally in their 4th, often
between their 3rd and 4th year. Education, of course, they get none. The children themselves call the elementary schools, "natural schools," to
distinguish them from these blood-sucking institutions, in which they are kept at work simply to get through the task, generally 30 yards daily,
prescribed by their half-starved mothers. These same mothers often make them work at home, after school is over, till 10, 1 1, and 12 o'clock at
night. The straw cuts their mouths, with which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers. Dr. Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the
whole body of medical officers in London, that 300 cubic feet is the minimum space proper for each person in a bedroom or workroom. But in
the straw-plait schools space is more sparingly allotted than in the lace-schools, " 12 2/3, 17, 18 1/2 and below 22 cubic feet for each person."
The smaller of these numbers, says one of the commissioners, Mr. White, represents less space than the half of what a child would occupy if
packed in a box measuring 3 feet in each direction. Thus do the children enjoy life till the age of 12 or 14. The wretched half-starved parents
think of nothing but getting as much as possible out of their children. The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not care a farthing, and
naturally so, for their parents, and leave them. "It is no wonder that ignorance and vice abound in a population so brought up.... Their morality is
at the lowest ebb,... a great number of the women have illegitimate children, and that at such an immature age that even those most conversant
with criminal statistics are astounded." [1841 And the native land of these model families is the pattern Christian country for Europe; so says at
least Count Montalembert, certainly a competent authority on Christianity!

Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (the maximum wages of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in rare cases to 3 shillings),
are reduced far below their nominal amount by the prevalence of the truck system everywhere, but especially in the lace districts. [1851



E. Passage of Modern Manufacture, an Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. The Hastening of This Revolution by the
Application of the Factory Acts to those Industries

The cheapening of labour-power, by sheer abuse of the labour of women and children, by sheer robbery of every normal condition requisite for
working and living, and by the sheer brutality of overwork and night-work, meets at last with natural obstacles that cannot be overstepped. So
also, when based on these methods, do the cheapening of commodities and capitalist exploitation in general. So soon as this point is at last
reached — and it takes many years — the hour has struck for the introduction of machinery, and for the thenceforth rapid conversion of the
scattered domestic industries and also of manufactures into factory industries.

An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is afforded by the production of wearing apparel. This industry, according to the
classification of the Children's Employment Commission, comprises straw-hat makers, ladies'-hat makers, cap-makers, tailors, milliners and
dressmakers, shirt-makers, corset-makers, glove-makers, shoemakers, besides many minor branches, such as the making of neck-ties, collars,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (28 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

&c. In 1861, the number of females employed in these industries, in England and Wales, amounted to 586,299, of these 1 15,242 at the least were
under 20, and 16,650. under 15 years of age. The number of these workwomen in the United Kingdom in 1861, was 750,334. The number of
males employed in England and Wales, in hat-making, shoemaking, glove-making and tailoring was 437,969; of these 14,964 under 15 years,
89,285 between 15 and 20, and 333,117 over 20 years. Many of the smaller branches are not included in these figures. But take the figures as
they stand; we then have for England and Wales alone, according to the census of 1861, a total of 1,024,277 persons, about as many as are
absorbed by agriculture and cattle breeding. We begin to understand what becomes of the immense quantities of goods conjured up by the magic
of machinery, and of the enormous masses of workpeople, which that machinery sets free.

The production of wearing apparel is carried on partly in manufactories in whose workrooms there is but a reproduction of that division of
labour, the membra disjecta of which were found ready to hand; partly by small master-handicraftsmen; these, however, do not, as formerly,
work for individual consumers, but for manufactories and warehouses, and to such an extent that often whole towns and stretches of country
carry on certain branches, such as shoemaking, as a speciality; finally, on a very great scale by the so-called domestic workers, who form an
external department of the manufactories, warehouses, and even of the workshops of the smaller masters. [1861

The raw material, &c, is supplied by mechanical industry, the mass of cheap human material (taillable a merci et misericorde) is composed of
the individuals "liberated" by mechanical industry and improved agriculture. The manufactures of this class owed their origin chiefly to the
capitalist's need of having at hand an army ready equipped to meet any increase of demand. [187] These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the
scattered handicrafts and domestic industries to continue to exist as a broad foundation. The great production of surplus- value in these branches
of labour, and the progressive cheapening of their articles, were and are chiefly due to the minimum wages paid, no more than requisite for a
miserable vegetation, and to the extension of working-time up to the maximum endurable by the human organism. It was in fact by the
cheapness of the human sweat and the human blood, which were converted into commodities, that the markets were constantly being extended,
and continue daily to be extended; more especially was this the case with England's colonial markets, where, besides, English tastes and habits
prevail. At last the critical point was reached. The basis of the old method, sheer brutality in the exploitation of the workpeople, accompanied
more or less by a systematic division of labour, no longer sufficed for the extending markets and for the still more rapidly extending competition
of the capitalists. The hour struck for the advent of machinery. The decisively revolutionary machine, the machine which attacks in an equal
degree the whole of the numberless branches of this sphere of production, dressmaking, tailoring, shoemaking, sewing, hat-making, and many
others, is the sewing-machine.

Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all machinery, which, since the rise of modern industry, has seized upon new branches of
trade. Children of too tender an age are sent adrift. The wage of the machine hands rises compared with that of the house-workers, many of
whom belong to the poorest of the poor. That of the better situated handicraftsman, with whom the machine competes, sinks. The new machine
hands are exclusively girls and young women. With the help of mechanical force, they destroy the monopoly that male labour had of the heavier
work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of old women and very young children. The overpowering competition crushes the
weakest of the manual labourers. The fearful increase in death from starvation during the last 10 years in London runs parallel with the extension
of machine sewing. IT881 The new workwomen turn the machines by hand and foot, or by hand alone, sometimes sitting, sometimes standing,
according to the weight, size, and special make of the machine, and expend a great deal of labour-power. Their occupation is unwholesome,
owing to the long hours, although in most cases they are not so long as under the old system. Wherever the sewing-machine locates itself in
narrow and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds to the unwholesome influences. "The effect," says Mr. Lord, "on entering low-ceiled
workrooms in which 30 to 40 machine hands are working is unbearable.... The heat, partly due to the gas stoves used for warming the irons, is
horrible.... Even when moderate hours of work, i.e., from 8 in the morning till 6 in the evening, prevail in such places, yet 3 or 4 persons fall into
a swoon regularly every day." [189]

The revolution in the industrial methods which is the necessary result of the revolution in the instruments of production, is effected by a medley
of transition forms. These forms vary according to the extent to which the sewing-machine has become prevalent in one branch, of industry or
the other, to the time during which it has been in operation, to the previous condition of the workpeople, to the preponderance of manufacture, of
handicrafts or of domestic industry, to the rent of the workrooms, [1901 &c. In dressmaking, for instance, where the labour for the most part was
already organised, chiefly by simple co-operation, the sewing-machine at first formed merely a new factor in that manufacturing industry. In
tailoring, shirtmaking, shoemaking, &c, all the forms are intermingled. Here the factory system proper. There middlemen receive the raw
material from the capitalist en chef, and group around their sewing-machines, in "chambers" and "garrets," from 10 to 50 or more workwomen.
Finally, as is always the case with machinery when not organised into a system, and when it can also be used in dwarfish proportions,
handicraftsman and domestic workers, along with their families, or with a little extra labour from without, make use of their own
sewing-machines. [1911 The system actually prevalent in England is, that the capitalist concentrates a large number of machines on his premises,
and then distributes the produce of those machines for further manipulation amongst the domestic workers. [1921 The variety of the transition
forms, however, does not conceal the tendency to conversion into the factory system proper. This tendency is nurtured by the very nature of the
sewing-machine, the manifold uses of which push on the concentration, under one roof, and one management, of previously separated branches
of a trade. It is also favoured by the circumstance that preparatory needlework, and certain other operations, are most conveniently done on the
premises where the machine is at work; as well as by the inevitable expropriation of the hand sewers, and of the domestic workers who work
with their own machines. This fate has already in part overtaken them. The constantly increasing amount of capital invested in sewing-machines,
[1931 gives the spur to the production of, and gluts the markets with, machine-made articles, thereby giving the signal to the domestic workers
for the sale of their machines. The overproduction of sewing-machines themselves, causes their producers, in bad want of a sale, to let them out
for so much a week, thus crushing by their deadly competition the small owners of machines. [1941 Constant changes in the construction of the
machines, and their ever-increasing cheapness, depreciate day by day the older makes, and allow of their being sold in great numbers, at absurd
prices, to large capitalists, who alone can thus employ them at a profit. Finally, the substitution of the steam-engine for man gives in this, as in all

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (29 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:06]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

similar revolutions, the finishing blow. At first, the use of steam power meets with mere technical difficulties, such as unsteadiness in the
machines, difficulty in controlling their speed, rapid wear and tear of the lighter machines, &c, all of which are soon overcome by experience.
[1951 If, on the one hand, the concentration of many machines in large manufactories leads to the use of steam power, on the other hand, the
competition of steam with human muscles hastens on the concentration of workpeople and machines in large factories. Thus England is at
present experiencing, not only in the colossal industry of making wearing apparel, but in most of the other trades mentioned above, the
conversion of manufacture, of handicrafts, and of domestic work into the factory system, after each of those forms of production, totally changed
and disorganised, under the Influence of modern industry, has long ago reproduced, and even overdone, all the horrors of the factory system,
without participating in any of the elements of social progress it contains. [1961

This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, is artificially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts to all industries in which
women, young persons and children are employed. The compulsory regulation of the working-day as regards its length, pauses, beginning and
end, the system of relays of children, the exclusion of all children under a certain age, &c, necessitate on the one hand more machinery [1971
and the substitution of steam as a motive power in the place of muscles. [1981 On the other hand, in order to make up for the loss of time, an
expansion occurs of the means of production used in common, of the furnaces, buildings, &c, in one word, greater concentration of the means of
production and a correspondingly greater concourse of workpeople. The chief objection, repeatedly and passionately urged on behalf of each
manufacture threatened with the Factory Act, is in fact this, that in order to continue the business on the old scale a greater outlay of capital will
be necessary. But as regards labour in the so-called domestic industries and the intermediate forms between them and Manufacture, so soon as
limits are put to the working-day and to the employment of children, those industries go to the wall. Unlimited exploitation of cheap
labour-power is the sole foundation of their power to compete.

One of the essential conditions for the existence of the factory system, especially when the length of the working-day is fixed, is certainty in the
result, i.e., the production in a given time of a given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful effect. The statutory pauses in the
working-day, moreover, imply the assumption that periodical and sudden cessation of the work does no harm to the article undergoing the
process of production. This certainty in the result, and this possibility of interrupting the work are, of course, easier to be attained in the purely
mechanical industries than in those in which chemical and physical processes play a part; as, for instance, in the earthenware trade, in bleaching,
dyeing, baking, and in most of the metal industries. Wherever there is a workingday without restriction as to length, wherever there is night-work
and unrestricted waste of human life, there the slightest obstacle presented by the nature of the work to a change for the better is soon looked
upon as an everlasting barrier erected by Nature. No poison kills vermin with more certainty than the Factory Act removes such everlasting
barriers. No one made a greater outcry over "impossibilities" than our friends the earthenware manufacturers. In 1864, however, they were
brought under the Act, and within sixteen months every "impossibility" had vanished. "The improved method," called forth by the Act, "of
making slip by pressure instead of by evaporation, the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware in its green state, &c, are each events of
great importance in the pottery art, and mark an advance which the preceding century could not rival.... It has even considerably reduced the
temperature of the stoves themselves with a considerable saving of fuel, and with a readier effect on the ware." [1991 In spite of every prophecy,
the cost-price of earthenware did not rise, but the quantity produced did, and to such an extent that the export for the twelve months, ending
December, 1865, exceeded in value by £138,628 the average of the preceding three years. In the manufacture of matches it was thought to be an
indispensable requirement, that boys, even while bolting their dinner, should go on dipping the matches in melted phosphorus, the poisonous
vapour from which rose into their faces. The Factory Act (1864) made the saving of time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping
machine, the vapour from which could not come in contact with the workers. [2001 So, at the present time, in those branches of the
lace manufacture not yet subject to the Factory Act, it is maintained that the meal-times cannot be regular owing to the different periods required
by the various kinds of lace for drying, which periods vary from three minutes up to an hour and more. To this the Children's Employment
Commissioners answer: "The circumstances of this case are precisely analogous to that of the paper-stainers, dealt with in our first report. Some
of the principal manufacturers in the trade urged that in consequence of the nature of the materials used, and their various processes, they would
be unable, without serious loss, to stop for meal-times at any given moment. But it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous
arrangement, the apprehended difficulty would be got over; and accordingly, by clause 6 of section 6 of the Factory Acts Extension Act, passed
during this Session of Parliament, an interval of eighteen months is given to them from the passing of the Act before they are required to
conform to the meal hours, specified by the Factory Acts." [2011 Hardly had the Act been passed when our friends the manufacturers found out:
"The inconveniences we expected to arise from the introduction of the Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have not
arisen. We do not find the production at all interfered with; in short, we produce more in the same time." [2021 It is evident that the English
legislature, which certainly no one will venture to reproach with being overdosed with genius, has been led by experience to the conclusion that a
simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away all the so-called impediments, opposed by the nature of the process, to the restriction and
regulation of the working-day. Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given industry, a period varying from six to eighteen months
is fixed within which it is incumbent on the manufacturers to remove all technical impediments to the working of the Act. Mirabeau's
"Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce bete de mot!" is particularly applicable to modern technology. But though the Factory Acts thus artificially
ripen the material elements necessary for the conversion of the manufacturing system into the factory system, yet at the same time, owing to the
necessity they impose for greater outlay of capital, they hasten on the decline of the small masters, and the concentration of capital. [2031

Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable by technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople themselves obstruct the
regulation of the hours of labour. This is especially the case where piece- wage predominates, and where loss of time in one part of the day or
week can be made good by subsequent over-time, or by night-work, a process which brutalises the adult workman, and ruins his wife and
children. [2041 Although this absence of regularity in the expenditure of labour-power is a natural and rude reaction against the tedium of
monotonous drudgery, it originates, also, to a much greater degree from anarchy in production, anarchy that in its turn pre-supposes unbridled
exploitation of labour-power by the capitalist. Besides the general periodic changes of the industrial cycle, and the special fluctuations in the
markets to which each industry is subject, we may also reckon what is called "the season," dependent either on the periodicity of favourable

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (30 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

seasons of the year for navigation; or on fashion, and the sudden placing of large orders that have to be executed in the shortest possible time.
The habit of giving such orders becomes more frequent with the extension of railways and telegraphs. "The extension of the railway system
throughout the country has tended very much to encourage giving short notice. Purchasers now come up from Glasgow, Manchester, and
Edinburgh once every fortnight or so to the wholesale city warehouses which we supply, and give small orders requiring immediate execution,
instead of buying from stock as they used to do. Years ago we were always able to work in the slack times, so as to meet demand of the next
season, but now no one can say beforehand what will be the demand then." [2051

In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject to the Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails periodically during what is
called the season, in consequence of sudden orders. In the outside department of the factory, of the manufactory, and of the warehouse, the
so-called domestic workers, whose employment is at the best irregular, are entirely dependent for their raw material and their orders on the
caprice of the capitalist, who, in this industry, is not hampered by any regard for depreciation of his buildings and machinery, and risks nothing
by a stoppage of work, but the skin of the worker himself. Here then he sets himself systematically to work to form an industrial reserve force
that shall be ready at a moment's notice; during one part of the year he decimates this force by the most inhuman toil, during the other part, he
lets it starve for want of work. "The employers avail themselves of the habitual irregularity in the homework, when any extra work is wanted at a
push, so that the work goes on till 11, and 12 p.m. or 2 a.m., or as the usual phrase is, "all hours," and that in localities where "the stench is
enough to knock you down, you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but shudder to go further." [2061 "They are curious men," said one of the
witnesses, a shoemaker, speaking of the masters, "they think it does a boy no harm to work too hard for half the year, if he is nearly idle for the
other half." [2071

In the same way as technical impediments, so, too, those "usages which have grown with the growth of trade" were and still are proclaimed by
interested capitalists as obstacles due to the nature of the work. This was a favourite cry of the cotton lords at the time they were first threatened
with the Factory Acts. Although their industry more than any other depends on navigation, yet experience has given them the lie. Since then,
every pretended obstruction to business has been treated by the Factory inspectors as a mere sham. [2081 The thoroughly conscientious
investigations of the Children's Employment Commission prove that the effect of the regulation of the hours of work, in some industries, was to
spread the mass of labour previously employed more evenly over the whole year [208al that this regulation was the first rational bridle on the
murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion, [208bl caprices that consort so badly with the system of modern industry; that the development of
ocean navigation and of the means of communication generally, has swept away the technical basis on which season-work was really supported,
[2091 and that all other so-called unconquerable difficulties vanish before larger buildings, additional machinery, increase in the number of
workpeople employed, [2101 and the alterations caused by all these in the mode of conducting the wholesale trade. [2111 But for all that, capital
never becomes reconciled to such changes — and this is admitted over and over again by its own representatives — except "under the pressure
of a General Act of Parliament" [2121 for the compulsory regulation of the hours of labour.



SECTION 9

THE FACTORY ACTS. SANITARY AND EDUCATIONAL CLAUSES OF THE SAME. THEIR GENERAL EXTENSION IN
ENGLAND



Factory legislation, that first conscious and methodical reaction of society against the spontaneously developed form of the process of
production, is, as we have seen, just as much the necessary product of modern industry as cotton yam, self-actors, and the electric telegraph.
Before passing to the consideration of the extension of that legislation in England, we shall shortly notice certain clauses contained in the Factory
Acts, and not relating to the hours of work.

Apart from their wording, which makes it easy for the capitalist to evade them, the sanitary clauses are extremely meagre, and, in fact, limited to
provisions for whitewashing the walls, for insuring cleanliness in some other matters, for ventilation, and for protection against dangerous
machinery. In the third book we shall return again to the fanatical opposition of the masters to those clauses which imposed upon them a slight
expenditure on appliances for protecting the limbs of their workpeople, an opposition that throws a fresh and glaring light on the Free-trade
dogma, according to which, in a society with conflicting interests, each individual necessarily furthers the common weal by seeking nothing but
his own personal advantage! One example is enough. The reader knows that during the last 20 years, the flax industry has very much extended,
and that, with that extension, the number of scutching mills in Ireland has increased. In 1864 there were in that country 1,800 of these mills.
Regularly in autumn and winter women and "young persons," the wives, sons, and daughters of the neighbouring small farmers, a class of people
totally unaccustomed to machinery, are taken from field labour to feed the rollers of the scotching mills with flax. The accidents, both as regards
number and kind, are wholly unexampled in the history of machinery. In one scotching mill, at Kildinan, near Cork, there occurred between
1852 and 1856, six fatal accidents and sixty mutilations; every one of which might have been prevented by the simplest appliances, at the cost of
a few shillings. Dr. W. White, the certifying surgeon for factories at Downpatrick, states in his official report, dated the 15th December, 1865:
"The serious accidents at the scotching mills are of the most fearful nature. In many cases a quarter of the body is torn from the trunk, and either
involves death, or a future of wretched incapacity and suffering. The increase of mills in the country will, of course, extend these dreadful
results, and it will be a great boon if they are brought under the legislature. I am convinced that by proper supervision of scutching mills a vast

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (31 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
sacrifice of life and limb would be averted." [2131

What could possibly show better the character of the capitalist mode of production, than the necessity that exists for forcing upon it, by Acts of
Parliament, the simplest appliances for maintaining cleanliness and health? In the potteries the Factory Act of 1864 "has whitewashed and
cleansed upwards of 200 workshops, after a period of abstinence from any such cleaning, in many cases of 20 years, and in some, entirely," (this
is the "abstinence" of the capitalist!) "in which were employed 27,800 artisans, hitherto breathing through protracted days and often nights of
labour, a mephitic atmosphere, and which rendered an otherwise comparatively innocuous occupation, pregnant with disease and death. The Act
has improved the ventilation very much." [2141 At the same time, this portion of the Act strikingly shows that the capitalist mode of production,
owing to its very nature, excludes all rational improvement beyond a certain point. It has been stated over and over again that the English doctors
are unanimous in declaring that where the work is continuous, 500 cubic feet is the very least space that should be allowed for each person. Now,
if the Factory Acts, owing to their compulsory provisions, indirectly hasten on the conversion of small workshops into factories, thus indirectly
attacking the proprietary rights of the smaller capitalists, and assuring a monopoly to the great ones, so, if it were made obligatory to provide the
proper space for each workman in every workshop, thousands of small employers would, at one full swoop, be expropriated directly ! The very
root of the capitalist mode of production, i.e., the self-expansion of all capital, large or small, by means of the "free" purchase and consumption
of labour-power, would be attacked. Factory legislation is therefore brought to a deadlock before these 500 cubic feet of breathing space. The
sanitary officers, the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all harp, over and over again, upon the necessity for those 500
cubic feet, and upon the impossibility of wringing them out of capital. They thus, in fact, declare that consumption and other lung diseases
among the workpeople are necessary conditions to the existence of capital. [2151

Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the whole, yet they proclaim elementary education to be an indispensable condition to the
employment of children. [2161 The success of those clauses proved for the first time the possibility of combining education and gymnastics
[2171 with manual labour, and, consequently, of combining manual labour with education and gymnastics. The factory inspectors soon found out
by questioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although receiving only one half the education of the regular day scholars, yet learnt
quite as much and often more. "This can be accounted for by the simple fact that, with only being at school for one half of the day, they are
always fresh, and nearly always ready and willing to receive instruction. The system on which they work, half manual labour, and half school,
renders each employment a rest and a relief to the other; consequently, both are far more congenial to the child, than would be the case were he
kept constantly at one. It is quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the morning, cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who
comes fresh and bright from his work." [2181 Further information on this point will be found in Senior's speech at the Social Science Congress at
Edinburgh in 1863. He there shows, amongst other things, how the monotonous and uselessly long school hours of the children of the upper and
middle classes, uselessly add to the labour of the teacher, "while he not only fruitlessly but absolutely injuriously, wastes the time, health, and
energy of the children." [2191 From the Factory system budded, as Robert Owen has shown us in detail, the germ of the education of the future,
an education that will, in the case of every child over a given age, combine productive labour with instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of
the methods of adding to the efficiency of production, but as the only method of producing fully developed human beings.

Modern Industry, as we have seen, sweeps away by technical means the manufacturing division of labour, under which each man is bound hand
and foot for life to a single detail-operation. At the same time, the capitalistic form of that industry reproduces this same division of labour in a
still more monstrous shape; in the factory proper, by converting the workman into a living appendage of the machine; and everywhere outside
the Factory, partly by the sporadic use of machinery and machine workers, [2201 partly by re-establishing the division of labour on a fresh basis
by the general introduction of the labour of women and children, and of cheap unskilled labour.

The antagonism between the manufacturing division of labour and the methods of Modern Industry makes itself forcibly felt. It manifests itself,
amongst other ways, in the frightful fact that a great part of the children employed in modern factories and manufactures, are from their earliest
years riveted to the most simple manipulations, and exploited for years, without being taught a single sort of work that would afterwards make
them of use, even in the same manufactory or factory. In the English letter-press printing trade, for example, there existed formerly a system,
corresponding to that in the old manufactures and handicrafts, of advancing the apprentices from easy to more and more difficult work. They
went through a course of teaching till they were finished printers. To be able to read and write was for every one of them a requirement of their
trade. All this was changed by the printing machine. It employs two sorts of labourers, one grown up, renters, the other, boys mostly from 1 1 to
17 years of age whose sole business is either to spread the sheets of paper under the machine, or to take from it the printed sheets. They perform
this weary task, in London especially, for 14, 15, and 16 hours at a stretch, during several days in the week, and frequently for 36 hours, with
only 2 hours' rest for meals and sleep. [2211 A great part of them cannot read, and they are, as a rule, utter savages and very extraordinary
creatures. "To qualify them for the work which they have to do, they require no intellectual training; there is little room in it for skill, and less for
judgment; their wages, though rather high for boys, do not increase proportionately as they grow up, and the majority of them cannot look for
advancement to the better paid and more responsible post of machine minder, because while each machine has but one minder, it has at least
two, and often four boys attached to it." [2221 As soon as they get too old for such child's work, that is about 17 at the latest, they are discharged
from the printing establishments. They become recruits of crime. Several attempts to procure them employment elsewhere, were rendered of no
avail by their ignorance and brutality, and by their mental and bodily degradation.

As with the division of labour in the interior of the manufacturing workshops, so it is with the division of labour in the interior of society. So
long as handicraft and manufacture form the general groundwork of social production, the subjection of the producer to one branch exclusively,
the breaking up of the multifariousness of his employment, [2231 is a necessary step in the development. On that groundwork each separate
branch of production acquires empirically the form that is technically suited to it, slowly perfects it, and, so soon as a given degree of maturity
has been reached, rapidly crystallises that form. The only thing, that here and there causes a change, besides new raw material supplied by
commerce, is the gradual alteration of the instruments of labour. But their form, too, once definitely settled by experience, petrifies, as is proved

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (32 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

by their being in many cases handed down in the same form by one generation to another during thousands of years. A characteristic feature is,
that, even down into the eighteenth century, the different trades were called "mysteries" (mysteres); [2241 into their secrets none but those duly
initiated could penetrate. Modern Industry rent the veil that concealed from men their own social process of production, and that turned the
various, spontaneously divided branches of production into so many riddles, not only to outsiders, but even to the. initiated. The principle which
it pursued, of resolving each process into its constituent movements, without any regard to their possible execution by the hand of man, created
the new modern science of technology. The varied, apparently unconnected, and petrified forms of the industrial processes now resolved
themselves into so many conscious and systematic applications of natural science to the attainment of given useful effects. Technology also
discovered the few main fundamental forms of motion, which, despite the diversity of the instruments used, are necessarily taken by every
productive action of the human body; just as the science of mechanics sees in the most complicated machinery nothing but the continual
repetition of the simple mechanical powers.

Modern Industry never looks upon and treats the existing form of a process as final. The technical basis of that industry is therefore
revolutionary, while all earlier modes of production were essentially conservative. [2251 By means of machinery, chemical processes and other
methods, it is continually causing changes not only in the technical basis of production, but also in the functions of the labourer, and in the social
combinations of the labour-process. At the same time, it thereby also revolutionises the division of labour within the society, and incessantly
launches masses of capital and of workpeople from one branch of production to another. But if Modern Industry, by its very nature, therefore
necessitates variation of labour, fluency of function, universal mobility of the labourer, on the other hand, in its capitalistic form, it reproduces
the old division of labour with its ossified particularisations. We have seen how this absolute contradiction between the technical necessities of
Modern Industry, and the social character inherent in its capitalistic form, dispels all fixity and security in the situation of the labourer; how it
constantly threatens, by taking away the instruments of labour, to snatch from his hands his means of subsistence, [2261 and, by suppressing his
detail-function, to make him superfluous, We have seen, too, how this antagonism vents its rage in the creation of that monstrosity, an industrial
reserve army, kept in misery in order to be always at the disposal of capital; in the incessant human sacrifices from among the working-class, in
the most reckless squandering of labour-power and in the devastation caused by a social anarchy which turns every economic progress into a
social calamity. This is the negative side. But if, on the one hand, variation of work at present imposes itself after the manner of an overpowering
natural law, and with the blindly destructive action of a natural law that meets with resistance [2271 at all points, Modern Industry, on the other
hand, through its catastrophes imposes the necessity of recognising, as a fundamental law of production, variation of work, consequently fitness
of the labourer for varied work, consequently the greatest possible development of his varied aptitudes. It becomes a question of life and death
for society to adapt the mode of production to the normal functioning of this law. Modern Industry, indeed, compels society, under penalty of
death, to replace the detail-worker of to-day, grappled by life-long repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and thus reduced to the mere
fragment of a man, by the fully developed individual, fit for a variety of labours, ready to face any change of production, and to whom the
different social functions he performs, are but so many modes of giving free scope to his own natural and acquired powers.

One step already spontaneously taken towards effecting this revolution is the establishment of technical and agricultural schools, and of "ecoles
d'enseignement professionnel," in which the children of the working-men receive some little instruction in technology and in the practical
handling of the various implements of labour. Though the Factory Act, that first and meagre concession wrung from capital, is limited to
combining elementary education with work in the factory, there can be no doubt that when the working-class comes into power, as inevitably it
must, technical instruction, both theoretical and practical, will take its proper place in the working-class schools. There is also no doubt that such
revolutionary regents, the final result of which is the abolition of the old division of labour, are diametrically opposed to the capitalistic form of
production, and to the economic status of the labourer corresponding to that form. But the historical development of the antagonisms, immanent
in a given form of production, is the only way in which that form of production can be dissolved and a new form established. "Ne sutor ultra
crepidam" — this nee plus ultra of handicraft wisdom became sheer nonsense, from the moment the watchmaker Watt invented the
steam-engine, the barber Arkwright, the throstle, and the working -jeweller, Fulton, the steamship. [2281

So long as Factory legislation is confined to regulating the labour in factories, manufactories, &c, it is regarded as a mere interference with the
exploiting rights of capital. But when it comes to regulating the so-called "home-labour," [2291 it is immediately viewed as a direct attack on the
patria potestas, on parental authority. The tender-hearted English Parliament long affected to shrink from taking this step. The force of facts,
however, compelled it at last to acknowledge that modern industry, in overturning the economic foundation on which was based the traditional
family, and the family labour corresponding to it, had also unloosened all traditional family ties. The rights of the children had to be proclaimed.
The final report of the Ch. Empl. Comm. of 1866, states: "It is unhappily, to a painful degree, apparent throughout the whole of the evidence,
that against no persons do the children of both sexes so much require protection as against their parents." The system of unlimited exploitation of
children's labour in general and the so-called home-labour in particular is "maintained only because the parents are able, without check or
control, to exercise this arbitrary and mischievous power over their young and tender offspring.... Parents must not possess the absolute power of
making their children mere 'machines to earn so much weekly wage....' The children and young persons, therefore, in all such cases may
justifiably claim from the legislature, as a natural right, that an exemption should be secured to them, from what destroys prematurely their
physical strength, and lowers them in the scale of intellectual and moral beings." [2301 It was not, however, the misuse of parental authority that
created the capitalistic exploitation, whether direct or indirect, of children's labour; but, on the contrary, it was the capitalistic mode of
exploitation which, by sweeping away the economic basis of parental authority, made its exercise degenerate into a mischievous misuse of
power. However terrible and disgusting the dissolution, under the capitalist system, of the old family ties may appear, nevertheless, modern
industry, by assigning as it does an important part in the process of production, outside the domestic sphere, to women, to young persons, and to
children of both sexes, creates a new economic foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations between the sexes. It is, of course,
just as absurd to hold the Teutonic-Christian form of the family to be absolute and final as it would be to apply that character to the ancient
Roman, the ancient Greek, or the Eastern forms which, moreover, taken together form a series in historical development. Moreover, it is obvious
that the fact of the collective working group being composed of individuals of both sexes and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (33 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

conditions, become a source of humane development; although in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalistic form, where the labourer
exists for the process of production, and not the process of production for the labourer, that fact is a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery.
[2311

The necessity for a generalisation of the Factory Acts, for transforming them from an exceptional law relating to mechanical spinning and
weaving — those first creations of machinery — into a law affecting social production as a whole, arose, as we have seen, from the mode in
which Modern Industry was historically developed. In the rear of that industry, the traditional form of manufacture, of handicraft, and of
domestic industry, is entirely revolutionised; manufactures are constantly passing into the factory system, and handicrafts into manufactures; and
lastly, the spheres of handicraft and of the domestic industries become, in a, comparatively speaking, wonderfully short time, dens of misery in
which capitalistic exploitation obtains free play for the wildest excesses. There are two circumstances that finally turn the scale: first, the
constantly recurring experience that capital, so soon as it finds itself subject to legal control at one point, compensates itself all the more
recklessly at other points; [2321 secondly, the cry of the capitalists for equality in the conditions of competition, i.e., for equal restrain on all
exploitation of labour. f2331 On this point let us listen to two heart-broken cries. Messrs. Cooksley of Bristol, nail and chain, &c, manufacturers,
spontaneously introduced the regulations of the Factory Act into their business. "As the old irregular system prevails in neighbouring works, the
Messrs. Cooksley are subject to the disadvantage of having their boys enticed to continue their labour elsewhere after 6 p.m. ' This,' they
naturally say, 'is an unjustice and loss to us, as it exhausts a portion of the boy's strength, of which we ought to have the full benefit." [2341 Mr. J.
Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, London) states before the commissioners of the Ch. Empl. Comm.: "He would sign any petition for it"
(legislative interference).... "As it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed his place, lest others should be working later than him
and getting away his orders." [2351 Summarising, the Ch. Empl. Comm. says: "It would be unjust to the larger employers that their factories
should be placed under regulation, while the hours of labour in the smaller places in their own branch of business were under no legislative
restriction. And to the injustice arising from the unfair conditions of competition, in regard to hours, that would be created if the smaller places
of work were exempt, would be added the disadvantage to the larger manufacturers, of finding their supply of juvenile and female labour drawn
off to the places of work exempt from legislation. Further, a stimulus would be given to the multiplication of the smaller places of work, which
are almost invariably the least favourable to the health, comfort, education, and general improvement of the people." [2361

In its final report the Commission proposes to subject to the Factory Act more than 1,400,000 children, young persons, and women, of which
number about one half are exploited in small industries and by the so-called home-work. [2371 It says, "But if it should seem fit to Parliament to
place the whole of that large number of children, young persons and females under the protective legislation above adverted to ... it cannot be
doubted that such legislation would have a most beneficent effect, not only upon the young and the feeble, who are its more immediate objects,
but upon the still larger body of adult workers, who would in all these employments, both directly and indirectly, come immediately under its
influence. It would enforce upon them regular and moderate hours; it would lead to their places of work being kept in a healthy and cleanly state;
it would therefore husband and improve that store of physical strength on which their own well-being and that of the country so much depends; it
would save the rising generation from that overexertion at an early age which undermines their constitutions and leads to premature decay;
finally, it would ensure them — at least up to the age of 13 — the opportunity of receiving the elements of education, and would put an end to
that utter ignorance ... go faithfully exhibited in the Reports of our Assistant Commissioners, and which cannot be regarded without the deepest
pain, and a profound sense of national degradation. [2381

The Tory Cabinet [2391 announced in the Speech from the Throne, on February 5, 1867, that it had framed the proposals of the Industrial
Commission of Inquiry [2401 into Bills. To get that far, another twenty years of experimentum in corpore vili had been required. Already in 1840
a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the labour of children had been appointed. Its Report, in 1842, unfolded, in the words of Nassau W.
Senior, "the most frightful picture of avarice, selfishness and cruelty on the part of masters and of parents, and of juvenile and infantile misery,
degradation and destruction ever presented.... It may be supposed that it describes the horrors of a past age. But there is unhappily evidence that
those horrors continue as intense as they were. A pamphlet published by Hardwicke about 2 years ago states that the abuses complained of in
1842, are in full bloom at the present day. It is a strange proof of the general neglect of the morals and health of the children of the
working-class, that this report lay unnoticed for 20 years, during which the children, 'bred up without the remotest sign of comprehension as to
what is meant by the term morals, who had neither knowledge, nor religion, nor natural affection,' were allowed to become the parents of the
present generation." [2411

The social conditions having undergone a change, Parliament could not venture to shelve the demands of the Commission of 1862, as it had done
those of the Commission of 1840. Hence in 1864, when the Commission had not yet published more than a part of its reports, the earthenware
industries (including the potteries), makers of paperhangings, matches, cartridges, and caps, and fustian cutters were made subject to the Acts in
force in the textile industries. In the Speech from the Throne, on 5th February, 1867, the Tory Cabinet of the day announced the introduction of
Bills, founded on the final recommendations of the Commission, which had completed its labours in 1866.

On the 15th August, 1867, the Factory Acts Extension Act, and on the 21st August, the Workshops' Regulation Act received the Royal Assent;
the former Act having reference to large industries, the latter to small.

The former applies to blast-furnaces, iron' and copper mills, foundries, machine shops, metal manufactories, gutta-percha works, paper mills,
glass-works, tobacco manufactories, letter-press printing (including newspapers), book-binding, in short to all industrial establishments of the
above kind, in which 50 individuals or more are occupied simultaneously, and for not less than 100 days during the year.

To give an idea of the extent of the sphere embraced by the Workshops' Regulation Act in its application, we cite from its interpretation clause,
the following passages:



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (34 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

"Handicraft shall mean any manual labour exercised by way of trade, or for purposes of gain in, or incidental to, the making any article or part of
an article, or in, or incidental to, the altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, or otherwise adapting for sale any article."

"Workshop shall mean any room or place whatever in the open air or undercover, in which any handicraft is carried on by any child, young
person, or woman, and to which and over which the person by whom such child, young person, or woman is employed, has the right of access
and control."

"Employed shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether for wages or not, under a master or under a parent as herein defined."

"Parent shall mean parent, guardian, or person, having the custody of, or control over, any... child or young person."

Clause 7, which imposes a penalty for employment of children, young persons, and women, contrary to the provisions of the Act, subjects to
fines, not only the occupier of the workshop, whether parent or not, but even "the parent of, or the person deriving any direct benefit from the
labour of, or having the control over, the child, young person or woman. "

The Factory Acts Extension Act, which affects the large establishments, derogates from the Factory Act by a crowd of vicious exceptions and
cowardly compromises with the masters.

The Workshops' Regulation Act, wretched in all its details, remained a dead letter in the hands of the municipal and local authorities who were
charged with its execution. When, in 1871, Parliament withdrew from them this power, in order to confer it on the Factory Inspectors, to whose
province it thus added by a single stroke more than one hundred thousand workshops, and three hundred brickworks, care was taken at the same
time not to add more than eight assistants to their already undermanned staff. \2A2\

What strikes us, then, in the English legislation of 1867, is, on the one hand, the necessity imposed on the parliament of the ruling classes, of
adopting in principle measures so extraordinary, and on so great a scale, against the excesses of capitalistic exploitation; and on the other hand,
the hesitation, the repugnance, and the bad faith, with which it lent itself to the task of carrying those measures into practice.

The Inquiry Commission of 1862 also proposed a new regulation of the mining industry, an industry distinguished from others by the
exceptional characteristic that the interests of landlord and capitalist there join hands. The antagonism of these two interests had been favourable
to Factory legislation, while on the other hand the absence of that antagonism is sufficient to explain the delays and chicanery of the legislation
on mines.

The Inquiry Commission of 1840 had made revelations so terrible, so shocking, and creating such a scandal all over Europe, that to salve its
conscience Parliament passed the Mining Act of 1842, in which it limited itself to forbidding the employment underground in mines of children
under 10 years of age and females.

Then another Act, The Mines' Inspecting Act of 1860, provides that mines shall be inspected by public officers nominated specially for that
purpose, and that boys between the ages of 10 and 12 years shall not be employed, unless they have a school certificate, or go to school for a
certain number of hours. This Act was a complete dead letter owing to the ridiculously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of their
powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we proceed.

One of the most recent Blue books on mines is the "Report from the Select Committee on Mines, together with &c. Evidence, 23rd July, 1866."
This Report is the work of a Parliamentary Committee selected from members of the House of Commons, and authorised to summon and
examine witnesses. It is a thick folio volume in which the Report itself occupies only five lines to this effect; that the committee has nothing to
say, and that more witnesses must be examined!

The mode of examining the witnesses reminds one of the crossexamination of witnesses in English courts of justice, where the advocate tries, by
means of impudent, unexpected, equivocal and involved questions, put without connexion, to intimidate, surprise, and confound the witness, and
to give a forced meaning to the answers extorted from him. In this inquiry the members of the committee themselves are the cross-examiners,
and among them are to be found both mine-owners and mine exploiters; the witnesses are mostly working coal miners. The whole farce is too
characteristic of the spirit of capital, not to call for a few extracts from this Report. For the sake of conciseness I have classified them. I may also
add that every question and its answer are numbered in the English Blue books.

1. Employment in mines of boys of 10 years and upwards. — In the mines the work, inclusive of going and returning, usually lasts 14 or 15
hours, sometimes even from 3, 4 and 5 o'clock a.m., till 5 and 6 o'clock p.m. (n. 6, 452, 83). The adults work in two shifts, of eight hours each;
but there is no alternation with the boys, on account of the expense (n. 80, 203, 204). The younger boys are chiefly employed in opening and
shutting the ventilating doors in the various parts of the mine; the older ones are employed on heavier work, in carrying coal, &c. (n. 122, 739,
1747). They work these long hours underground until their 18th or 22nd year, when they are put to miner's work proper (n. 161). Children and
young persons are at present worse treated, and harder worked than at any previous period (n. 1663-1667). The miners demand almost
unanimously an act of Parliament prohibiting the employment in mines of children under 14. And now Hussey Vivian (himself an exploiter of
mines) asks: "Would not the opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty of the workman's family?" Mr. Bruce: "Do you not think it would
be a very hard case, where a parent had been injured, or where he was sickly, or where a father was dead, and there was only a mother, to
prevent a child between 12 and 14 earning Is. 7d. a day for the good of the family? ... You must lay down a general rule? ... Are you prepared to
recommend legislation which would prevent the employment of children under 12 and 14, whatever the state of their parents might be?" "Yes."
(ns. 107-1 10). Vivian: "Supposing that an enactment were passed preventing the employment of children under the age of 14, would it not be
probable that ... the parents of children would seek employment for their children in other directions, for instance, in manufacture?" "Not
generally I think" (n. 174). Kinnaird: "Some of the boys are keepers of doors?" "Yes." "Is there not generally a very great draught every time you

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (35 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

open a door or close it?" "Yes, generally there is." "It sounds a very easy thing, but it is in fact rather a painful one?" "He is imprisoned there just
the same as if he was in a cell of a gaol." Bourgeois Vivian: "Whenever a boy is furnished with a lamp cannot he read?" "Yes, he can read, if he
finds himself in candles.... I suppose he would be found fault with if he were discovered reading; he is there to mind his business, he has a duty
to perform, and he has to attend to it in the first place, and I do not think it would be allowed down the pit." (ns. 139, 141, 143, 158, 160).

II. Education. — The working miners want a law for the compulsory education of their children, as in factories. They declare the clauses of the
Act of 1860, which require a school certificate to be obtained before employing boys of 10 and 12 years of age, to be quite illusory. The
examination of the witnesses on this subject is truly droll. "Is it (the Act) required more against the masters or against the parents?" "It is
required against both I think." "You cannot say whether it is required against one more than against the other?" "No; I can hardly answer that
question." (ns. 1 15, 116). "Does there appear to be any desire on the part of the employers that the boys should have such hours as to enable
them to go to school?" "No; the hours are never shortened for that purpose." (n. 137) Mr. Kinnaird: "Should you say that the colliers generally
improve their education; have you any instances of men who have, since they began to work, greatly improved their education, or do they not
rather go back, and lose any advantage that they may have gained?" "They generally become worse: they do not improve; they acquire bad
habits; they get on to drinking and gambling and such like,, and they go completely to wreck." (n. 21 1.) "Do they make any attempt of the kind
(for providing instruction) by having schools at night?" "There are few collieries where night schools are held, and perhaps at those collieries a
few boys do go to those schools; but they are so physically exhausted that it is to no purpose that they go there." (n. 454.) "You are then,"
concludes the bourgeois, "against education?" "Most certainly not; but," &c. (n. 443.) "But are they (the employers) not compelled to demand
them (school certificates)?" "By law they are; but I am not aware that they are demanded by the employers." "Then it is your opinion, that this
provision of the Act as to requiring certificates, is not generally carried out in the collieries?" "It is not carried out." (ns. 443, 444.) "Do the men
take a great interest in this question (of education)?" "The majority of them do." (n. 717.) "Are they very anxious to see the law enforced?" "The
majority are." (n. 718.) "Do you think that in this country any law that you pass ... can really be effectual unless the population themselves assist
in putting it into operation?" "Many a man might wish to object to employing a boy, but he would perhaps become marked by it." (n. 720.)
"Marked by whom?" "By his employers." (n. 721.) "Do you think that the employers would find any fault with a man who obeyed the law. . . ?"
"I believe they would." (n. 722.) "Have you ever heard of any workman objecting to employ a boy between 10 and 12, who could not write or
read?" "It is not left to men's option." (n. 123.) "Would you call for the interference of Parliament?" "I think that if anything effectual is to be
done in the education of the colliers' 'children, it will have to be made compulsory by Act of Parliament." (n. 1634.) "Would you lay that
obligation upon the colliers only, or all the workpeople of Great Britain?" "I came to speak for the colliers." (n. 1636.) "Why should you
distinguish them (colliery boys) from other boys?" "Because I think they are an exception to the rule." (n. 1638.) "In what respect?" "In a
physical respect." (n. 1639.) "Why should education be more valuable to them than to other classes of lads?" "I do not know that it is more
valuable; but through the over-exertion in mines there is less chance for the boys that are employed there to get education, either at Sunday
schools, or at day schools." (n. 1640.) "It is impossible to look at a question of this sort absolutely by itself?" (n. 1644.) "Is there a sufficiency of
schools?" — "No"... (n. 1646). "If the State were to require that every child should be sent to school, would there be schools for the children to
go to?" "No; but I think if the circumstances were to spring up, the schools would be forthcoming." (n. 1647.) "Some of them (the boys) cannot
read and write at all, I suppose?" "The majority cannot. . The majority of the men themselves cannot." (ns. 705, 725.)

III. Employment of women. — Since 1842 women are no more employed underground, but are occupied on the surface in loading the coal,
&c, in drawing the tubs to the canals and railway waggons, in sorting, &c. Their numbers have considerably increased during the last three or
four years, (n. 1727.) They are mostly the wives, daughters, and widows of the working miners, and their ages range from 12 to 50 or 60 years,
(ns. 645, 1779.) "What is the feeling among the working miners as to the employment of women?" "I think they generally condemn it." (n. 648.)
"What objection do you see to it?" "I think it is degrading to the sex." (n. 649.) "There is a peculiarity of dress?" "Yes ... it is rather a man's dress,
and I believe in some cases, it drowns all sense of decency." "Do the women smoke?" "Some do." "And I suppose it is very dirty work?" "Very
dirty." "They get black and grimy?" "As black as those who are down the mines ... I believe that a woman having children (and there are plenty
on the banks that have) cannot do her duty to her children." (ns. 650-654, 701.) "Do you think that those widows could get employment
anywhere else, which would bring them in as much wages as that (from 8s. to 10s. a week)?" "I cannot speak to that." (n. 709.) "You would still
be prepared, would you," (flint-hearted fellow!) "to prevent their obtaining a livelihood by these means?" "I would." (n. 710.) "What is the
general feeling in the district ... as to the employment of women?" "The feeling is that it is degrading; and we wish as miners to have more
respect to the fair sex than to see them placed on the pit bank... Some part of the work is very hard; some of these girls have raised as much as 10
tons of stuff a day." (ns. 1715,1717.) "Do you think that the women employed about the collieries are less moral than the women employed in
the factories?" ". ..the percentage of bad ones may be a little more ... than with the girls in the factories." (n. 1237.) "But you are not quite
satisfied with the state of morality in the factories?" "No." (n. 1733.) "Would you prohibit the employment of women in factories also?" "No, I
would not." (n. 1734.) "Why not?" "I think it a more honourable occupation for them in the mills." (n. 1735.) "Still it is injurious to their
morality, you think?" "Not so much as working on the pit bank; but it is more on the social position I take it; I do not take it on its moral ground
alone. The degradation, in its social bearing on the girls, is deplorable in the extreme. When these 400 or 500 girls become colliers' wives, the
men suffer greatly from this degradation, and it causes them to leave their homes and drink." (n. 1736.) "You would be obliged to stop the
employment of women in the ironworks as well, would you not, if you stopped it in the collieries?" "I cannot speak for any other trade." (n.
1737.) "Can you see any difference in the circumstances of women employed in ironworks, and the circumstances of women employed above
ground in collieries?" "I have not ascertained anything as to that." (n. 1740.) "Can you see anything that makes a distinction between one class
and the other?" "I have not ascertained that, but I know from house to house visitation, that it is a deplorable state of things in our district...." (n.
1741.) "Would you interfere in every case with the employment of women where that employment was degrading?" "It would become injurious,
I think, in this way: the best feelings of Englishmen have been gained from the instruction of a mother. . . (n. 1750.) "That equally applies to
agricultural employments, does it not?" "Yes, but that is only for two seasons, and we have work all the four seasons." (n. 1751.) "They often
work day and night, wet through to the skin, their constitution undermined and their health ruined." "You have not inquired into that subject
perhaps?" "I have certainly taken note of it as I have gone along, and certainly I have seen nothing parallel to the effects of the employment of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (36 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

women on the pit bank.... It is the work of a man... a strong man." (ns. 1753, 1793, 1794.) "Your feeling upon the whole subject is that the better
class of colliers who desire to raise themselves and humanise themselves, instead of deriving help from the women, are pulled down by
them?" "Yes." (n. 1808.) After some further crooked questions from these bourgeois, the secret of their "sympathy" for widows, poor families,
&c, comes out at last. "The coal proprietor appoints certain gentlemen to take the oversight of the workings, and it is their policy, in order to
receive approbation, to place things on the most economical basis they can, and these girls are employed at from Is. up to Is. 6d. a day, where a
man at the rate of 2s. 6d. a day would have to be employed." (n. 1816.)

IV. Coroner's inquests. — "With regard to coroner's inquests in your district, have the workmen confidence in the proceedings at those inquests
when accidents occur?" "No; they have not." (n. 360.) "Why not?" "Chiefly because the men who are generally chosen, are men who know
nothing about mines and such like." "Are not workmen summoned at all upon the juries?" "Never but as witnesses to my knowledge." "Who are
the people who are generally summoned upon these juries?" "Generally tradesmen in the neighbourhood ... from their circumstances they are
sometimes liable to be influenced by their employers ... the owners of the works. They are generally men who have no knowledge, and can
scarcely understand the witnesses who are called before them, and the terms which are used and such like." "Would you have the jury composed
of persons who had been employed in mining?" "Yes, partly... they (the workmen) think that the verdict is not in accordance with the evidence
given generally." (ns. 361, 364, 366, 368, 371, 375.) "One great object in summoning a jury is to have an impartial one, is it not?" "Yes, I should
think so." "Do you think that the juries would be impartial if they were composed to a considerable extent of workmen?" "I cannot see any
motive which the workmen would have to act partially ... they necessarily have a better knowledge of the operations in connexion with the
mine." "You do not think there would be a tendency on the part of the workmen to return unfairly severe verdicts?" "No, I think not." (ns. 378,
379, 380.)

V. False weights and measures. — The workmen demand to be paid weekly instead of fortnightly, and by weight instead of by cubical contents
of the tubs; they also demand protection against the use of false weights, &c. (n. 1071.) "If the tubs were fraudulently increased, a man. could
discontinue working by giving 14 days' notice?" "But if he goes to another place, there is the same thing going on there." (n. 1071.) "But he can
leave that place where the wrong has been committed?" "It is general; wherever he goes, he has to submit to it." (n. 1072.) "Could a man leave
by giving 14 days' notice?" "Yes." (n. 1073.) And yet they are not satisfied!

VI. Inspection of mines. — Casualties from explosions are not the only things the workmen suffer from. (n. 234, sqq.) "Our men complained
very much of the bad ventilation of the collieries ... the ventilation is so bad in general that the men can scarcely breathe; they are quite unfit for
employment of any kind after they have been for a length of time in connexion with their work; indeed, just at the part of the mine where I am
working, men have been obliged to leave their employment and come home in consequence of that ... some of them have been out of work for
weeks just in consequence of the bad state of the ventilation where there is not explosive gas ... there is plenty of air generally in the main
courses, yet pains are not taken to get air into the workings where men are working." "Why do you not apply to the inspector?" "To tell the truth
there are many men who are timid on that point; there have been cases of men being sacrificed and losing their employment in consequence of

applying to the inspector." "Why is he a marked man for having complained?" "Yes And he finds it difficult to get employment in another

mine?" "Yes." "Do you think the mines in your neighbourhood are sufficiently inspected to insure a compliance with the provisions of the Act?"
"No; they are not inspected at all ... the inspector has been down just once in the pit, and it has been going seven years.... In the district to which I
belong there are not a sufficient number of inspectors. We have one old man more than 70 years of age to inspect more than 130 collieries."
"You wish to have a class of sub-inspectors?" "Yes." (ns. 234, 241, 251, 254, 274, 275, 554, 276, 293.) "But do you think it would be possible
for Government to maintain such an army, of inspectors as would be necessary to do all that you want them to do, without information from the
men?" "No, I should think it would be next to impossible...." "It would be desirable the inspectors should come oftener?" "Yes, and without
being sent for." (n. 280, 277.) "Do you not think that the effect of having these inspectors examining the collieries so frequently would be to shift
the responsibility (!) of supplying proper ventilation from the owners of the collieries to the Government officials?" "No, I do not think that, I
think that they should make it their business to enforce the Acts which are already in existence." (n. 285.) "When you speak of sub-inspectors, do
you mean men at a less salary, and of an inferior stamp to the present inspectors?" "I would not have them inferior, if you could get them
otherwise." (n. 294.) "Do you merely want more inspectors, or do you want a lower class of men as an inspector?" "A man who would knock
about, and see that things are kept right; a man who would not be afraid of himself." (n. 295.) "If you obtained your wish in getting an inferior
class of inspectors appointed, do you think that there would be no danger from want of skill, &c?" "I think not, I think that the Government
would see after that, and have proper men in that position." (n. 297.) This kind of examination becomes at last too much even for the chairman of
the committee, and he interrupts with the observation: "You want a class of men who would look into all the details of the mine, and would go
into all the holes and corners, and go into the real facts ... they would report to the chief inspector, who would then bring his scientific knowledge
to bear on the facts they have stated?" (ns. 298, 299.) "Would it not entail very great expense if all these old workings were kept ventilated?"
"Yes, expense might be incurred, but life would be at the same time protected." (n. 53 1.) A working miner objects to the 17th section of the Act
of 1860; he says, "At the present time, if the inspector of mines finds a part of the mine unfit to work in, he has to report it to the mine-owner and
the Home Secretary. After doing that, there is given to the owner 20 days to look over the matter; at the end of 20 days he has the power to
refuse making any alteration in the mine; but, when he refuses, the mine-owner writes to the Home Secretary, at the same time nominating five
engineers, and from those five engineers named by the mine-owner himself, the Home Secretary appoints one, I think, as arbitrator, or appoints
arbitrators from them; now we think in that case the mine-owner virtually appoints his own arbitrator." (n. 581.) Bourgeois examiner, himself a
mine-owner: "But ... is this a 'Merely speculative objection?" (n. 586.) "Then you have a very poor opinion of the integrity of mining engineers?"
"It is most certainly unjust and inequitable." (n. 588.) "Do not mining engineers possess a sort of public character, and do not you think that they
are above making such a partial decision as you apprehend?" "I do not wish to answer such a question as that with respect to the personal
character of those men. I believe that in many cases they would act very partially indeed, and that it ought not to be in their hands to do so, where
men's lives are at stake." (n. 589.) This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this question: "Do you not think that the mine-owner also suffers
loss from an explosion?" Finally, "Are not you workmen in Lancashire able to take care of your own interests without calling in the Government
to help you?" "No." (n. 1042.)

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (37 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

In the year 1865 there were 3,217 coal mines in Great Britain, and 12 inspectors. A Yorkshire mine-owner himself calculates (Times, 26th
January, 1867), that putting on one side their office work, which absorbs all their time, each mine can be visited but once in ten years by an
inspector. No wonder that explosions have increased progressively, both in number and extent (sometimes with a loss of 200-300 men), during
the last ten years. These are the beauties of "free" capitalist production! [This sentence has been added to the English text in conformity with the
4th German edition. — Ed.]

The very defective Act, passed in 1872, is the first that regulates the hours of labour of the children employed in mines, and makes exploiters and
owners, to a certain extent, responsible for so-called accidents.

The Royal Commission appointed in 1867 to inquire into the employment in agriculture of children, young persons, and women, has published
some very important reports. Several attempts to apply the principles of the Factory Acts, but in a modified form, to agriculture have been made,
but have so far resulted in complete failure. All that I wish to draw attention to here is the existence of an irresistible tendency towards the
general application of those principles.

If the general extension of factory legislation to all trades for the purpose of protecting the working-class both in mind and body has become
inevitable, on the other hand, as we have already pointed out, that extension hastens on the general conversion of numerous isolated small
industries into a few combined industries carried on upon a large scale; it therefore accelerates the concentration of capital and the exclusive
predominance of the factory system. It destroys both the ancient and the transitional forms, behind which the dominion of capital is still in part
concealed, and replaces them by the direct and open sway of capital; but thereby it also generalises the direct opposition to this sway. While in
each individual workshop it enforces uniformity, regularity, order, and economy, it increases by the immense spur which the limitation and
regulation of the working-day give to technical improvement, the anarchy and the catastrophes of capitalist production as a whole, the intensity
of labour, and the competition of machinery with the labourer. By the destruction of petty and domestic industries it destroys the last resort of the
"redundant population," and with it the sole remaining safety-valve of the whole social mechanism. By maturing the material conditions, and the
combination on a social scale of the processes of production, it matures the contradictions and antagonisms of the capitalist form of production,
and thereby provides, along with the elements for the formation of a new society, the forces for exploding the old one. [2431



SECTION 10.

MODERN INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE



The revolution called forth by modern industry in agriculture, and in the social relations of agricultural producers, will be investigated later on.
In this place, we shall merely indicate a few results by way of anticipation. If the use of machinery in agriculture is for the most part free from
the injurious physical effect it has on the factory operative, its action in superseding the labourers is more intense, and finds less resistance, as we
shall see later in detail. In the counties of Cambridge and Suffolk, for example, the area of cultivated land has extended very much within the last
20 years (up to 1868), while in the same period the rural population has diminished, not only relatively, but absolutely. In the United States it is
as yet only virtually that agricultural machines replace labourers; in other words, they allow of the cultivation by the farmer of a larger surface,
but do not actually expel the labourers employed. In 1861 the number of persons occupied in England and Wales in the manufacture of
agricultural machines was 1 ,034, whilst the number of agricultural labourers employed in the use of agricultural machines and steam-engines did
not exceed 1,205.

In the sphere of agriculture, modern industry has a more revolutionary effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it annihilates the peasant, that
bulwark of the old society, and replaces him by the wage-labourer. Thus the desire for social changes, and the class antagonisms are brought to
the same level in the country as in the towns. The irrational, old-fashioned methods of agriculture are replaced by scientific ones. Capitalist
production completely tears asunder the old bond of union which held together agriculture and manufacture in their infancy. But at the same time
it creates the material conditions for a higher synthesis in the future, viz., the union of agriculture and industry on the basis of the more perfected
forms they have each acquired during their temporary separation. Capitalist production, by collecting the population in great centres, and causing
an ever-increasing preponderance of town population, on the one hand concentrates the historical motive power of society; on the other hand, it
disturbs the circulation of matter between man and the soil, i.e., prevents the return to the soil of its elements consumed by man in the form of
food and clothing; it therefore violates the conditions necessary to lasting fertility of the soil. By this action it destroys at the same time the
health of the town labourer and the intellectual life of the rural labourer. [2441 But while upsetting the naturally grown conditions for the
maintenance of that circulation of matter, it imperiously calls for its restoration as a system, as a regulating law of social production, and under a
form appropriate to the full development of the human race. In agriculture as in manufacture, the transformation of production under the sway of
capital, means, at the same time, the martyrdom of the producer; the instrument of labour becomes the means of enslaving, exploiting, and
impoverishing the labourer; the social combination and organisation of labour-processes is turned into an organised mode of crushing out the
workman's individual vitality, freedom, and independence. The dispersion of the rural labourers over larger areas breaks their power of
resistance while concentration increases that of the town operatives. In modern agriculture, as in the urban industries, the increased
productiveness and quantity of the labour set in motion are bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labour-power itself.
Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the labourer, but of robbing the soil; all progress in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (38 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time, is a progress towards ruining the lasting sources of that fertility. The more a country starts its
development on the foundation of modern industry, like the United States, for example, the more rapid is this process of destruction. [2451
Capitalist production, therefore, develops technology, and the combining together of various processes into a social whole, only by sapping the
original sources of all wealth-the soil and the labourer.



Footnotes

[11 Mill should have said, "of any human being not fed by other people's labour," for, without doubt, machinery has greatly increased the number
of well-to-do idlers.

[21 See, for instance, Hutton: "Course of Mathematics."

[31 "From this point of view we may draw a sharp line of distinction between a tool and a machine: spades, hammers, chisels, &c, combinations
of levers and of screws, in all of which, no matter how complicated they may be in other respects, man is the motive power, ... all this falls under
the idea of a tool; but the plough, which is drawn by animal power, and wind-mills, &c, must be classed among machines." (Wilhelm Schulz:
"Die Bewegung der Produktion." Zurich, 1843, p. 38.) In many respects a book to be recommended.

[41 Before his time, spinning machines, although very imperfect ones, had already been used, and Italy was probably the country of their first
appearance. A critical history of technology would show how little any of the inventions of the 1 8th century are the work of a single individual.
Hitherto there is no such book. Darwin has interested us in the history of Nature's Technology, i.e., in the formation of the organs of plants and
animals, which organs serve as instruments of production for sustaining life. Does not the history of the productive organs of man, of organs that
are the material basis of all social organisation, deserve equal attention? And would not such a history be easier to compile, since, as Vico says,
human history differs from natural history in this, that we have made the former, but not the latter? Technology discloses man's mode of dealing
with Nature, the process of production by which he sustains his life, and thereby also lays bare the mode of formation of his social relations, and
of the mental conceptions that flow from them. Every history of religion, even, that fails to take account of this material basis, is uncritical. It is,
in reality, much easier to discover by analysis the earthly core of the misty creations of religion, than, conversely, it is, to develop from the actual
relations of life the corresponding celestialised forms of those relations. The latter method is the only materialistic, and therefore the only
scientific one. The weak points in the abstract materialism of natural science, a materialism that excludes history and its process, are at once
evident from the abstract and ideological conceptions of its spokesmen, whenever they venture beyond the bounds of their own speciality.

[51 Especially in the original form of the power-loom, we recognise, at the first glance, the ancient loom. In its modern form, the power-loom has
undergone essential alterations.

[61 It is only during the last 15 years (i.e., since about 1850), that a constantly increasing portion of these machine tools have been made in
England by machinery, and that not by the same manufacturers who make the machines. Instances of machines for the fabrication of these
mechanical tools are, the automatic bobbin-making engine, the cardsetting engine, shuttle-making machines, and machines for forging mule and
throstle spindles.

[71 Moses says: "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treads the corn." The Christian philanthropists of Germany, on the contrary, fastened a
wooden board round the necks of the serfs, whom they used as a motive power for grinding, in order to prevent them from putting flour into their
mouths with their hands.

[81 It was partly the want of streams with a good fall on them, and partly their battles with superabundance of water in other respects, that
compelled the Dutch to resort to wind as a motive power. The wind-mill itself they got from Germany, where its invention was the origin of a
pretty squabble between the nobles, the priests, and the emperor, as to which of those three the wind "belonged." The air makes bondage, was the
cry in Germany, at the same time that the wind was making Holland free. What it reduced to bondage in this case, was not the Dutchman, but the
land for the Dutchman. In 1836, 12,000 windmills of 6,000 horse-power were still employed in Holland, to prevent two-thirds of the land from
being reconverted into morasses.

[91 It was, indeed, very much improved by Watt's first so-called single acting engine; but, in this form, it continued to be a mere machine for
raising water, and the liquor from salt mines.

[101 "The union of all these simple instruments, set in motion by a single motor, constitutes a machine." (Babbage, 1. c.)

[Ill In January, 1861, John C. Morton read before the Society of Arts a paper on "The forces employed in agriculture." He there states: "Every
improvement that furthers the uniformity of the land makes the steam-engine more and more applicable to the production of pure mechanical
force.... Horse-power is requisite wherever crooked fences and other obstructions prevent uniform action. These obstructions are vanishing day
by day. For operations that demand more exercise of will than actual force, the only power applicable is that controlled every instant by the
human mind-in other words, man- power." Mr. Morton then reduces steam-power, horse-power, and man-power, to the unit in general use for
steam-engines, namely, the force required to raise 33,000 lbs. one foot in one minute, and reckons the cost of one horse-power from a
steam-engine to be 3d., and from a horse to be 5-l/2d. per hour. Further, if a horse must fully maintain its health, it can work no more than 8
hours a day. Three at the least out of every seven horses used on tillage land during the year can be dispensed with by using steam-power, at an
expense not greater than that which, the horses dispensed with, would cost during the 3 or 4 months in which alone they can be used effectively.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (39 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

Lastly, steam-power, in those agricultural operations in which it can be employed, improves, in comparison with horse-power, the quality of the
work. To do the work of a steam-engine would require 66 men, at a total cost of 15 S. an hour, and to do the work of a horse, 32 men, at a total
cost of 8s. an hour.



12] Faulhaber, 1625; De Caus, 1688.

131 The modern turbine frees the industrial exploitation of water-power from many of its former fetters.



[141 "In the early days of textile manufactures, the locality of the factory depended upon the existence of a stream having a sufficient fall to turn
a water-wheel; and, although the establishment of the water-mills was the commencement of the breaking up of the domestic system of
manufacture, yet the mills necessarily situated upon streams, and frequently at considerable distances the one from the other, formed part of a
rural, rather than an urban system; and it was not until the introduction of the steam-power as a substitute for the stream that factories were
congregated in towns, and localities where the coal and water required for the production of steam were found in sufficient quantities. The
steam-engine is the parent of manufacturing towns." (A. Redgrave in "Reports of the Insp. of Fact., 30th April, 1860," p. 36.)

[151 From the standpoint of division of labour in Manufacture, weaving was not simple, but, on the contrary, complicated manual labour; and
consequently the power-loom is a machine that does very complicated work. It is altogether erroneous to suppose that modern machinery
originally appropriated those operations alone, which division of labour had simplified. Spinning and weaving were, during the manufacturing
period, split up into new species, and the implements were modified and improved; but the labour itself was in no way divided, and it retained its
handicraft character. It is not the labour, but the instrument of labour, that serves as the starting-point of the machine.



[161 Before the epoch of Mechanical Industry, the wool manufacture was the predominating manufacture in England. Hence it was in this
industry that, in the first half of the 18th century, the most experiments were made. Cotton, which required less careful preparation for its
treatment by machinery, derived the benefit of the experience gained on wool, just as afterwards the manipulation of wool by machinery was
developed on the lines of cotton-spinning and weaving by machinery. It was only during the 10 years immediately preceding 1866, that isolated
details of the wool manufacture, such as woolcombing, were incorporated in the factory system. "The application of power to the process of
combing wool ... extensively in operation since the introduction of the combingmachine, especially Lister's ... undoubtedly had the effect of
throwing a very large number of men out of work. Wool was formerly combed by hand, most frequently in the cottage of the comber. It is now
very generally combed in the factory, and hand-labour is superseded, except in some particular kinds of work, in which hand-combed wool is
still preferred. Many of the hand-combers found employment in the factories, but the produce of the hand-combers bears so small a proportion to
that of the machine, that the employment of a very large number of combers has passed away." ("Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1856," p.
16.)



[171 "The principle of the factory system, then, is to substitute ... the partition of a process into its essential constituents, for the division or
graduation of labour among artisans." (Andrew Ure: "The Philosophy of Manufactures," Lond., 1835, p. 20.)



[181 The power-loom was at first made chiefly of wood; in its improved modern form it is made of iron. To what an extent the old forms of the
instruments of production influenced their new forms at first starting, is shown by, amongst other things, the most superficial comparison of the
present power-loom with the old one, of the modern blowing apparatus of a blast-furnace with the first inefficient mechanical reproduction of the
ordinary bellows, and perhaps more strikingly than in any other way, by the attempts before the invention of the present locomotive, to construct
a locomotive that actually had two feet, which after the fashion of a horse, it raised alternately from the ground. It is only after considerable
development of the science of mechanics, and accumulated practical experience, that the form of a machine becomes settled entirely in
accordance with mechanical principles, and emancipated from the traditional form of the tool that gave rise to it.



[191 Eli Whitney's cotton gin had until very recent times undergone less essential changes than any other machine of the 1 8th century. It is only
during the last decade (i.e., since 1856) that another American, Mr. Emery, of Albany, New York, has rendered Whitney's gin antiquated by an
improvement as simple as it is effective.

[201 "The Industry of Nations," Lond., 1855, Part II., p. 239. This work also remarks: 'Simple and outwardly unimportant as this appendage to
lathes may appear, it is not, we believe, averring too much to state, that its influence in improving and extending the use of machinery has been
as great as that produced by Watt's improvements of the steam-engine itself. Its introduction went at once to perfect all machinery, to cheapen it,
and to stimulate invention and improvement."

[211 One of these machines, used for forging paddle-wheel shafts in London, is called "Thor." It forges a shaft of 16 1/2 tons with as much ease
as a blacksmith forges a horseshoe.

[221 Wood- working machines that are also capable of being employed on a small scale are mostly American inventions.



[231 Science, generally speaking, costs the capitalist nothing, a fact that by no means hinders him from exploiting it. The science of others is as
much annexed by capital as the labour of others. Capitalistic appropriation and personal appropriation, whether of science or of material wealth,
are, however, totally different things. Dr. Ure himself deplores the gross ignorance of mechanical science existing among his dear
machinery-exploiting manufacturers, and Liebig can a tale unfold about the astounding ignorance of chemistry displayed by English chemical
manufacturers.



[241 Ricardo lays such stress on this effect of machinery (of which, in other connexions, he takes no more notice than he does of the general
distinction between the labour process and the process of creating surplus-value), that he occasionally loses sight of the value given up by

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (40 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

machines to the product, and puts machines on the same footing as natural forces. Tbus "Adam Smith nowhere undervalues the services which
the natural agents and machinery perform for us, but he very justly distinguishes the nature of the value which they add to commodities... as they
perform their work gratuitously, the assistance which they afford us, adds nothing to value in exchange." (Ric, 1. c, pp. 336, 337.) This
observation of Ricardo is of course correct in so far as it is directed against J. B. Say, who imagines that machines render the "service" of
creating value which forms a part of "profits."



[251 A horse-power is equal to a force of 33,000 foot-pounds per minute, i.e., to a force that raises 33,000 pounds one foot in a minute, or one
pound 33,000 feet. This is the horse power meant in the text. In ordinary language, and also here and there in quotations in this work, a
distinction is drawn between the "nominal" and the "commercial" or "indicated" horse-power of the same engine. The old or nominal
horse-power is calculated exclusively from the length of piston- stroke, and the diameter of the cylinder, and leaves pressure of steam and piston
speed out of consideration. It expresses practically this: This engine would be one of 50 horse-power, if it were driven with the same low
pressure of steam, and the same slow piston speed, as in the days of Boulton and Watt. But the two latter factors have increased enormously
since those days. In order to measure the mechanical force exerted today by an engine, an indicator has been invented which shows the pressure
of the steam in the cylinder. The piston speed is easily ascertained. Thus the "indicated" or "commercial" horse-power of an engine is expressed
by a mathematical formula, involving diameter of cylinder, length of stroke, piston speed, and steam pressure, simultaneously, and showing what
multiple of 33,000 pounds is really raised by the engine in a minute. Hence, one "nominal" horse-power may exert three, four, or even five
"indicated" or "real" horse-powers. This observation is made for the purpose of explaining various citations in the subsequent pages. — F. E.



[261 The reader who is imbued with capitalist notions will naturally miss here the "interest" that the machine, in proportion to its capital value,
adds to the product. It is, however, easily seen that since a machine no more creates new value than any other part of constant capital, it cannot
add any value under the name of "interest." It is also evident that here, where we are treating of the production of surplus-value, we cannot
assume a priori the existence of any part of that value under the name of interest. The capitalist mode of calculating, which appears, prima facie,
absurd, and repugnant to the laws of the creation of value, will be explained in the third book of this work.

[271 This portion of value which is added by the machinery, decreases both absolutely and relatively, when the machinery does away with horses
and other animals that are employed as mere moving forces, and not as machines for changing the form of matter. It may here be incidentally
observed, that Descartes, in defining animals as mere machines, .saw with eyes of the manufacturing period, while to eyes of the middle ages,
animals were assistants to man, as they were later to Von Haller in his "Restauration der Staatswissenschaften." That Descartes, like Bacon,
anticipated an alteration in the form of production, and the practical subjugation of Nature by Man, as a result of the altered methods of thought,
is plain from his "Discours de la Methode." He there says: "If est possible (by the methods he introduced in philosophy) de parvenir i des
connaissances fort utiles i la vie, et qu'au lieu de cette philosophic speculative qu'on enseigne dans les ecoles, on en peut trouver une pratique,
par laquelle, connaissant la force et les actions du feu, de l'eau, de Fair, des astres, et de tons les autres corps qui nous environment, aussi
distinctement que nous connaissons les divers metiers de nos artisans, nous les pourrions employer en meme facon a tous les usages auxquels ils
sont propres, et ainsi nous rendre comme maitres et possesseurs de la nature" and thus "contrubuer au perfectionnement de la vie humaine." In
the preface to Sir Dudley North's "Discourses upon Trade" (1691) it is stated, that Descartes' method had begun to free Political Economy from
the old fables and superstitious notions of gold, trade, &c. On the whole, however, the early English economists sided with Bacon and Hobbes as
their philosophers; while, at a later period, the philosopher [...] of Political Economy in England, France, and Italy, was Locke.



[281 According to the annual report (1863) of the Essen chamber of commerce, there was produced in 1862, at the cast-steel works of Krupp,
with its 161 furnaces, thirty-two steam-engines (in the year 1800 this was about the number of all the steam-engines working in Manchester),
and fourteen steam-hammers (representing in all 1,236 horse-power) forty-nine forges, 203 tool-machines, and about 2,400 workmen-thirteen
million pounds of cast steel. Here there are not two workmen to each horse-power.



[291 Babbage estimates that in Java the spinning labour alone adds 117% to the value of the cotton. At the same period (1832) the total value
added to the cotton by machinery and labour in the fine-spinning industry, amounted to about 33% of the value of the cotton. ("On the Economy
of Machinery," pp. 165, 166.)



30] Machine printing also economises colour.

311 See Paper read by Dr. Watson, Reporter on Products to the Government of India, before the Society of Arts, 17th April, 1860.



[321 "These mute agents (machines) are always the produce of much less labour than that which they displace, even when they are of the same
money-value." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 40.)

[331 Hence in a communistic society there would be a very different scope for the employof machinery than there can be in a bourgeois society.



[341 "Employers of labour would not unnecessarily retain two sets of children under thirteen.... In fact one class of manufacturers, the spinners of
woollen yam, now rarely employ children under thirteen years of age, i.e., half-timers. They have introduced improved and new machinery of
various kinds, which altogether supersedes the employment of children (i.e., under 13 years); f. i., I will mention one process as an illustration of
this diminution in the number of children, wherein by the addition of an apparatus, called a piecing machine, to existing machines, the work of
six or four half-timers, according to the peculiarity of each machine, can be performed by one young person (over 13 years)... the half-time
system 'stimulated' the invention of the piecing machine." (Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858.)



351 "Wretch" is the recognised term in English Political Economy for the agricultural labourer.

361 "Machinery ... can frequently not be employed until labour (he means wages) rises." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 479.)

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (41 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
[37] See "Report of the Social Science Congress, at Edinburgh." Oct., 1863.



P81 Dr. Edward Smith, during the cotton crisis caused by the American Civil War, was sent by the English Government to Lancashire, Cheshire,
and other places, to report on the sanitary condition of the cotton operatives. He reported, that from a hygienic point of view, and apart from the
banishment of the operatives from the factory atmosphere, the crisis had several advantages. The women now had sufficient leisure to give their
infants the breast, instead of poisoning them with "Godfrey's cordial." They had time to learn to cook. Unfortunately the acquisition of this art
occurred at a time when they had nothing to cook. But from this we see how capital, for the purposes of its self-expansion, has usurped the
labour necessary in the home of the family. This crisis was also utilised to teach sewing to the daughters of the workmen in sewing schools. An
American revolution and a universal crisis, in order that the working girls, who spin for the whole world, might learn to sew!



[391 "The numerical increase of labourers has been great, through the growing substitution of female for male, and above all, of childish for adult
labour. Three girls of 13, at wages of from 6 shillings to 8 shillings a week, have replaced the one man of mature age, of wages varying from 18
shillings to 45 shillings." (Th. de Quincey: "The Logic of Political Econ.," London, 1844. Note to p. 147.) Since certain family functions, such as
nursing and suckling children, cannot be entirely suppressed, the mothers confiscated by capital, must try substitutes of some sort. Domestic
work, such as sewing and mending, must be replaced by the purchase of ready-made articles. Hence, the diminished expenditure of labour in the
house is accompanied by an increased expenditure of money. The cost of keeping the family increases, and balances the greater income. In
addition to this, economy and judgment in the consumption and preparation of the means of subsistence becomes impossible. Abundant material
relating to these facts, which are concealed by official Political Economy, is to be found in the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories, of the
Children's Employment Commission, and more especially in the Reports on Public Health.



[401 In striking contrast with the great fact, that the shortening of the hours of labour of women and children in English factories was exacted
from capital by the male operatives, we find in the latest reports of the Children's Employment Commission traits of the operative parents in
relation to the traffic in children, that are truly revolting and thoroughly like slave-dealing. But the Pharisee of a capitalist, as may be seen from
the same reports, denounces this brutality which he himself creates, perpetuates, and exploits, and which he moreover baptises "freedom of
labour." "Infant labour has been called into aid ... even to work for their own daily bread. Without strength to endure such disproportionate toil,
without instruction to guide their future life, they have been thrown into a situation physically and morally polluted. The Jewish historian has
remarked upon the overthrow of Jerusalem by Titus that it was no wonder it should have been destroyed, with such a signal destruction, when an
inhuman mother sacrificed her own offspring to satisfy the cravings of absolute hunger." ("Public Economy Concentrated." Carlisle, 1833, p.
66.)

[41] A. Redgrave in "Reports of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1858," pp. 40, 41.

[421 "Children's Employment Commission, Fifth Report," London, 1866, p. 81, n. 31. [Added in the 4th German edition. — The Bethnal Green
silk industry is now almost destroyed. — F. E.]

[431 "Children's Employment Commission, Third Report," London, 1864, p. 53, n. 15.

[441 1. c., Fifth Report, p. 22, n. 137.

[451 "Sixth Report on Public Health," Lond., 1864, p. 34.



[461 "It (the inquiry of 1861)... showed, moreover, that while, with the described circumstances, infants perish under the neglect and
mismanagement which their mothers' occupations imply, the mothers become to a grievous extent denaturalised towards their
offspring-commonly not troubling themselves much at the death, and even sometimes... taking direct measures to insure it." (1. c.)

[471 1. c, p. 454.

[481 1- c, pp. 454-463. "Report by Dr. Henry Julian Hunter on the excessive mortality of infants in some rural districts of England."

[491 1. c, p. 35 and pp. 455, 456.

[501 1. c, p. 456.

[51] In the agricultural as well as in the factory districts the consumption of opium among the grown-up labourers, both male and female, is
extending daily. "To push the sale of opiate... is the great aim of some enterprising wholesale merchants. By druggists it is considered the leading
article." (1. c, p. 459.) Infants that take opiates "shrank up into little old men," or "wizened like little monkeys." (1. c, p. 460.) We here see how
India and China avenged themselves on England.

[521 1. c, p. 37.

[531 "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," p. 59. Mr. Baker was formerly a doctor.

[541 L. Horner in "Reports of lnsp. of Fact, for 30th June, 1857," p. 17.

[551 L. Horner in "Rep, of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1855," pp. 18, 19.

[56] Sir John Kincaid in "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858," pp. 31, 32.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (42 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

[571 L. Homer in "Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1857," pp. 17, 18.

[581 Sir J. Kincaid in "Reports, &c., 31st Oct., 1856," p. 66.

[591 A. Redgrave in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st. Oct., 1857," pp. 41-42. In those industries where the Factory Act proper (not the Print Works
Act referred to in the text) has been in force for some time, the obstacles in the way of the education clauses have, in recent years, been
overcome. In industries not under the Act, the views of Mr. J. Geddes, a glass manufacturer, still extensively prevail. He informed Mr. White,
one of the Inquiry Commissioners: "As far as I can see, the greater amount of education which a part of the working-class has enjoyed for some
years past is an evil. It is dangerous, because it makes them independent." ("Children's Empl. Comm., Fourth Report," Lond., 1865, p. 253.)

[601 "Mr. E., a manufacturer ... informed me that he employed females exclusively at his power-looms ... gives a decided preference to married
females, especially those who have families at home dependent on them for support; they are attentive, docile, more so than unmarried females,
and are compelled to use their utmost exertions to procure the necessaries of life. Thus are the virtues, the peculiar virtues of the female character
to be perverted to her injury-thus all that is most dutiful and tender in her nature is made a means of her bondage and suffering." (Ten Hours'
Factory Bill. The Speech of Lord Ashley, March 15th, Lond., 1844, p. 20.)



[611 "Since the general introduction of machinery, human nature has been forced far beyond its average strength." (Rob. Owen: "Observations
on the Effects of the Manufacturing System," 2nd Ed., London, 1817.)



[621 The English, who have a tendency to look upon the earliest form of appearance of a thing as the cause of its existence, are in the habit of
attributing the long hours of work in factories to the extensive kidnapping of children, practised by capitalists in the infancy of the factory
system, on workhouses and orphanages, by means of which robbery, unresisting material for exploitation was procured. Thus, for instance,
Ficiden, himself a manufacturer, says: "It is evident that the long hours of work were brought about by the circumstance of so great a number of
destitute children being supplied from different parts of the country, that the masters were independent of the hands, and that having once
established the custom by means of the miserable materials they had procured in this way, they could impose it on their neighbours with the
greater facility." (J. Ficiden: "The Curse of the Factory System," Lond., 1836, p. I 1.) With reference to the labour of women, Saunders, the
factory inspector, says in his report of 1844: "Amongst the female operatives there are some women who, for many weeks in succession, except
for a few days, are employed from 6 a. in. till midnight, with less than 2 hours for meals, so that on 5 days of the week they have only 6 hours
left out of the 24, for going to and from their homes and resting in bed."

[631 "Occasion... injury to the delicate moving parts of metallic mechanism by inaction." (Ure, 1. c, p. 281.)



[641 The Manchester Spinner (Times, 26th Nov., 1862) before referred to says in relation to this subject: "It (namely, the "allowance for
deterioration of machinery") is also intended to cover the loss which is constantly arising from the superseding of machines before they are worn
out, by others of a new and better construction."



[651 "It has been estimated, roughly, that the first individual of a newly-invented machine will cost about five times as much as the construction
of the second." (Babbage, 1. c, p. 349.



[661 "The improvements which took place not long ago in frames for making patent net were so great that a machine in good repair which had
cost £1,200, sold a few years after for £60 ... improvements succeeded each other so rapidly, that machines which had never been finished were
abandoned in the hands of their makers, because new improvements bad superseded their utility." (Babbage, 1. c, p. 233.) In these stormy,
go-ahead times, therefore, the tulle manufacturers soon extended the working-day, by means of double sets of hands, from the original 8 hours to
24.



[67] "It is self-evident, that, amid the ebbings and flowings of the markets and the alternate expansions and contractions of demand, occasions
will constantly recur, in which the manufacturer may employ additional floating capital without employing additional fixed capital... if additional
quantities of raw material can be worked up without incurring an additional expense for buildings and machinery." (R. Torrens: "On Wages and
Combination." London, 1834, p. 64.)

[681 This circumstance is mentioned only for the sake of completeness, for I shall not consider the rate of profit, i.e., the ratio of the
surplus-value to the total capital advanced, until I come to the third book.

[691 Senior, "Letters on the Factory Act." London, 1837, pp. 13, 14.



[701 "The great proportion of fixed to circulating capital ... makes long hours of work desirable." With the increased use of machinery, &c, "the
motives to long hours of work will become greater, as the only means by which a large proportion of fixed capital can be made profitable." (1. c,
pp. 1 1-13.) "There are certain expenses upon a mill which go on in the same proportion whether the mill be running short or full time, as, for
instance, rent rates, and taxes, insurance against fire, wages of several permanent servants, deterioration of machinery, with various other charges
upon a manufacturing establishment, the proportion of which to profits increases as the production decreases." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st
Oct., 1862," p. 19.)

[711 Why it is, that the capitalist, and also the political economists who am imbued with his views, are unconscious of this immanent
contradiction, will appear from the first part of the third book.



721 It is one of the greatest merits of Ricardo to have seen in machinery not only the means of producing commodities, but of creating a
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (43 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
"redundant population."

1731 F. Biese. "Die Philosophie des Aristoteles," Vol. 2. Berlin, 1842, p. 408.



[741 1 give below the translation of this poem by Stolberg, because it brings into relief, quite in the spirit of former quotations referring to
division of labour, the antithesis between the views of the ancients and the moderns. "Spare the hand that grinds the corn, Oh, miller girls, and
softly sleep. Let Chanticleer announce the morn in vain! Deo has commanded the work of the girls to be done by the Nymphs, and now they skip
lightly over the wheels, so that the shaken axles revolve with their spokes and pull round the load of the revolving stones. Let us live the life of
our fathers, and let us rest from work and enjoy the gifts that the Goddess sends us."

"Schonet der mahlenden Hand, o Miillerinnen, und schlafet
Sanft! es verkiinde der Hahn euch den Morgen umsonst!
Dao hat die Arbeit der Midchen den Nymphen befohlen,
Und itzt hiipfen sic leicht liber die Rader dahin,
DaB die erschiitterten Achsen mit ihren Speichen sich walzen,
Und im Kreise die Last drehen des walzenden Steins.
LaBt uns leben das Leben der Vater, und laBt uns der Gaben
Arbeitsios uns freun, welche die Gottin uns schenkt."

(Gedichte aus dem Griechischen ubersetzt von Christian Graf zu Stolberg, Hamburg, 1782.)



[751 There are, of course, always differences, in the intensities of the labour in various industries. But these differences are, as Adam Smith has
shown, compensated to a partial extent by minor circumstances, peculiar to each sort of labour. Labour-time, as a measure of value, is not,
however, affected in this case, except in so far as the duration of labour, and the degree of its intensity, are two antithetical and mutually
exclusive expressions for one and the same quantity of labour.



[761 Especially by piece-work, a form we shall investigate in Part VI. of this book.

[771 See "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1865."

[781 Rep, of lnsp, of Fact, for 1844 and the quarter ending 30th April, 1845, pp. 20-21.

[791 1- c, p. 19. Since the wages for piece-work were unaltered, the weekly wages depended on the quantity produced.

[801 1. c, p. 20.



[811 The moral element played an important part in the above experiments. The workpeople told the factory inspector: "We work with more
spirit, we have the reward ever before us of getting away sooner at night, and one active and cheerful spirit pervades the whole mill, from the
youngest piecer to the oldest hand, and we can greatly help each other." (1. c, p. 21.)

[821 John Fielden, 1. c, p. 32.

[831 Lord Ashley, 1. c, pp. 6-9, passim.

[841 Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for Quarter ending 30th September, 1844, and from 1st October, 1844, to 30th April, 1845, p. 20.

[851 1. c, p. 22.

[861 "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1862," p. 62.



[871 This was altered in the "Parliamentary Return" of 1862. In it the actual horse-power of the modern steam engines and water wheels appears
in place of the nominal. The doubling spindles, too, are no longer included in the spinning spindles (as was the case in the "Returns" of 1839,
1850, and 1856); further, in the case of woollen mills, the number of "gigs" is added, a distinction made between jute and hemp mills on the one
hand and flax mills on the other, and finally stocking-weaving is for the first time inserted in the report.

[881 "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1856," pp. 13-14, 20 and 1852, p. 23.

[89J I.e., pp. 14-15.

[901 1. c, P. 20.

[911 "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1858," pp. 0-10. Compare "Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1860," p. 30, sqq.

[921 "Reports of lnsp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," pp. 100 and 130.



[931 On 2 modern power-looms a weaver now makes in a week of 60 hours 26 pieces of certain quality, length, and breadth; while on the old
power-looms he could make no more than 4 such pieces. The cost of weaving a piece of such cloth had already soon after 1850 fallen from 2s.
9d. to 5 l/8d.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (44 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

"Thirty years ago (1841) one spinner with three placers was not required to attend to more than one pair of mules with 300-324 spindles. At the
present time (1871) he has to mind with the help of 5 piecers 2,200 spindles, and produces not less than seven times as much yarn as in 1841."
(Alex. Redgrave, Factory Inspector-in the Journal of Arts, 5th January, 1872.)

[94j "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1861," pp. 25, 26.

[951 The agitation for a working-day of 8 hours has now (1867) begun in Lancashire among the factory operatives.

[961 The following few figures indicate the increase in the "factories" of the United Kingdom since 1848:









Quantity

Exported.

1848.


Quantity

Exported.

1851.


Quantity

Exported.

1860.


Quantity

Exported.

1865.


COTTON


Cotton yarn


lbs.
135,831,162


lbs.
143,966,106


lbs.
197,343,655


lbs.
103,751,455


Sewing thread


—


lbs.
4,392,176


lbs.
6,297,554


lbs.
4,648,611


Cotton cloth


yds.
1,091,373,930


yds.
1,543,161,789


yds.

2,776,218,427


yds.
2,015,237,851


FLAX & HEMP


Yarn


lbs.
11,722,182


lbs.
18,841,326


lbs.
31,210,612


lbs.

36,777,334


Cloth


yds.
88,901,519


yds.
129,106,753


yds.
143,996,773


yds.
247,012.529


SILK


Yarn


lbs.
466,825


lbs.
462,513


lbs.
897,402


lbs.
812,589


Cloth


—


yds.
1,181,455


yds.
1,307,293


yds.
2,869,837


WOOL


Woollen and
Worsted yarns


—


lbs.
14,670,880


lbs.
27,533,968


lbs.
31,669,267


Cloth


—


yds.
151,231,153


yds.
190,371,507


yds.
278,837,418









Value

Exported.

1848.

£


Value

Exported.

1851.

£


Value

Exported.

1860.

£


Value

Exported.

1865.

£


COTTON


Yarn


5,927,831


6,634,026


9,870,875


10,351,049


Cloth


16,753,369


23,454,810


42,141,505


46,903,796


FLAX & HEMP


Yarn


493,449


951,426


1,801,272


2,505,497


Cloth


2,802,789


4,107,396


4,804,803


9,155,358


SILK


Yarn


77,789


196,380


826,107


768,064


Cloth


—


1,130,398


1,587,303


1,409,221


WOOL


Yarn


776,975


1,484,544


3,843,450


5,424,047


Cloth


5,733,828


8,377,183


12,156,998


20,102,259



See the Blue books "Statistical Abstract of the United Kingdom," Nos. 8 and 13. Lond., 1961 and 1866. In Lancashire the number of mills
increased only 4 per cent, between 1839 and 1850; 19 per cent, between 1850 and 1856; and 33 per cent, between 1856 and 1862; while the
persons employed in them during each of the above periods of It years increased absolutely, but diminished relatively. (See "Rep. of Insp. of
Fact., for 3 1st Oct., 1862," p. 63.) The cotton trade preponderates in Lancashire. We may form an idea of the stupendous nature of the cotton



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (45 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

trade in that district when we consider that, of the gross number of textile factories in the United Kingdom, it absorbs 45.2 per cent., of the
spindles 83.3 per cent., of the power-looms 81.4 per cent., of the mechanical horse-power 72.6 per cent., and of the total number of persons
employed 58.2 per cent. (1. c, pp. 62-63.)

[971 Ure, 1. c, p. 18.

[981 Ure, 1. c, P. 3 1. See Karl Marx, 1. c, pp. 140-141.



[991 It looks very like intentional misleading by statistics (which misleading it would be possible to prove in detail in other cases too), when the
English factory legislation excludes from its operation the class of labourers last mentioned in the text, while the parliamentary returns expressly
include in the category of factory operatives, not only engineers, mechanics, &c, but also managers, salesmen, messengers, warehousemen,
packers, &c, in short everybody, except the owner of the factory himself.

riOOl Ure grants this. He says, "in case of need," the workmen can be moved at the will of the manager from one machine to another, and he
triumphantly exclaims: "Such a change is in flat contradiction with the old routine, that divides the labour, and to one workman assigns the task
of fashioning the head of a needle, to another the sharpening of the point." He had much better have asked himself, why this "old routine" is
departed from in theautomatic factory, only "in case of need. "

[1011 When distress is very great, as, for instance, during the American Civil War, the factory operative is now and then set by the Bourgeois to
do the roughest Of Work, such as road-making, &c. The English "ateliers nationaux" of 1862 and the following years, established for the benefit
of the destitute cotton operatives, differ from the French of 1848 in this, that in the latter the workmen had to do unproductive work at the
expense of the state, in the former they had to do productive municipal work to the advantage of the bourgeois, and that, too, cheaper than the
regular workmen, with whom they were thus thrown into competition. "The physical appearance of the cotton operatives is unquestionably
improved. This I attribute ... as to the men, to outdoor labour on public works." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1863," p. 59.) The writer here
alludes to the Preston factory operatives, who were employed on Preston Moor.

[1021 An example: The various mechanical apparatus introduced since the Act of 1844 into woollen mills, for replacing the labour of children.
So soon as it shall happen that the children of the manufacturers themselves have to go through a course of schooling as helpers in the mill, this
almost unexplored territory of mechanics will soon make remarkable progress. "Of machinery, perhaps self-acting mules are as dangerous as any
other kind. Most of the accidents from them happen to little children, from their creeping under the mules to sweep the floor whilst the mules are
in motion. Several 'minders' have been fined for this offence, but without much general benefit. If machine makers would only invent a
self-sweeper, by whose use the necessity for these little children to creep under the machinery might be prevented, it would be a happy addition
to our protective measures." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st. Oct., 1866," p. 63.)

[1031 So much then for Proudhon's wonderful idea: he "construes" machinery not as a synthesis of instruments of labour, but as a synthesis of
detail operations for the benefit of the labourer himself.

[1041 F. Engels, 1. c, p. 217. Even an ordinary and optimist Free-trader, like Mr. Molinari, goes so far as to say, "Un homme s'use plus vite en
surveillant, quinze heures par jour, revolution uniforme d'un mecanisme, qu'en exercant, dans le meme espace de temps, sa force physique. Ce
travail de surveillance qui servirait peut-etre d'utile gymnastique a l'intelligence, s'il n'etait pas trop prolonge, detruit a la longue, par son exces,
et l'intelligence, et le corps meme." (G. de Molinari: "Etudes Economiques." Paris, 1846.)

[1051 F- Engels, 1. c, p. 216.

[1061 "The Master Spinners' and Manufacturers' Defence Fund. Report of the Committee." Manchester, 1854, p. 17. We shall see hereafter, that
the "master" can sing quite another song, when he is threatened with the loss of his "living" automaton.

[1071 Ure, 1. c, p. 15. Whoever knows the life history of Arkwright, will never dub this barber-genius "noble." Of all the great inventors of the
18th century, he was incontestably the greatest thiever of other people's inventions and the meanest fellow.

[1081 "The slavery in which the bourgeoisie has bound the proletariat, comes nowhere more plainly into daylight than in the factory system. In it
all freedom comes to an end both at law and in fact. The workman must be in the factory at half past five. If he come a few minutes late, he is
punished; if he come 10 minutes late, he is not allowed to enter until after breakfast, and thus loses a quarter of a day's wage. He must eat, drink
and sleep at word of command.... The despotic bell calls him from his bed, calls him from breakfast and dinner. And how does he fare in the
mill? There the master is the absolute law-giver. He makes what regulations he pleases; he alters and makes additions to his code at pleasure; and
if he insert the veriest nonsense, the courts say to the workman: Since you have entered into this contract voluntarily, you must now carry it out
.... These workmen are condemned to live, from their ninth year till their death, under this mental and bodily torture." (F. Engels, 1. c, p. 217,
sq.) What, "the courts say," I will illustrate by two examples. One occurs at Sheffield at the end of 1866. In that town a workman had engaged
himself for 2 years in a steelworks. In consequence of a quarrel with his employer he left the works, and declared that under no circumstances
would he work for that master any more. He was prosecuted for breach of contract, and condemned to two months' imprisonment. (If the master
break the contract, he can be proceeded against only in a civil action, and risks nothing but money damages.) After the workman has served his
two months, the master invites him to return to the works, pursuant to the contract. Workman says: No, he has already been punished for the
breach. The master prosecutes again, the court condemns again, although one of the judges, Mr. Shee, publicly denounces this as a legal
monstrosity, by which a man can periodically, as long as he lives, be punished over and over again for the same offence or crime. This judgment
was given not by the "Great Unpaid," the provincial Dogberries, but by one of the highest courts of justice in London. — [Added in the 4th
German edition. — This has now been done away with. With few exceptions, e.g., when public gas-works are involved, the worker in England is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (46 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

now put on an equal footing with the employer in case of breach of contract and can be sued only civilly. — F. E.] The second case occurs in
Wiltshire at the end of November 1863. About 30 power-loom weavers, in the employment of one Harrup, a cloth manufacturer at Leower's
Mill, Westbury Leigh, struck work because master Harrup indulged in the agreeable habit of making deductions from their wages for being late
in the morning; 6d. for 2 minutes; Is. for 3 minutes, and Is. 6d. for ten minutes. This is at the rate of 9s. per hour, and £4 10s. Od. per diem;
while the wages of the weavers on the average of a year, never exceeded 10s. to 12s. weekly. Harrup also appointed a boy to announce the
starting time by a whistle, which he often did before six o'clock in the morning: and if the hands were not all there at the moment the whistle
ceased, the doors were closed, and those hands who were outside were fined: and as there was no clock on the premises, the unfortunate hands
were at the mercy of the young Harrup-inspired time-keeper. The hands on strike, mothers of families as well as girls, offered to resume work if
the timekeeper were replaced by a clock, and a more reasonable scale of fines were introduced. Harrup summoned 19 women and girls before the
magistrates for breach of contract. To the utter indignation of all present, they were each mulcted in a fine of 6d. and 2s. 6d. for costs. Harrup
was followed from the court by a crowd of people who hissed him. A favourite operation with manufacturers is to punish the workpeople by
deductions made from their wages on account of faults in the material worked on. This method gave rise in 1866 to a general strike in the
English pottery districts. The reports of the Ch. Empl. Corn. (1863-1866), give cases where the worker not only receives no wages, but becomes,
by means of his labour, and of the penal regulations, the debtor to boot, of his worthy master. The late cotton crisis also furnished edifying
examples of the sagacity shown by the factory autocrats in making deductions from wages. Mr. R. Baker, the Inspector of Factories, says, "I
have myself had lately to direct prosecutions against one cotton mill occupier for having in these pinching and painful times deducted lOd. a
piece from some of the young workers employed by him, for the surgeon's certificate (for which he himself had only paid 6d.), when only
allowed by the law to deduct 3d., and by custom nothing at all .... And I have been informed of another, who, in order to keep without the law,
but to attain the same object, charges the poor children who work for him a shilling each, as a fee for learning them the art and mystery of cotton
spinning, so soon as they are declared by the surgeon fit and proper persons for that occupation. There may therefore be undercurrent causes for
such extraordinary exhibitions as strikes, not only wherever they arise, but particularly at such times as the present, which without explanation,
render them inexplicable to the public understanding." He alludes here to a strike of power-loom weavers at Darwen, June, 1863. ("Reports of
Insp. of Fact, for 30 April, 1863," pp. 50-51.) The reports always go beyond their official dates.

[1091 The protection afforded by the Factory Acts against dangerous machinery has had a beneficial effect. "But ... there are other sources of
accident which did not exist twenty years since; one especially, viz., the increased speed of the machinery. Wheels, rollers, spindles and shuttles
are now propelled at increased and increasing rates; fingers must be quicker and defter in their movements to take up the broken thread, for, if
placed with hesitation or carelessness, they are sacrificed.... A large number of accidents are caused by the eagerness of the workpeople to get
through their work expeditiously. It must be remembered that it is of the highest importance to manufacturers that their machinery should be in
motion, i.e., producing yams and goods. Every minute's stoppage is not only a loss of power, but of production, and the workpeople are urged by
the overlookers, who are interested in the quantity of work turned off, to keep the machinery in motion, and it is no less important to those of the
operatives who are paid by the weight or piece, that the machines should be kept in motion. Consequently, although it is strictly forbidden in
many, nay in most factories, that machinery should be cleaned while in motion, it is nevertheless the constant practice in most, if not in all, that
the workpeople do, unreproved, pick out waste, wipe rollers and wheels, &c, while their frames are in motion. Thus from this cause only, 906
accidents have occurred during the six months.... Although a great deal of cleaning is constantly going on day by day, yet Saturday is generally
the day set apart for the thorough cleaning of the machinery, and a great deal of this is done while the machinery is in motion." Since cleaning is
not paid for, the workpeople seek to get done with it as speedily as possible. Hence "the number of accidents which occur on Fridays, and
especially on Saturdays, is much larger than on any other day. On the former day the excess is nearly '.2 per cent, over the average number of the
four first days of the week, and on the latter day the excess is 25 per cent, over the average of the preceding five days; or, if the number of
working-hours on Saturday being taken into account — 7 1/2 hours on Saturday as compared with 10 1/2 on other days — there is an excess of
65 per cent, on Saturdays over the average of the other five days." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," pp. 9, 15, 16, 17.)

[1101 In Part I. of Book III. I shall give an account of a recent campaign by the English manufacturers against the Clauses in the Factory Acts
that protect the "hands" against dangerous machinery. For the present, let this one quotation from the official report of Leonard Horner suffice: "I
have heard some mill-owners speak with inexcusable levity of some of the accidents; such, for instance, as the loss of a finger being a trifling
matter. A working-man's living and prospects depend so much upon his fingers, that any loss of them is a very serious matter to him. When I
have heard such inconsiderate remarks made, I have usually put this question: Suppose you were in want of an additional workman, and two
were to apply, both equally well qualified in other respects, but one had lost a thumb or a forefinger, which would you engage? There never was
a hesitation as to the answer...." The manufacturers have "mistaken prejudices against what they have heard represented as a
pseudo-philanthropic legislation." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1855.") These manufacturers are clever folk, and not without reason were
they enthusiastic for the slave-holders' rebellion.

[1111 In those factories that have been longest subject to the Factory Acts, with their compulsory limitation of the hours of labour, and other
regulations, many of the older abuses have vanished. The very improvement of the machinery demands to a certain extent "improved
construction of the buildings," and this is an advantage to the workpeople. (See "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1863," p. 109.)

[1121 See amongst others, John Houghton: "Husbandry and Trade Improved." London, 1727. "The Advantages of the East India Trade, 1720."
John Bellers, 1. c. "The masters and their workmen are, unhappily, in a perpetual war with each other. The invariable object of the former is to
get their work done as cheaply as possible; and they do not fail to employ every artifice to this purpose, whilst the latter are equally attentive to
every occasion of distressing their masters into a compliance with higher demands." ("An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of
Provisions," pp. 61-62. Author, the Rev. Nathaniel Forster, quite on the side of the workmen.)

[1131 In old-fashioned manufactures the revolts of the workpeople against machinery, even to this day, occasionally assume a savage character,
as in the case of the Sheffield file cutters in 1865.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (47 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:07]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

[1141 Sir James Steuart also understands machinery quite in this sense. "Je considere done les machines comme des moyens d'augmenter
(virtuellement) le nombre des gens industrieux qu'on n'est pas oblige de nourrir.... En quoi l'effet d'une machine differe-t-il de celui de nouveaux
habitants?" (French trans. 1. 1., 1. 1., ch. XIX.) More naive is Petty, who says, it replaces "Polygamy." The above point of view is, at the most,
admissible only for some parts of the United States. On the other hand, "machinery can seldom be used with success to abridge the labour of an
individual; more time would be lost in its construction than could be saved by its application. It is only really useful when it acts on great masses,
when a single machine can assist the work of thousands. It is accordingly in the most populous countries, where there are most idle men, that it is
most abundant.... It is trot called into use by a scarcity of men, but by the facility with which they can be brought to work in masses." (Piercy
Ravenstone: "Thoughts on the Funding System and its Effects." London, 1824, p. 45.)

[1151 [Note in the 4th German edition. — This applies to Germany too. Where in our country agriculture on a large scale exists, hence
particularly in the East, it has become possible only in consequence of the clearing of the estates ("Bauernlegen"), a practice which became
widerspread in the 16th century and was particularly so since 1648. — F. E.]

[1161 "Machinery and labour are in constant competition." Ricardo, 1. c, p. 479.

[1171 The competition between hand-weaving and power-weaving in England, before the passing of the Poor Law of 1833, was prolonged by
supplementing the wages, which had fallen considerably below the minimum, with parish relief. "The Rev. Mr. Turner was, in 1827, rector of
Wilmslow in Cheshire, a manufacturing district. The questions of the Committee of Emigration, and Mr. Turner's answers, show how the
competition of human labour is maintained against machinery. 'Question: Has not the use of the power-loom superseded the use of the
hand-loom? Answer: Undoubtedly; it would have superseded them much more than it has done, if the hand-loom weavers were not enabled to
submit to a reduction of wages.' 'Question: But in submitting he has accepted wages which are insufficient to support him, and looks to parochial
contribution as the remainder of his support? Answer: Yes, and in fact the competition between the hand-loom and the power-loom is maintained
out of the poor-rates.' Thus degrading pauperism or expatriation, is the benefit which the industrious receive from the introduction of machinery,
to be reduced from the respectable and in some degree independent mechanic, to the cringing wretch who lives on the debasing bread of charity.
This they call a temporary inconvenience." ("A Prize Essay on the Comparative Merits of Competition and Co-operation." Lond., 1834, p. 29.)

[1181 "The same cause which may increase the revenue of the country" (i.e., as Ricardo explains in the same passage, the revenues of landlords
and capitalists, whose wealth, from the economic point of view, forms the Wealth of the Nation), "may at the same time render the population
redundant and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 469.) "The constant aim and the tendency of every improvement in
machinery is, in fact, to do away entirely with the labour of man, or to lessen its price by substituting the labour of women and children for that
of grown-up men, or of unskilled for that of skilled workmen." (Ure, 1. c, 1. 1., p. 35.)

[1191 "Rep. Insp. Fact, for 31st October, 1858," p. 43.

[1201 "Rep. Insp. Fact, for 31st October, 1856," p. 15.

[1211 Ure, 1. c, p. 19. "The great advantage of the machinery employed in brick-making consists in this, that the employer is made entirely
independent of skilled labourers." ("Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Report," Lond., 1866, p. 130, n. 46.) Mr. A. Sturrock, superintendent of the machine
department of the Great Northern Railway, says, with regard to the building of locomotives, &c: "Expensive English workmen are being less
used every day. The production of the workshops of England is being increased by the use of improved tools and these tools are again served by
a low class of labour.... Formerly their skilled labour necessarily produced all the parts of engines. Now the parts of engines are produced by
labour with less skill, but with good tools. By tools, I mean engineer's machinery, lathes, planing machines, drills, and so on." ("Royal Corn, on
Railways," Lond., 1867, Minutes of Evidence, n. 17, 862 and 17, 863.)

[1221 Ure, 1. c, p. 20.

[1231 Ure, I.e., p. 321.

[1241 Ure, 1. c, p. 23.

[1251 "Rep. Insp. Fact, 31st Oct., 1863," pp. 108,109.

[1261 1- c, p. 109. The rapid improvement of machinery, during the crisis, allowed the English manufacturers, immediately after the termination
of the American Civil War, and almost in no time, to glut the markets of the world again. Cloth,' during the last six months of 1866, was almost
unsaleable. Thereupon began the consignment of goods to India and China, thus naturally making the glut more intense. At the beginning of
1867 the manufacturers resorted to their usual way out of the difficulty, viz., reducing wages 5 per cent. The workpeople resisted, and said that
the only remedy was to work short time, 4 days a-week; and their theory was the correct one. After holding out for some time, the self-elected
captains of industry had to make up their minds to short time, with reduced wages in some places, and in others without.

[1271 "The relation of master and man in the blown-flint bottle trades amounts to a chronic strike." Hence the impetus given to the manufacture
of pressed glass, in which the chief operations are done by machinery. One firm in Newcastle, who formerly produced 350,000 lbs. of
blown-flint glass, now produces in its place 3,000,500 lbs. of pressed glass. ("Ch. Empl. Comm., Fourth Rep.," 1865, pp. 262-263.)

[1281 Gaskell. "The Manufacturing Population of England," London, 1833, pp. 3, 4.

[1291 W. Fairbaim discovered several very important applications of machinery to the construction of machines, in consequence of strikes in his

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (48 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
own workshops.

IT301 Ure, 1. c, pp. 368-370

[131] Ure, 1. c, pp. 368, 7, 370, 280, 281, 321, 370, 475.

11321 Ricardo originally was also of this opinion, but afterwards expressly disclaimed it with the scientific impartiality and love of truth
characteristic of him. See 1. c, ch. xxxi. "On Machinery."

[1331 Nota bene. My illustration is entirely on the lines of those given by the above named economists.

[1341 A disciple of Ricardo, in answer to the insipidities of J. B. Say, remarks on this point: "Where division of labour is well developed, the
skill of the labourer is available only in that particular branch in which it has been acquired; he himself is a sort of machine. It does not therefore
help matters one jot, to repeat in parrot fashion, that things have a tendency to find their level. On looking around us we cannot but see, that they
are unable to find their level for a long time; and that when they do find it, the level is always lower than at the commencement of the process."
(".An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand," &c, Lond. 1821, p. 72.)

[1351 MacCulloch, amongst others, is a past master in this pretentious cretinism. "If," he says, with the affected naivete of a child of 8 years, "if
it be advantageous, to develop the skill of the workman more and more, so that he is capable of producing, with the same or with a less quantity
of labour, a constantly increasing quantity of commodities, it must also be advantageous, that he should avail himself of the help of such
machinery as will assist him most effectively in the attainment of this result." (MacCulloch: "Princ. of Pol. Econ.," Lond. 1830, p. 166.)

[1361 "The inventor of the spinning machine has ruined India, a fact, however, that touches us but little." A. Thiers: De la propriete. — M. Thiers
here confounds the spinning machine with the power-loom, "a fact, however, that touches us but little."

[1371 According to the census of 1861 (Vol. II., Lond., 1863), the number of people employed in coal mines in England and Wales, amounted to
246,613 of which 73,545 were under, and 173,067 were over 20 years. Of those under 20, 835 were between 5 and 10 years, 30,701 between 10
and 15 years, 42,010 between 15 and 19 years. The number employed in iron, copper, lead, tin, and other mines of every description, was 319,

222.

[1381 In England and Wales, in 1861, there were employed in making machinery, 60,807 persons, including the masters and their clerks, &c,
also all agents and business people connected with this industry, but excluding the makers of small machines, such as sewing-machines, &c, as
also the makers of the operative parts of machines, such as spindles. The total number of civil engineers amounted to 3,329.

[1391 Since iron is one of the most important raw materials; let me here state that, in 1861, there were in England and Wales 125,771 operative
iron founders, of whom 123,430 were maim 2,341 females. Of the former 30,810 were under, and 92,620 over 20 years.

[1401 "A family of four grown-up persons, with two children as winders, earned at the end of the last, and the beginning of the present century,
by ten hours' daily labour, L4 a week. If the work was very pressing, they could earn more.... Before that, they had always suffered from a
dificient supply of yarn." (Gaskell, 1. c, pp. 25-27.)

[1411 F. Engels, in "Lage, &c," points out the miserable condition of a large number of those who work on these very articles of luxury. See also
numerous instances in the "Reports of the Children's Employment Commission."

[1421 In 1861, in England and Wales, there were 94,665 sailors in the merchant service.

[1431 Of these only 177,596 are males above 13 years of age.

[1441 Of these, 30,501 are females.

[1451 Of these, 137,447 males. None are included in the 1,208,648 who do not serve in private houses. Between 1861 and 1870 the number of
male servants nearly doubled itself. It increased to 267,671. In the year 1847 there were 2,694 gamekeepers (for the landlords' preserves), in
1869 there were 4,921. The young servant girls in the houses of the London lower middle class are in common parlance called "slaveys."

[1461 Ganilh, on the contrary, considers the final result of the factory system to be an absolutely less number of operatives, at whose expense an
increased number of "gens honnetes" live and develop their well-known "perfectibilite perfectible." Little as he understands the movement of
production, at least he feels, that machinery must needs be a very fatal institution, if its introduction converts busy workmen into paupers, and its
development calls more slaves of labour into existence than it has suppressed. It is not possible to bring out the cretinism of his standpoint,
except by his own words: "Les classes condamnees a produire et a consommer diminuent, et les classes qui dirigent le travail, qui soulagent,
consolent, et eclairent toute la population, se multiplient ... et s'approprient tons les bienfaits qui resultent de la diminution des fmis du travail, de
I'abondance des productions, et du bon marche des consommations. Dans cette direction, l'espece humaine s'eleve aux plus hautes conceptions
du genie, penetre dans les profoundeurs mysterieuses de la religion, etablit les principes salutaires de la morale (which consists in 's'approprier
tous les beinfaits,' &c), les lois tutelaires de la liberte (liberty of 'les classes condamnees a produire?') et du pouvoir, de l'obeissance et de la
justice, du devoir et de la I'humanite." For this twaddle, see "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique, &c, Par M. Ch. Ganilh," 2eme ed., Paris,
1821, 1. 1, p. 224, and see p. 212.

[1471 "Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1865," p. 58, sq. At the same time, however, means of employment for an increased number of hands
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (49 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
was ready in 110 new mills with 11,625 looms, 628,576 spindles and 2,695 total horse-power of steam and water (1. a).

11481 "Reports, &c., for 31 Oct., 1862," p. 79. At the end of 1871, Mr. A. Redgrave, the factory inspector, in a lecture given at Bradford, in the
New Mechanics' Institution, said: "What has struck me for some time past is the altered appearance of the woollen factories. Formerly they were
filled with women and children, now machinery seems to do all the work. At my asking for an explanation of this from a manufacturer, he gave
me the following: 'Under the old system I employed 63 persons; after the introduction of improved machinery I reduced my hands to 33, and
lately, in consequence of new and extensive alterations, I have been in a position to reduce those 33 to 13."

[149] See "Reports, &c, 31 Oct., 1856," p. 16.

[1501 "The sufferings of the hand-loom weavers were the subject of an inquiry by a Royal Commission, but although their distress was
acknowledged and lamented, the amelioration of their condition was left, and probably necessarily so, to the chances and changes of time, which
it may now be hoped" [20 years later!] "have nearly obliterated those miseries, and not improbably by the present great extention of the
power-loom." ("Rep. Insp. of Fact, 31 Oct., 1856," p. 75.)

[1511 Other ways in which machinery affects the production of raw material will be mentioned in the third book.

[1521 EXPORT OF COTTON FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 34,540,143 lbs. 1860. — 204,141,168 lbs. 1865. — 445,947,600
lbs.

EXPORT OF WOOL FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 4,570,581 lbs. 1860. — 20,214,173 lbs. 1865. — 20,679,1 11 lbs.

[1531 EXPORT OF WOOL FROM THE CAPE TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 2,958,457 lbs. 1860. — 16,574,345 lbs. 1865. — 29,920,623
lbs.

EXPORT OF WOOL FROM AUSTRALIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 21,789,346 lbs. 1860. — 59,166,616 lbs. 1865. — 109,734,261
lbs.

[1541 The economic development of the United States is itself a product of European, more especially of English modern industry. In their
present form (1866) the States must still be considered a European colony. [Added in the 4th German edition. — "Since then they have developed
into country whose industry holds second place in the world, without on that account entirely losing their colonial character. " — F. E.]

EXPORT OF COTTON FROM THE UNITED STATES TO GREAT

1846. - 401,949,393 lbs. 1852. - 765,630,54
1859. - 961,707,264 lbs. 1860. - 1,115,890,60



EXPORT OF CORN, &c, FROM THE UNITED STATE
TO GREAT BRITAIN

1850

Wheat, cwts 16,202,312

Barley, cwts 3,669,653

Oats, cwts 3,174,801

Rye, cwts 388,749

Flour, cwts 3,819,440

Buckwheat, cwts 1,054

Maize, cwts 5,473,161

Bere or Bigg (a sort of Barley), cwts 2,039

Peas, cwts 811,620

Beans, cwts 1,822,972



Total exports 35,365,801

[1561 In an appeal made in July, 1866, to the Trade Societies of England, by the shoemakers of Leicester, who had been thrown on the streets by
a lock-out, it is stated: "Twenty years ago the Leicester shoe trade was revolutionised by the introduction of riveting in the place of stitching. At
that time good wages could be earned. Great competition was shown between the different firms as to which could turn out the neatest article.
Shortly afterwards, however a worse kind of competition sprang up, namely, that of underselling one another in the market. The injurious
consequences soon manifested themselves in reductions of wages, and so sweepingly quick was the fall in the price of labour, that many firms

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (50 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

now pay only one half of the original wages. And yet, though wages sink lower and lower, profits appear, with each alteration in the scale of
wages, to increase." Even bad times are utilised by the manufacturers, for making exceptional profits by excessive lowering of wages, i.e., by a
direct robbery of the labourer's means of subsistence. One example (it has reference to the crisis in the Coventry silk weaving): "From
information I have received from manufacturers as well as workmen, there seems to be no doubt that wages have been reduced to a greater
extent than either the competition of the foreign producers, or other circumstances have rendered necessary ... the majority of weavers are
working at a reduction of 30 to 40 per cent, in their wages. A piece of ribbon for. making which the weaver got 6s. or 7s. five years back, now
only brings them 3s. 3d. or 3s. 6d.; other work is now priced at 2s. and 2s. 3d. which was formerly priced at 4s. and 4s. 3d. The reduction in
wage seems to have been carried to a greater extent than is necessary for increasing demand. Indeed, the reduction in the cost of weaving, in the
case of many descriptions of ribbons, has net been accompanied by any corresponding reduction in the selling price of the manufactured article."
(Mr. F. D. Longes Report. "Ch. Emp. Corn., V. Rep., 1866," p. 114, 1.)

[157] Conf "Reports of Insp. of Fact., 3 1st October, 1862," p. 30.

[15811. c, p. 19.

IT591 "Rep. Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1863," pp. 41-45.

IT 601 1- c, pp. 41-42

[16111. c, p. 57.

IT 621 I.e., pp. 50-51.

11631 1. c, pp. 62-63.

11641 "Rep. &c, 30th April, 1864," p. 27.

[1651 From a letter of Mr. Harris, Chief Constable of Bolton, in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. 61-62.

[1661 In an appeal, dated 1863, of the factory operatives of Lancashire, &c, for the purpose of forming a society for organised emigration, we
find the following: "That a large emigration of factory workers is now absolutely essential to raise them from their present prostrate condition,
few will deny; but to show that a continuous stream of emigration is at all times demanded, and, without which it is impossible for than to
maintain their position in ordinary times, we beg to call attention to the subjoined facts: — In 1814 the official value of cotton goods exported
was £17,665,378, whilst the real marketable value was £20,070,824. In 1858 the official value of cotton goods exported, was £182,221,681; but
the real or marketable value was only £43,001,322, being a ten-fold quantity sold for little more than double the former price. To produce results
so disadvantageous to the country generally, and to the factory workers in particular, several causes have cooperated, which, had circumstances
permitted, we should have brought more prominently under your notice; suffice it for the present to say that the most obvious one is the constant
redundancy of labour, without which a trade so ruinous in its effects never could have been carried on, and which requires a constantly extending
market to save it from annihilation. Our cotton mills may be brought to a stand by the periodical stagnations of trade, which, under present
arrangements, are as inevitable as death itself; but the human mind is constantly at work, and although we believe we are under the mark in
stating that six millions of persons have left these shores during the last 25 years, yet, from the natural increase of population, and the
displacement of labour to cheapen production, a large percentage of the male adults in the most prosperous times find it impossible to obtain
work in factories on any conditions whatever." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 30th April 1863," pp. 51-52.) We shall, in a later chapter, see how our
friends, the manufacturers, endeavoured, during the catastrophe in the cotton trade, to prevent by every means, including State interference, the
emigration of the operatives.

[1671 "Ch. Empt. Comm. III. Report, 1864," p. 108, n. 447.

[1681 In the United States the restoration, in this way, of handicrafts based on machinery is frequent; and therefore, when the inevitable transition
to the factory system shall take place, the ensuing concentration will, compared with Europe and even with England, stride on in seven-league
boots.

[1691 See "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, 31st Oct., 1865," p. 64.

[1701 Mr. Gillott erected in Birmingham the first steel-pen factory on a large scale. It produced, so early as 185 1, over 180,000,000 of pens
yearly, and consumed 120 tons of steel. Birmingham has the monopoly of this industry in the United Kingdom, and at present produces
thousands of millions of steel-pens. According to the Census of 1861, the number of persons employed was 1,428, of whom 1,268 females from
5 years of age upwards.

[1711 "Ch. Empl. Comm. II. Rep. 1864," p. LXVIIL, n. 415.

[1721 And now forsooth children are employed at file-cutting in Sheffield.

ri731 "Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep. 1866," p. 3, n. 24; p. 6, n. 55, 56; p. 7, n. 59, 60.

[1741 1- c., pp. 1 14, 1 15, n. 6, 7. The commissioner justly remarks that though as a rule machines take the place of men, here literally young
persons replace machines.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (51 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
IT751 See the Report on the rag trade, and numerous details in "Public Health, VIII. Rep." Lond. 1866, app., pp. 196, 208.

[176] "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep., 1866," pp. xvi-xviii, n. 86-97, and pp. 130-133, n. 39-71. See also III. Rep., 1864, pp. 48, 56.

ri771 "Public Health. Sixth Rep.," Lond. 1864, pp. 29, 31.

[1781 1- c., p. 30. Dr. Simon remarks that the mortality among the London tailors and printers between the ages of 25 and 35 is in fact much
greater, because the employers in London obtain from the country a great number of young people up to 30 years of age, as "apprentices" and
"improvers," who come for the purpose of being perfected in their trade. These figure in the census as Londoners, they swell out the number of
heads on which the London death-rate is calculated, without adding proportionally to the number of deaths in that place. The greater part of them
in fact return to the country, and especially in cases of severe illness. (1. c.)

[1791 1 allude here to hammered nails, as distinguished from nails cut out and made by machinery. See "Child. Empl. Comm., Third Rep.," pp.
xi., xix., n. 125-130, p. 52, n. 11, p. 114, n. 487, p. 137, n. 674.

IT 801 "Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep.," p. xxii, n. 166.

[1811 "Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep., 1864," pp. xix., xx., xxi.

IT821 1. c, pp. xxi.. xxii.

[1831 1- c., pp. xxix., xxx.

[1841 1. c, pp. xi., xii.

[1851 "Child. Empl. Comm., I. Rep. 1863," p. 185.

[1861 In England millinery and dressmaking are for the most part carried on, on the premises of the employer, partly by workwomen who live
there, partly by women who live off the premises.

[1871 Mr. White, a commissioner, visited a military clothing manufactory that employed 1,000 to 1,200 persons, almost all females, and a shoe
manufactory with 1,300 persons; of these nearly one half were children and young persons.

IT881 An instance. The weekly report of deaths by the Registrar-General dated 26th Feb., 1864, contains 5 cases of death from starvation. On the
same day The Times reports another case. Six victims of starvation in one week!

[1891 "Child. Empl. Comm., Second Rep., 1864," p. lxvii., n. 406-9, p. 84, n. 124, p. lxxiii, n. 441, p. 68, n. 6, p. 84, n. 126, p. 78, n. 85, p. 76, n.
69, p. lxxii, n. 483.

[1901 "The rental of premises required for workrooms seems the element which ultimately determines the point; and consequently it is in the
metropolis, that the old system of giving work out to small employers and families has been longest retained, and earliest returned to." (1. c, p.
83, n. 123.) The concluding statement in this quotation refers exclusively to shoemaking.

IT911 In glove-making and other industries where the condition of the work-people is hardly distinguishable from that of paupers, this does not
occur.

[1921 1. c, p. 83, n. 122.

IT931 In the wholesale boot and shoe trade of Leicester alone, there were in 1864, 800 sewing-machines already in use.

[19411. c, p. 84, n. 124.

IT951 Instances: The Army Clothing Depot at Pimlico, London, the Shirt factory of Tillie and Henderson at Londonderry, and the clothes factory
of Messrs. Tait at Limerick which employs about 1,200 hands.

[1961 "Tendency to Factory System" (1. c, p. lxvii). "The whole employment is at this time in a state of transition, and is undergoing the same
Change as that effected in the lace trade, weaving, &c." (1. c, n. 405.) "A complete revolution" (1. c, p. xlvi., n. 318). At the date of the Child.
Empl. Comm. of 1840 stocking making was still done by manual labour. Since 1846 various sorts of machines have been introduced, which are
now driven by steam. The total number of persons of both sexes and of all ages from 3 years upwards, employed in stocking making in England,
was in 1862 about 129,000. Of these only 4,063 were, according to the Parliamentary Return of the 1 1th February, 1862, working under the
Factory Acts.

[1971 Thus, e.g., in the earthenware trade, Messrs. Cochrane, of the Britain Pottery, Glasgow, report: "To keep up our quantity we have gone
extensively into machines wrought by unskilled tabour, and every day convinces us that we can produce a greater quantity than by the old
method." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 3 1st Oct., 1865," p. 13.) "The effect of the Fact. Acts is to force on the further introduction of machinery" (1. c,
pp. 13-14).

[1981 Thus, after the extension of the Factory Act to the potteries, great increase of powerjiggers in place of hand-moved jiggers.
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (52 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
[1991 "Report of lnsp. of Fact, 31st Oct., 1865," pp. 96 and 127.

[2001 The introduction of this and other machinery into match-making caused in one department alone 230 young persons to be replaced by 32
boys and girls of 14 to 17 years of age. This saving in labour was carried still further in 1865, by the employment of steam power.

[2011 "Ch. Empl. Comm, 11. Rep., 1864," p. ix., n. 50.

[2021 "Rep. of lnsp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p..22.

[2031 "But it must be borne in mind that those improvements, though carried out fully in some establishments, are by no means general, and are
not capable of being brought into use in many of the old manufactories without an expenditure of capital beyond the means of many of the
present occupiers." "I cannot but rejoice," writes Sub-Insp. May, "that notwithstanding the temporary disorganisation which inevitably follows
the introduction of such a measure (as the Factory Act Extension Act), and is, indeed, directly indicative of the evils which it was intended to
remedy, &c." (Rep. of lnsp. of Fact, 31st Oct, 1865.)

[204] With blast furnaces, for instance, "work towards the end of the week being generally much increased in duration in consequence of the
habit of the men of idling on Monday and occasionally during a part or the whole of Tuesday also." ("Child. Empl. Comm., III. Rep.," p. vi.)
"The little masters generally have very irregular hours. They lose two or three days, and then work all night to make it up.... They always employ
their own children, if they have any." (1. c, p. vii.) "The want of regularity in coming to work, encouraged by the possibility and practice of
making up for this by working longer hours." (1. c, p. xviii.) "In Birmingham ... an enormous amount of time is lost ... idling part of the time,
slaving the rest." (1. c, p. xi.)

[2051 "Child. Empl. Comm., IV., Rep.," p. xxxii., "The extension of the railway system is said to have contributed greatly to this custom of
giving sudden orders, and the consequent hurry, neglect of meal-times, and late hours of the workpeople." (1. c, p. xxxi.)

[2061 "Ch. Empl. Comm, IV. Rep.," pp. xxxv., n. 235, 237.

[2071 "Ch. Empl. Comm. IV. Rep.," p. 127, n. 56.

[2081 With respect to the loss of trade by non-completion of shipping orders in time, I remember that this was the pet argument of the factory
masters in 1832 and 1833. Nothing that can he advanced now on this subject, could have the force that it had then, before steam had halved all
distances and established new regulations for transit. It quite failed at that time of proof when put to the test, and again it will certainly fail
should it have to be tried." ("Reports of lnsp. of Fact, 31 Oct, 1862," pp. 54, 55.)

[208al "Ch. Empl. Comm. IV. Rep.," p. xviii, n. 118.

[208bl John Bellers remarked as far back as 1699: "The uncertainty of fashions does increase necessitous poor. It has two great mischiefs in it.
1st, The journeymen are miserable in winter for want of work, the mercers and master-weavers not daring to lay out their stocks to keep the
journeymen employed before the spring comes, and they know what the fashion will then be; 2ndly, In the spring the journeymen are not
sufficient, but the master-weavers must draw in many prentices, that they may supply the trade of the kingdom in a quarter or half a year, which
robs the plough of hands, drains the country of labourers, and in a great part stocks the city with beggars, and starves some in winter that are
ashamed to beg." ("Essays about the Poor, Manufactures, &c," p. 9.)

[2091 "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep.," p. 171, n. 34.

[2101 The evidence of some Bradford export-houses is as follows: "Under these circumstances, it seems clear that no boys need be worked
longer than from 8 a.m. to 7 or 7.30 p.m., in making up. It is merely a question of extra hands and extra outlay. If some masters were not so
greedy, the boys would not work late; an extra machine costs only £16 or £18; much of such over- time as does occur is to be referred to an
insufficiency of appliances, and a want of space." "Ch. Empl, Comm. V. Rep.," p. 171, n. 35, 36, 38.

[2111 1- c. A London manufacturer, who in other respects looks upon the compulsory regulation of the hours of labour as a protection for the
workpeople against the manufacturers, and for the manufacturers themselves against the wholesale trade, states: "The pressure in our business is
caused by the shippers, who want, e.g., to send the goods by sailing vessel so as to reach their destination at a given season, and at the same time
want to pocket the difference in freight between a sailing vessel and a steamship, or who select the earlier of two steamships in order to be in the
foreign market before their competitors."

[2121 "This could be obviated," says a manufacturer, "at the expense of an enlargement of the works under the pressure of a General Act of
Parliament." 1. c, p. x., n. 38.

[2131 1- c, p. xv., n. 72. sqq.

[2141 "Rep. lnsp. Fact, 31st October, 1865," p. 127.

[2151 It has been found out by experiment, that with each respiration of average intensity made by a healthy average individual, about 25 cubic
inches of air are consumed, and that about 20 respirations are made in each minute. Hence the air inhaled in 24 hours by each individual is about
720,000 cubic inches, or 416 cubic feet. It is clear, however, that air which has been once breathed, can no longer serve for the same process
until it has been purified in the great workshop of Nature. According to the experiments of Valentin and Brunner, it appears that a healthy man

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (53 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

gives off about 1,300 cubic inches of carbonic acid per hour; this would give about 8 ounces of solid carbon thrown off from the lungs in 24
hours." Every man should have at least 800 cubic feet." (Huxley.)

[2161 According to the English Factory Act, parents cannot send their children under 14 years of age into Factories under the control of the Act,
unless at the same time they allow them to receive elementary education. The manufacturer is responsible for compliance with the Act. "Factory
education is compulsory, and it is a condition of labour." ("Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. 111.)

[2171 On the very advantageous results of combining gymnastics (and drilling in the case of boys) with compulsory education for factory
children and pauper scholars, see the speech of N. W. Senior at the seventh annual congress of "The National Association for the Promotion of
Social Science," in "Report of Proceedings, &c," Lond. 1863, pp. 63, 64, also the "Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," pp. 118, 119, 120, 126,
sqq.

[2181 "Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. 118. A silk manufacturer naively states to the Children's Employment Commissioners: "I am quite
sure that the true secret of producing efficient workpeople is to be found in uniting education and tabour from a period of childhood. Of course
the occupation must not be too severe, nor irksome, or unhealthy. But of the advantage of the union I have no doubt. I wish my own children
could have some work as well as play to give variety to their schooling." ("Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep.," p. 82, n. 36.)

[2191 Senior, 1. c, p. 66. How Modern Industry, when it has attained to a certain pitch, is capable, by the revolution it effects in the mode of
production and in the social conditions of production, of also revolutionising people's minds, is strikingly shown by a comparison of Senior's
speech in 1863, with his philippic against the Factory Act of 1833; or by a comparison, of the views of the congress above referred to, with the
fact that in certain country districts of England poor parents are forbidden, on pain of death by starvation, to educate their children. Thus, e.g.,
Mr. Snell reports it to be a common occurrence in Somersetshire that, when a poor person claims parish relief, he is compelled to take his
children from school. Mr. Wollarton, the clergyman at Feltham, also tells of cases where all relief was denied to certain families "because they
were sending their children to school!"

[2201 Wherever handicraft-machines, driven by men, compete directly or indirectly with more developed machines driven by mechanical power,
a great change takes place with regard to the tabourer who drives the machine. At first the steam-engine replaces this tabourer, afterwards he
must replace the steam-engine. Consequently the tension and the amount of tabour-power expended become monstrous, and especially so in the
case of the children who are condemned to this torture. Thus Mr. Longe; one of the commissioners, found in Coventry and the neighbourhood
boys of from 10 to 15 years employed in driving the ribbon-looms, not to mention younger children who had to drive smaller machines. "It is
extraordinarily fatiguing work. The boy is a mere substitute for steam power." ("Ch. Empl. Comm. V, Rep. 1866;" p. 1 14, n. 6.) As to the fatal
consequences of "this system of slavery," as the official report styles it, see 1. c, p. 1 14 sqq.

[2211 1. c, p. 3, n. 24.

[2221 1- c, P. 7, n. 60.

[2231 "in some parts of the Highlands of Scotland, not many years ago, every peasant, according to the Statistical Account, made his own shoes
of leather tanned by himself. Many a shepherd and cottar too, with his wife and children, appeared at Church in clothes which had been touched
by no hands but their own, since they were shorn from the sheep and sown in the flaxfield. In the preparation of these, it is added, scarcely a
single article had been purchased, except the awl, needle, thimble, and a very few parts of the iron-work employed in the weaving. The dyes,
toci, were chiefly extracted by the women from trees, shrubs and herbs." (Dugald Stewart's "Works," Hamilton's Ed., Vol. viii., pp. 327-328.)

[2241 In the celebrated "Livre des metiers" of Etienne Boileau, we find it prescribed that a journeyman on being admitted among the masters had
to swear "to love his brethren with brotherly love, to support them in their respective trades, not wilfully to betray the secrets of the trade, and
besides, in the interests of all, not to recommend his own-wares by calling the attention of the buyer to defects in the articles made by others."

[2251 "The bourgeoisie cannot exist without continually revolutionising the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production
and all the social relations. Conservation, in an unaltered form, of the old modes of production was on the contrary the first condition of
existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolution in production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting
uncertainty and agitation, distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and
venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air,
all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind." (F.
Engels und Karl Marx: "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei." Lond. 1848, p. 5.)

[2261

"You take my life

When you do take the means whereby I live."

Shakespeare.

[2271 A French workman, on his return from San-Francisco, writes as follows: "I never could have believed, that I was capable of working at the
various occupations I was employed on in California. I was firmly convinced that I was fit for nothing but letter-press printing.... Once in the
midst of this world of adventurers, who change their occupation as often as they do their shirt, egad, I did as the others. As mining did not turn
out remunerative enough, I left it for the town, where in succession I became typographer, slater, plumber, &c. In consequence of thus finding
out that I am fit to any sort of work, I feel less of a mollusk and more of a man." (A. Corbon, "De l'enseignement professionnel," 2eme ed., p.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (54 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen
50.)

r2281 John Bellers, a very phenomenon in the history of Political Economy, saw most clearly at the end of the 17th century, the necessity for
abolishing the present system of education and division of labour, which beget hypertrophy and atrophy at the two opposite extremities of
society. Amongst other things he says this: "An idle learning being little better than the learning of idleness.... Bodily labour, it's a primitive
institution of God.... Labour being as proper for the bodies' health as eating is for its living; for what pains a man saves by ease, he will find in
disease.... Labour adds oil to the lamp of life, when thinking inflames it.... A childish silly employ" (a warning this, by presentiment, against the
Basedows and their modern imitators) "leaves the children's minds silly," ("Proposals for Raising a Colledge of Industry of all Useful Trades and
Husbandry." Lond., 1696, pp. 12, 14, 18.)

[2291 This sort of labour goes on mostly in small workshops, as we have seen in the lacemaking and straw-plaiting trades, and as could be shown
more in detail from the metal trades of Sheffield, Birmingham, &c.

f2301 "Ch. Empl. Comm, V. Rep.," p. xxv., n. 162, and II. Rep., p. xxxviii., n, 285, 289, p. xxv., xxvi., n. 191.

[231] "Factory labour may be as pure and as excellent as domestic labour, and perhaps more so' " ("Rep. Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," p.
129.)

[2321 "Rep. Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. 27-32.

[2331 Numerous instances will be found in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact."

[2341 "Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep.," p. x., n. 35.

[2351 Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep.," p. ix., n. 28.

[2361 1- c., p. xxv., n. 165-167. As to the advantages of large scale, compared with small scale, industries, see "Ch. Empl. Comm., III. Rep.," p.
13, n. 144, p. 25, n. 121, p. 26, n. 125, p. 27, n. 140, &c.

[2371 The trades proposed to be brought under the Act were the following: Lace-making, stocking-weaving, straw-plaiting, the manufacture of
wearing apparel with its numerous sub-divisions, artificial flower-making, shoemaking, hat-making, glove-making, tailoring, all metal works,
from blast furnaces down to needleworks, &c, paper-mills, glassworks, tobacco factories, India-rubber works, braid-making (for weaving),
hand-carpetmaking, umbrella and parasol making, the manufacture of spindles and spools, letterpress printing, book-binding, manufacture of
stationery (including paper bags, cards, coloured paper, &c), rope-making, manufacture of jet ornaments, brick-making, silk manufacture by
hand, Coventry weaving, salt works, tallow chandiers, cement works, sugar refineries, biscuit-making, various industries connected with timber,
and other mixed trades.

[2381 1. c, p. xxv., n. 169.

[2391 Here (from "The Tory Cabinet to "Nassau W. Senior") the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edition. —

Ed.

[2401 The Factory Acts Extension Act was passed on August 12, 1867. it regulates all foundries, smithies, and metal manufactories, including
machine shops; furthermore glass-works, paper mills, gutta-percha and India-rubber works, tobacco manufactories, letter- press printing and
book-binding works, and, lastly, all workshops in which more than 50 persons are employed. The Hours of Labour Regulation Act, passed on
August 17, 1867, regulates the smaller workshops and the so-called domestic industries.

I shall revert to these Acts and to the new Mining Act of 1872 in Volume II.

[2411 Senior, "Social Science Congress," pp. 55-58.

[2421 The "personnel" of this staff consisted of 2 inspectors, 2 assistant inspectors and 41 sub-inspectors. Eight additional sub-inspectors were
appointed in 1871. The total cost of administering the Acts in England, Scotland, and Ireland amounted for the year 1871-72 to no more than
£25,347, inclusive of the law expenses incurred by prosecutions of offending masters.

[2431 Robert Owen, the father of Co-operative Factories and Stores, but who, as before remarked, in no way shared the illusions of his followers
with regard to the bearing of these isolated elements of transformation, not only practically made the factory system the sole foundation of his
experiments, but also declared that system to be theoretically the startingpoint of the social revolution. Herr Vissering, Professor of Political
Economy in the University of Leyden, appears to have a suspicion of this when, in his "Handboek van Practische Staatshuishoudkunde,
1860-62," which reproduces all the platitudes of vulgar economy, he strongly supports handicrafts against the factory system.

[Added in the 4th German edition — The "hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments" (S. 314) (present volume, p. 284)
which English legislation called into life by means of the mutually conflicting Factory Acts, the Factory Acts Extension Act and the
Workshops' Act, finally became intolerable, and thus all legislative enactments on this subject were codified in the Factory and Workshop
Act of 1878. Of course no detailed critique of this English industrial code now in effect can be presented here. The following remarks will
have to suffice. The Act comprises:

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (55 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Fifteen

1) Textile Mills. Here everything remains about as it was: children more than 10 years of age may work 5 1/2 hours a day; or 6 hours and
Saturday off; young persons and women, 10 hours on 5 days, and at most 6 1/2 on Saturday.

2) Non-Textile Factories. Here the regulations are brought closer than before to those of No. 1, but there are still several exceptions
which favour the capitalists and which in certain cases may be expanded by special permission of the Home Secretary.

3) Workshops, defined approximately as in the former Act; as for the children, young workers and women employed there, the
workshops are about on a par with the non-textile factories, but again conditions are easier in details.

4) Workshops in which no children or young workers are employed, but only persons of both sexes above the age of 18; this category
enjoy still easier conditions.

5) Domestic Workshops, where only members of the family are employed, in the family dwelling: still more elastic regulations and
simultaneously the restriction that the inspector may, without special permission of the ministry or a court, enter only rooms not used also
for dwelling purposes; and lastly unrestricted freedom for straw-plaiting and lace and glove-making by members of the family. With all its
defects this Act, together with the Swiss Federal Factory Law of March 23, 1877, is still by far the best piece of legislation in this field. A
comparison of it with the said Swiss federal law is of particular interest because it clearly demonstrates the merits and demerits of the two
legislative methods — the English, "historical" method, which intervenes when occasion requires, and the continental method, which is
built up on the traditions of the French Revolution and generalises more. Unfortunately, due to insufficient inspection personnel, the
English code is still largely a dead letter with regard to its application to workshops. — F. E.]

[2441 "You divide the people into two hostile camps of clownish boors and emasculated dwarfs. Good heavens! a nation divided into agricultural
and commercial interests, calling itself sane; nay, styling itself enlightened and civilised, not only in spite of, but in consequence of this
monstrous and unnatural division." (David Urquhart, 1. c, p. 119.) This passage shows, at one and the same time, the strength and the weakness
of that kind of criticism which knows how to judge and condemn the present, but not how to comprehend it.

[2451 See Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physiologic," 7. Auflage, 1862, and especially the "Einleitung in die
Naturgesetze des Feldbaus," in the 1st Volume. To have developed from the point of view of natural science, the negative, i.e., destructive side
of modern agriculture, is one of Liebig's immortal merits. His summary, too, of the history of agriculture, although not free from gross errors,
contains flashes of light. It is, however, to be regretted that he ventures on such haphazard assertions as the following: "By greater pulverising
and more frequent ploughing, the circulation of air in the interior of porous soil is aided, and the surface exposed to the action of the atmosphere
is increased and renewed; but it is easily seen that the increased yield of the land cannot be proportional to the labour spent on that land, but
increases in a much smaller proportion. This law," adds Liebig, "was first enunciated by John Stuart Mill in his 'Principles of Pol. Econ.,' Vol. 1,
p. 17, as follows: That the produce of land increases, caeteris paribus, in a diminishing ratio to the increase of the labourers employed' (Mill
here introduces in an erroneous form the law enunciated by Ricardo's school, for since the 'decrease of the labourers employed,' kept even pace
in England with the advance of agriculture, the law discovered in, and applied to, England, could have no application to that country, at all
events), 'is the universal law of agricultural industry.' This is very remarkable, since Mill was ignorant of the reason for this taw." (Liebig, 1. c,
Bd. I., p. 143 and Note.) Apart from Liebig's wrong interpretation of the word "labour," by which word he understands something quite different
from what Political Economy does, it is, in any case, "very remarkable" that he should make Mr. John Stuart Mill the first propounder of a theory
which was first published by James Anderson in A. Smith's days, and was repeated in various works down to the beginning of the 19th century;
a theory which Malthus, that master in plagiarism (the whole of his population theory is a shameless plagiarism), appropriated to himself in
1815; which West developed at the same time as, and independently of, Anderson; which in the year 1817 was connected by Ricardo with the
general theory of value, then made the round of the world as Ricardo's theory, and in 1820 was vulgarised by James Mill, the father of John
Stuart Mill; and which, finally, was reproduced by John Stuart Mill and others, as a dogma already quite commonplace, and known to every
schoolboy. It cannot be denied that John Stuart Mill owes his, at all events, "remarkable" authority almost entirely to such quid-pro-quos.



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Sixteen: Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm (56 of 56) [23/08/2000 16:18:08]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part V:

The Production of Absolute and of

Relative Surplus-Value



CHAPTER SIXTEEN:

ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE



In considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter V .) by treating it in the abstract, apart from its
historical forms, as a process between man and Nature. We there stated, "If we examine the whole
labour-process, from the point of view of its result, it is plain that both the instruments and the subject of
labour are means of production, and that the labour itself is productive labour." And in Note 2, same
page, we further added: "This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour-process alone,
what is productive labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist process of
production." We now proceed to the further development of this subject.

So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the same labourer unites in himself all the
functions, that later on become separated. When an individual appropriates natural objects for his
livelihood, no one controls him but himself. Afterwards he is controlled by others. A single man cannot
operate upon Nature without calling his own muscles into play under the control of his own brain. As in
the natural body head and hand wait upon each other, so the labour-process unites the labour of the hand
with that of the head. Later on they part company and even become deadly foes. The product ceases to be
the direct product of the individual, and becomes a social product, produced in common by a collective
labourer, i.e., by a combination of workmen, each of whom takes only a part, greater or less, in the
manipulation of the subject of their labour. As the co-operative character of the labour-process becomes
more and more marked, so, as a necessary consequence, does our notion of productive labour, and of its
agent the productive labourer, become extended. In order to labour productively, it is no longer necessary
for you to do manual work yourself; enough, if you are an organ of the collective labourer, and perform
one of its subordinate functions. The first definition given above of productive labour, a definition
deduced from the very nature of the production of material objects, still remains correct for the collective
labourer, considered as a whole. But it no longer holds good for each member taken individually.

On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour becomes narrowed. Capitalist production is
not merely the production of commodities, it is essentially the production of surplus-value. The labourer
produces, not for himself, but for capital. It no longer suffices, therefore, that he should simply produce.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

He must produce surplus-value. That labourer alone is productive, who produces surplus-value for the
capitalist, and thus works for the self-expansion of capital. If we may take an example from outside the
sphere of production of material objects, a schoolmaster is a productive labourer when, in addition to
belabouring the heads of his scholars, he works like a horse to enrich the school proprietor. That the latter
has laid out his capital in a teaching factory, instead of in a sausage factory, does not alter the relation.
Hence the notion of a productive labourer implies not merely a relation between work and useful effect,
between labourer and product of labour, but also a specific, social relation of production, a relation that
has sprung up historically and stamps the labourer as the direct means of creating surplus- value. To be a
productive labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but a misfortune. In Book IV. which treats of the
history of the theory, it will be more clearly seen, that the production of surplus-value has at all times
been made, by classical political economists, the distinguishing characteristic of the productive labourer.
Hence their definition of a productive labourer changes with their comprehension of the nature of
surplus-value. Thus the Physiocrats insist that only agricultural labour is productive, since that alone,
they say, yields a surplus-value. And they say so because, with them, surplus-value has no existence
except in the form of rent.

The prolongation of the working-day beyond the point at which the labourer would have produced just an
equivalent for the value of his labour-power, and the appropriation of that surplus-labour by capital, this
is production of absolute surplus-value. It forms the general groundwork of the capitalist system, and the
starting-point for the production of relative surplus-value. The latter pre-supposes that the working-day is
already divided into two parts, necessary labour, and surplus-labour. In order to prolong the
surplus-labour, the necessary labour is shortened by methods whereby the equivalent for the wages is
produced in less time. The production of absolute surplus-value turns exclusively upon the length of the
working-day; the production of relative surplus-value, revolutionises out and out the technical processes
of labour, and the composition of society. It therefore pre-supposes a specific mode, the capitalist mode
of production, a mode which, along with its methods, means, and conditions, arises and develops itself
spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal subjection of labour to capital. In the course of
this development, the formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour to capital.

It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms, in which surplus-labour is not extorted by
direct compulsion from the producer, nor the producer himself yet formally subjected to capital. In such
forms capital has not yet acquired the direct control of the labour-process. By the side of independent
producers who carry on their handicrafts and agriculture in the traditional old-fashioned way, there
stands the usurer or the merchant, with his usurer's capital or merchant's capital, feeding on them like a
parasite. The predominance, in a society, of this form of exploitation excludes the capitalist mode of
production; to which mode, however, this form may serve as a transition, as it did towards the close of
the Middle Ages. Finally, as is shown by modern "domestic industry," some intermediate forms are here
and there reproduced in the background of Modern Industry, though their physiognomy is totally
changed.

If, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to capital suffices for the production of absolute
surplus-value, if, e.g., it is sufficient that handicraftsman who previously worked on their own account,
or as apprentices of a master, should become wage labourers under the direct control of a capitalist; so,
on the other hand, we have seen, how the methods of producing relative surplus-value, are, at the same
time, methods of producing absolute surplus-value. Nay, more, the excessive prolongation of the
working-day turned out to be the peculiar product of Modern Industry. Generally speaking, the
specifically capitalist mode of production ceases to be a mere means of producing relative surplus-value,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

so soon as that mode has conquered an entire branch of production; and still more so, so soon as it has
conquered all the important branches. It then becomes the general, socially predominant form of
production. As a special method of producing relative surplus-value, it remains effective only, first, in so
far as it seizes upon industries that previously were only formally subject to capital, that is, so far as it is
propagandist; secondly, in so far as the industries that have been taken over by it, continue to be
revolutionised by changes in the methods of production.

From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and relative surplus-value appears illusory.
Relative surplus-value is absolute, since it compels the absolute prolongation of the working-day beyond
the labour-time necessary to the existence of the labourer himself. Absolute surplus-value is relative,
since it makes necessary such a development of the productiveness of labour, as will allow of the
necessary labour-time being confined to a portion of the working-day. But if we keep in mind the
behaviour of surplus-value, this appearance of identity vanishes. Once the capitalist mode of production
is established and become general, the difference between absolute and relative surplus-value makes
itself felt, whenever there is a question of raising the rate of surplus-value. Assuming that labour-power
is paid for at its value, we are confronted by this alternative: given the productiveness of labour and its
normal intensity, the rate of surplus-value can be raised only by the actual prolongation of the
working-day; on the other hand, given the length of the working-day, that rise can be effected only by a
change in the relative magnitudes of the components of the working-day, viz., necessary labour and
surplus-labour; a change which, if the wages are not to fall below the value of labour-power, presupposes
a change either in the productiveness or in the intensity of the labour.

If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary means of subsistence for himself and his race,
he has no time left in which to work gratis for others. Without a certain degree of productiveness in his
labour, he has no such superfluous time at his disposal; without such superfluous time, no surplus-labour,
and therefore no capitalists, no slave-owners, no feudal lords, in one word, no class of large proprietors.

in

Thus we may say that surplus-value rests on a natural basis; but this is permissible only in the very
general sense, that there is no natural obstacle absolutely preventing one man from disburdening himself
of the labour requisite for his own existence, and burdening another with it, any more, for instance, than
unconquerable natural obstacle prevent one man from eating the flesh of another. [2] No mystical ideas
must in any way be connected, as sometimes happens, with this historically developed productiveness of
labour. It is only after men have raised themselves above the rank of animals, when therefore their labour
has been to some extent socialised, that a state of things arises in which the surplus-labour of the one
becomes a condition of existence for the other. At the dawn of civilisation the productiveness acquired
by labour is small, but so too are the wants which develop with and by the means of satisfying them.
Further, at that early period, the portion of society that lives on the labour of others is infinitely small
compared with the mass of direct producers. Along with the progress in the productiveness of labour, that
small portion of society increases both absolutely and relatively. £3] Besides, capital with its
accompanying relations springs up from an economic soil that is the product of a long process of
development. The productiveness of labour that serves as its foundation and starting-point, is a gift, not
of nature, but of a history embracing thousands of centuries.

Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the form of social production, the
productiveness of labour is fettered by physical conditions. These are all referable to the constitution of
man himself (race, &c), and to surrounding nature. The external physical conditions fall into two great

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

economic classes, (1) Natural wealth in means of subsistence, i.e., a fruitful soil, waters teeming with
fish, &c, and (2), natural wealth in the instruments of labour, such as waterfalls, navigable rivers, wood,
metal, coal, &c. At the dawn of civilisation, it is the first class that turns the scale; at a higher stage of
development, it is the second. Compare, for example, England with India, or in ancient times, Athens and
Corinth with the shores of the Black Sea.

The fewer the number of natural wants imperatively calling for satisfaction, and the greater the natural
fertility of the soil and the favourableness of the climate, so much less is the labour-time necessary for
the maintenance and reproduction of the producer. So much greater therefore can be the excess of his
labours for others over his labour for himself. Diodorus long ago remarked this in relation to the ancient
Egyptians. "It is altogether incredible how little trouble and expense the bringing up of their children
causes them. They cook for them the first simple food at hand; they also give them the lower part of the
papyrus stem to eat, so far as it can be roasted in the fire, and the roots and stalks of marsh plants, some
raw, some boiled and roasted. Most of the children go without shoes and unclothed, for the air is so mild.
Hence a child, until he is grown up, costs his parents not more, on the whole, than twenty drachmas. It is
this, chiefly, which explains why the population of Egypt is so numerous, and, therefore, why so many
great works can be undertaken." [4] Nevertheless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to the
extent of its population than to the large proportion of it that was freely disposable. Just as the individual
labourer can do more surplus-labour in proportion as his necessary labour-time is less, so with regard to
the working population. The smaller the part of it which is required for the production of the necessary
means of subsistence, so much the greater is the part that can be set to do other work.

Capitalist production once assumed, then, all other circumstances remaining the same, and given the
length of the working day, the quantity of surplus-labour will vary with the physical conditions of labour,
especially with the fertility of the soil. But it by no means follows from this that the most fruitful soil is
the most fitted for the growth of the capitalist mode of production. This mode is based on the dominion
of man over nature. Where nature is too lavish, she "keeps him in hand, like a child in leading-strings."
She does not impose upon him any necessity to develop himself. [51 It is not the tropics with their
luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate zone, that is the mother-country of capital. It is not the mere
fertility of the soil, but the differentiation of the soil, the variety of its natural products, the changes of the
seasons, which form the physical basis for the social division of labour, and which, by changes in the
natural surroundings, spur man on to the multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, his means and
modes of labour. It is the necessity of bringing a natural force under the control of society, of
economising, of appropriating or subduing it on a large scale by the work of man's hand, that first plays
the decisive part in the history of industry. Examples are, the irrigation works in Egypt, [61 Lombardy,
Holland, or in India and Persia where irrigation by means of artificial canals, not only supplies the soil
with the water indispensable to it, but also carries down to it, in the shape of sediment from the hills,
mineral fertilisers. The secret of the flourishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily under the dominion
of the Arabs lay in their irrigation works. \1]

Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possibility, never the reality, of surplus-labour, nor,
consequently, of surplus-value and a surplus-product. The result of difference in the natural conditions of
labour is this, that the same quantity of labour satisfies, in different countries, a different mass of
requirements, [81 consequently, that under circumstances in other respects analogous, the necessary
labour-time is different. These conditions affect surplus-labour only as natural limits, i.e., by fixing the
points at which labour for others can begin. In proportion as industry advances, these natural limits



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

recede. In the midst of our West European society, where the labourer purchases the right to work for his
own livelihood only by paying for it in surplus-labour, the idea easily takes root that it is an inherent
quality of human labour to furnish a surplus-product. £91 But consider, for example, an inhabitant of the
eastern islands of the Asiatic Archipelago, where sago grows wild in the forests. "When the inhabitants
have convinced themselves, by boring a hole in the tree, that the pith is ripe, the trunk is cut down and
divided into several pieces, the pith is extracted, mixed with water and filtered: it is then quite fit for use
as sago. One tree commonly yields 300 lbs., and occasionally 500 to 600 lbs. There, then, people go into
the forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with us they cut fire-wood." f 101 Suppose now such an
eastern bread-cutter requires 12 working hours a week for the satisfaction of all his wants. Nature's direct
gift to him is plenty of leisure time. Before he can apply this leisure time productively for himself, a
whole series of historical events is required; before he spends it in surplus-labour for strangers,
compulsion is necessary. If capitalist production were introduced, the honest fellow would perhaps have
to work six days a week, in order to appropriate to himself the product of one working day. The bounty
of Nature does not explain why he would then have to work 6 days a week, or why he must furnish 5
days of surplus-labour. It explains only why his necessary labour-time would be limited to one day a
week. But in no case would his surplus-product arise from some occult quality inherent in human labour.

Thus, not only does the historically developed social productiveness of labour, but also its natural
productiveness, appear to be productiveness of the capital with which that labour is incorporated.

Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus-value. He treats it as a thing inherent in the
capitalist mode of production, which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of social production.
Whenever he discusses the productiveness of labour, he seeks in it, not the cause of surplus-value, but the
cause that determines the magnitude of that value. On the other hand, his school has openly proclaimed
the productiveness of labour to be the originating cause of profit (read: Surplus-value). This at all events
is a progress as against the mercantilists who, on their side, derived the excess of the price over the cost
of production of the product, from the act of exchange, from the product being sold above its value.
Nevertheless, Ricardo's school simply shirked the problem, they did not solve it. In fact these bourgeois
economists instinctively saw, and rightly so, that it is very dangerous to stir too deeply the burning
question of the origin of surplus-value. But what are we to think of John Stuart Mill, who, half a century
after Ricardo, solemnly claims superiority over the mercantilists, by clumsily repeating the wretched
evasions of Ricardo's earliest vulgarisers?

Mill says: "The cause of profit is that labour produces more than is required for its support." So far,
nothing but the old story; but Mill wishing to add something of his own, proceeds: "To vary the form of
the theorem; the reason why capital yields a profit, is because food, clothing, materials and tools, last
longer than the time which was required to produce them." He here confounds the duration of
labour- time with the duration of its products. According to this view, a baker whose product lasts only a
day, could never extract from his workpeople the same profit, as a machine maker whose products
endure for 20 years and more. Of course it is very true, that if a bird's nest did not last longer than the
time it takes in building, birds would have to do without nests.

This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes his own superiority over the mercantilists. "We
thus see," he proceeds, "that profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the productive
power of labour; and the general profit of the country is always what the productive power of labour
makes it, whether any exchange takes place or not. If there were no division of employments, there
would be no buying or selling, but there would still be profit." For Mill then, exchange, buying and

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

selling, those general conditions of capitalist production, are but an incident, and there would always be
profits even without the purchase and sale of labour-power!

"If," he continues, "the labourers of the country collectively produce twenty per cent more than their
wages, profits will be twenty per cent, whatever prices may or may not be." This is, on the one hand, a
rare bit of tautology; for if labourers produce a surplus-value of 20% for the capitalist, his profit will be
to the total wages of the labourers as 20: 100. On the other hand, it is absolutely false to say that "profits
will be 20%." They will always be less, because they are calculated upon the sum total of the capital
advanced. If, for example, the capitalist have advanced £500, of which £400 is laid out in means of
production and £100 in wages, and if the rate of surplus-value be 20%, the rate of profit will be 20:500,
/.e., 4% and not 20%.

Then follows a splendid example of Mill's method of handling the different historical forms of social
production. "I assume, throughout, the state of things which, where the labourers and capitalists are
separate classes, prevails, with few exceptions, universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the
whole expenses, including the entire remuneration of the labourer." Strange optical illusion to see
everywhere a state of things which as yet exists only exceptionally on our earth, fill But let us finish —
Mill is willing to concede, "that he should do so is not a matter of inherent necessity." On the contrary:
"the labourer might wait, until the production is complete, for all that part of his wages which exceeds
mere necessaries: and even for the whole, if he has funds in hand sufficient for his temporary support.
But in the latter case, the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist in the concern, by supplying a
portion of the funds necessary for carrying it on." Mill might have gone further and have added, that the
labourer who advances to himself not only the necessaries of life but also the means of production, is in
reality nothing but his own wage-labourer. He might also have said that the American peasant proprietor
is but a serf who does enforced labour for himself instead of for his lord.

After thus proving clearly, that even if capitalist production had no existence, still it would always exist,
Mill is consistent enough to show, on the contrary, that it has no existence, even when it does exist. "And
even in the former case" (when the workman is a wage labourer to whom the capitalist advances all the
necessaries of life, he the labourer), "may be looked upon in the same light," (i.e., as a capitalist), "since,
contributing his labour at less than the market-price, (!) he may be regarded as lending the difference (?)
to his employer and receiving it back with interest, &c." |T21 In reality, the labourer advances his labour
gratuitously to the capitalist during, say one week, in order to receive the market price at the end of the
week, &c, and it is this which, according to Mill, transforms him into a capitalist. On the level plain,
simple mounds look like hills; and the imbecile flatness of the present bourgeoisie is to be measured by
the altitude of its great intellects.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "The very existence of the master-capitalists, as a distinct class, is dependent on the productiveness of
industry." (Ramsay, 1. c, p. 206.) "If each man's labour were but enough to produce his own food, there
could be no property." (Ravenstone, 1. c. p. 14, 15.)

\2] According to a recent calculation, there are yet at least 4,000,000 cannibals in those parts of the earth
which have already been explored.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

[31 "Among the wild Indians in America, almost everything is the labourer's, 99 parts of a hundred are to
be put upon the account of labour. In England, perhaps, the labourer has not 2/3." (The Advantages of the
East India Trade, &c, p. 73.)

[41 Diodorus, 1. c, 1. 1., c. 80.

[51 "The first (natural wealth) as it is most noble and advantageous, so doth it make the people careless,
proud, and given to all excesses; whereas the second enforceth vigilancy, literature, arts and policy."
(England's Treasure by Foreign Trade. Or the Balance of our Foreign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure.
Written by Thomas Mun of London, merchant, and now published for the common good by his son John
Mun. London, 1669, p. 181, 182.) "Nor can I conceive a greater curse upon a body of people, than to be
thrown upon a spot of land, where the productions for subsistence and food were, in great measure,
spontaneous, and the climate required or admitted little care for raiment and covering... there may be an
extreme on the other side. A soil incapable of produce by labour is quite as bad as a soil that produces
plentifully without any labour." (An Inquiry into the Present High Price of Provisions. Lond. 1767, p.
10.)

[61 The necessity for predicting the rise and fall of the Nile created Egyptian astronomy, and with it the
dominion of the priests, as directors of agriculture. "Le solstice est le moment de l'annee ou commence la
crue du Nil, et celui que les Egyptiens ont du observer avec le plus d'attention.... C'etait cette annee
tropique qu'il leur importait de marquer pour se diriger dans leurs operations agricoles. lis durent done
chercher dans le ciel un signe apparent de son retour." (Cuvier: Discours sur les revolutions du globe, ed.
Hoefer, Paris, 1863, p. 141.)

[71 One of the material bases of the power of the state over the small disconnected producing organisms
in India, was the regulation of the water supply. The Mahometan rulers of India understood this better
than their English successors. It is enough to recall to mind the famine of 1866, which cost the lives of
more than a million Hindus in the district of Orissa, in the Bengal presidency.

[81 "There are no two countries which furnish an equal number of the necessaries of life in equal plenty,
and with the same quantity of labour. Men's wants increase or diminish with the severity or
temperateness of the climate they live in; consequently, the proportion of trade which the inhabitants of
different countries are obliged to carry on through necessity cannot be the same, nor is it practicable to
ascertain the degree of variation farther than by the degrees of Heat and Cold; from whence one may
make this general conclusion, that the quantity of labour required for a certain number of people is
greatest in cold climates, and least in hot ones; for in the former men not only want more clothes, but the
earth more cultivating than in the latter." (An Essay on the Governing Causes of the Natural Rate of
Interest. Lond. 1750. p. 60.) The author of this epoch-making anonymous work is J. Massy. Hume took
his theory of interest from it.

[9J "Chaque travail doit (this appears also to be part of the droits et devoirs du citoyen) laisser un
excedant." Proudhon.

[101 F. Schouw: "Die Erde, die Pflanze und der Mensch," 2. Ed. Leipz. 1854, p. 148.

fill In earlier editions of Capital the quotation from John Stuart Mill, "I assume throughout... of the
labourer," had been given incorrectly, the words "where the labourers and capitalists are separate classes"



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Sixteen

having been left out. Marx, in a letter dated November 28, 1878, pointed this out to Danielson, the
Russian translator of Capital, adding:

"The next two sentences, viz. 'Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which as yet
exists only exceptionally on our earth. But let us finish'- should be deleted and the following sentence
substituted:

"Mr. Mill is good enough to believe that this state of things is not an absolute necessity, even in that
economic system in which labourers and capitalists are separate classes.'"

The substance of this note has been taken from the Volksaugabe. The quotation from Mill is from his
Principles of Political Economy, Book II, Chap XV, 5.

[12] J. St. Mill. Principles of Pol. Econ. Lond. 1868, p. 252-53 passim.



Transcribed by Allan Thurrott

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Seventeen: Changes of Magnitude in the price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch16.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:18:14]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part V:

The Production of Absolute and of

Relative Surplus-Value



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN:

CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE IN THE PRICE OF LABOUR-POWER AND

IN SURPLUS VALUE



Contents

Section 1 - Length of the Working-Day and Intensity of Labour Constant. Productiveness of Labour

Variable

Section 2 - Working-Day Constant. Productiveness of Labour Constant. Intensity of Labour Variable

Section 3 - Productiveness and Intensity of Labour Constant. Length of the Working-Day Variable

Section 4 - Simultaneous Variations in the Duration, Productiveness, and Intensity of Labour

A. Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with a Simultaneous Lengthening of the Working-Day

B. Increasing Intensity and Productiveness of Labour with Simultaneous Shortening of the Working-Day



The value of labour-power is determined by the value of the necessaries of life habitually required by the
average labourer. The quantity of these necessaries is known at any given epoch of a given society, and
can therefore be treated as a constant magnitude. What changes, is the value of this quantity. There are,
besides, two other factors that enter into the determination of the value of labour-power. One, the
expenses of developing that power, which expenses vary with the mode of production; the other, its
natural diversity, the difference between the labour-power of men and women, of children and adults.
The employment of these different sorts of labour-power, an employment which is, in its turn, made
necessary by the mode of production, makes a great difference in the cost of maintaining the family of
the labourer, and in the value of the labour-power of the adult male. Both these factors, however, are
excluded in the following investigation. £1J

I assume (1) that commodities are sold at their value; (2) that the price of labour-power rises occasionally
above its value, but never sinks below it.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (1 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

On this assumption we have seen that the relative magnitudes of surplus-value and of price of
labour-power are determined by three circumstances; (1) the length of the working-day, or the extensive
magnitude of labour; (2) the normal intensity of labour, its intensive magnitude, whereby a given
quantity of labour is expended in a given time; (3) the productiveness of labour,whereby the same
quantum of labour yields, in a given time, a greater or less quantum of product, dependent on the degree
of development in the conditions of production. Very different combinations are clearly possible,
according as one of the three factors is constant and two variable, or two constant and one variable, or
lastly, all three simultaneously variable. And the number of these combinations is augmented by the fact
that, when these factors simultaneously vary, the amount and direction of their respective variations may
differ. In what follows the chief combinations alone are considered.



SECTION 1

LENGTH OF THE WORKING-DAY AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT.
PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR VARIABLE.



On these assumptions the value of labour-power, and the magnitude of surplus-value, are determined by
three laws.

( 1.) A working day of given length always creates the same amount of value, no matter how the
productiveness of labour, and, with it, the mass of the product, and the price of each single commodity
produced, may vary.

If the value created by a working-day of 12 hours be, say, six shillings, then, although the mass of the
articles produced varies with the productiveness of labour, the only result is that the value represented by
six shillings is spread over a greater or less number of articles.

(2 .) Surplus-value and the value of labour-power vary in opposite directions. A variation in the
productiveness of labour, its increase or diminution, causes a variation in the opposite direction in the
value of labour-power, and in the same direction in surplus-value.

The value created by a working day of 12 hours is a constant quantity, say, six shillings. This constant
quantity is the sum of the surplus-value plus the value of the labour-power, which latter value the
labourer replaces by an equivalent. It is self-evident, that if a constant quantity consists of two parts,
neither of them can increase without the other diminishing. Let the two parts at starting be equal; 3
shillings value of labour-power, 3 shillings surplus-value. Then the value of the labour-power cannot rise
from three shillings to four, without the surplus- value falling from three shillings to two; and the
surplus-value cannot rise from three shillings to four, without the value of labour-power falling from
three shillings to two. Under these circumstances, therefore, no change can take place in the absolute
magnitude, either of the surplus-value, or of the value of labour-power, without a simultaneous change in
their relative magnitudes, i.e., relatively to each other. It is impossible for them to rise or fall
simultaneously.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (2 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

Further, the value of labour-power cannot fall, and consequently surplus-value cannot rise, without a rise
in the productiveness of labour. For instance, in the above case, the value of the labour-power cannot
sink from three shillings to two, unless an increase in the productiveness of labour makes it possible to
produce in 4 hours the same quantity of necessaries as previously required 6 hours to produce. On the
other hand, the value of the labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four, without a decrease in
the productiveness of labour, whereby eight hours become requisite to produce the same quantity of
necessaries, for the production of which six hours previously sufficed. It follows from this, that an
increase in the productiveness of labour causes a fall in the value of labour-power and a consequent rise
in surplus-value, while, on the other hand, a decrease in such productiveness causes a rise in the value of
labour-power, and a fall in surplus-value.

In formulating this law, Ricardo overlooked one circumstance; although a change in the magnitude of the
surplus-value or surplus-labour causes a change in the opposite direction in the magnitude of the value of
labour-power, or in the quantity of necessary labour, it by no means follows that they vary in the same
proportion. They do increase or diminish by the same quantity. But their proportional increase or
diminution depends on their original magnitudes before the change in the productiveness of labour took
place. If the value of the labour-power be 4 shillings, or the necessary labour-time 8 hours, and the
surplus-value be 2 shillings, or the surplus-labour 4 hours, and if, in consequence of an increase in the
productiveness of labour, the value of the labour-power fall to 3 shillings, or the necessary labour to 6
hours, the surplus-value will rise to 3 shillings, or the surplus-labour to 6 hours. The same quantity, 1
shilling or 2 hours, is added in one case and subtracted in the other. But the proportional change of
magnitude is different in each case. While the value of the labour-power falls from 4 shillings to 3, i.e.,
by 1/4 or 25%, the surplus-value rises from 2 shillings to 3, i.e., by 1/2 or 50%. It therefore follows that
the proportional increase or diminution in surplus-value, consequent on a given change in the
productiveness of labour, depends on the original magnitude of that portion of the working day which
embodies itself in surplus- value; the smaller that portion, the greater is the proportional change; the
greater that portion, the less is the proportional change.

(3.) Increase or diminution in surplus-value is always consequent on, and never the cause of, the
corresponding diminution or increase in the value of labour-power. [2]

Since the working-day is constant in magnitude, and is represented by a value of constant magnitude,
since, to every variation in the magnitude of surplus-value, there corresponds an inverse variation in the
value of labour-power, and since the value of labour-power cannot change, except in consequence of a
change in the productiveness of labour, it clearly follows, under these conditions, that every change of
magnitude in surplus-value arises from an inverse change of magnitude in the value of labour-power. If,
then, as we have already seen, there can be no change of absolute magnitude in the value of
labour-power, and in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a change in their relative magnitudes, so now it
follows that no change in their relative magnitudes is possible, without a previous change in the absolute
magnitude of the value of labour-power.

According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of surplus-value, presupposes a movement in the
value of labour-power, which movement is brought about by a variation in the productiveness of labour.
The limit of this change is given by the altered value of labour-power. Nevertheless, even when
circumstances allow the law to operate, subsidiary movements may occur. For example: if in
consequence of the increased productiveness of labour, the value of labour-power falls from 4 shillings to



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (3 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

3, or the necessary labour-time from 8 hours to 6, the price of labour-power may possibly not fall below
3s. 8d., 3s. 6d., or 3s. 2d., and the surplus-value consequently not rise above 3s. 4d., 3s. 6d., or 3s. lOd.
The amount of this fall, the lowest limit of which is 3 shillings (the new value of labour-power), depends
on the relative weight, which the pressure of capital on the one side, and the resistance of the labourer on
the other, throws into the scale.

The value of labour-power is determined by the value of a given quantity of necessaries. It is the value
and not the mass of these necessaries that varies with the productiveness of labour. It is, however,
possible that, owing to an increase of productiveness, both the labourer and the capitalist may
simultaneously be able to appropriate a greater quantity of these necessaries, without any change in the
price of labour-power or in surplus-value. If the value of labour-power be 3 shillings, and the necessary
labour-time amount to 6 hours, if the surplus-value likewise be 3 shillings, and the surplus-labour 6
hours, then if the productiveness of labour were doubled without altering the ratio of necessary labour to
surplus-labour, there would be no change of magnitude in surplus-value and price of labour-power. The
only result would be that each of them would represent twice as many use-values as before; these
use-values being twice as cheap as before. Although labour-power would be unchanged in price, it would
be above its value. If, however, the price of labour-power had fallen, not to Is. 6d., the lowest possible
point consistent with its new value, but to 2s. lOd. or 2s. 6d., still this lower price would represent an
increased mass of necessaries. In this way it is possible with an increasing productiveness of labour, for
the price of labour-power to keep on falling, and yet this fall to be accompanied by a constant growth in
the mass of the labourer's means of subsistence. But even in such case, the fall in the value of
labour-power would cause a corresponding rise of surplus-value, and thus the abyss between the
labourer's position and that of the capitalist would keep widening. [3J

Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three laws we have above stated. But he falls into the
following errors: (1) he looks upon the special conditions under which these laws hold good as the
general and sole conditions of capitalist production. He knows no change, either in the length of the
working-day, or in the intensity of labour; consequently with him there can be only one variable factor,
viz., the productiveness of labour; (2), and this error vitiates his analysis much more than (1), he has not,
any more than have the other economists, investigated surplus-value as such, i.e., independently of its
particular forms, such as profit, rent, &c. He therefore confounds together the laws of the rate of
surplus-value and the laws of the rate of profit. The rate of profit is, as we have already said, the ratio of
the surplus-value to the total capital advanced; the rate of surplus-value is the ratio of the surplus-value to
the variable part of that capital. Assume that a capital C of £500 is made up of raw material, instruments
of labour, &c. (c) to the amount of £400; and of wages (v) to the amount of £100; and further, that the
surplus-value (s) = £100. Then we have rate of surplus-value s/v = £100/£100 = 100%. But the rate of
profit s/c = £ 100/£500 = 20%. It is, besides, obvious that the rate of profit may depend on circumstances
that in no way affect the rate of surplus-value. I shall show in Book III. that, with a given rate of
surplus-value, we may have any number of rates of profit, and that various rates of surplus-value may,
under given conditions, express themselves in a single rate of profit.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (4 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

SECTION 2

WORKING-DAY CONSTANT. PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR CONSTANT. INTENSITY
OF LABOUR VARIABLE



Increased intensity of labour means increased expenditure of labour in a given time. Hence a
working-day of more intense labour is embodied in more products than is one of less intense labour, the
length of each day being the same. Increased productiveness of labour also, it is true, will supply more
products in a given working-day. But in this latter case, the value of each single product falls, for it costs
less labour than before; in the former case, that value remains unchanged, for each article costs the same
labour as before. Here we have an increase in the number of products, unaccompanied by a fall in their
individual prices: as their number increases, so does the sum of their prices. But in the case of increased
productiveness, a given value is spread over a greater mass of products. Hence the length of the
working-day being constant, a day's labour of increased intensity will be incorporated in an increased
value, and, the value of money remaining unchanged, in more money. The value created varies with the
extent to which the intensity of labour deviates from its normal intensity in the society. A given
working-day, therefore, no longer creates a constant, but a variable value; in a day of 12 hours of
ordinary intensity, the value created is, say 6 shillings, but with increased intensity, the value created may
be 7, 8, or more shillings. It is clear that, if the value created by a day's labour increases from, say, 6 to 8
shillings then the two parts into which this value is divided, viz., price of labour-power and
surplus-value, may both of them increase simultaneously, and either equally or unequally. They may
both simultaneously increase from 3 shillings to 4. Here, the rise in the price of labour-power does not
necessarily imply that the price has risen above the value of labour-power. On the contrary, the rise in
price may be accompanied by a fall in value. This occurs whenever the rise in the price of labour-power
does not compensate for its increased wear and tear.

We know that, with transitory exceptions, a change in the productiveness of labour does not cause any
change in the value of labour-power, nor consequently in the magnitude of surplus-value, unless the
products of the industries affected are articles habitually consumed by the labourers. In the present case
this condition no longer applies. For when the variation is either in the duration or in the intensity of
labour, there is always a corresponding change in the magnitude of the value created, independently of
the nature of the article in which that value is embodied.

If the intensity of labour were to increase simultaneously and equally in every branch of industry, then
the new and higher degree of intensity would become the normal degree for the society, and would
therefore cease to be taken account of. But still, even then, the intensity of labour would be different in
different countries, and would modify the international application of the law of value. The more intense
working-day of one nation would be represented by a greater sum of money than would the less intense
day of another nation. \4]



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (5 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

SECTION 3

PRODUCTIVENESS AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT. LENGTH OF THE
WORKING-DAY VARIABLE



The working-day may vary in two ways. It may be made either longer or shorter. From our present data,
and within the limits of the assumptions made on [previously] we obtain the following laws:

( 1.) The working-day creates a greater or less amount of value in proportion to its length — thus, a
variable and not a constant quantity of value.

(2. ) Every change in the relation between the magnitudes of surplus value and of the value of
labour-power arises from a change in the absolute magnitude of the surplus-labour, and consequently of
the surplus-value.

(3.) The absolute value of labour-power can change only in consequence of the reaction exercised by the
prolongation of surplus-labour upon the wear and tear of labour-power. Every change in this absolute
value is therefore the effect, but never the cause, of a change in the magnitude of surplus-value.

We begin with the case in which the working-day is shortened.

( 1.) A shortening of the working-day under the conditions given above, leaves the value of labour-power,
and with it, the necessary labour-time, unaltered. It reduces the surplus-labour and surplus- value. Along
with the absolute magnitude of the latter, its relative magnitude also falls, i.e., its magnitude relatively to
the value of labour-power whose magnitude remains unaltered. Only by lowering the price of
labour-power below its value could the capitalist save himself harmless.

All the usual arguments against the shortening of the working-day, assume that it takes place under the
conditions we have here supposed to exist; but in reality the very contrary is the case: a change in the
productiveness and intensity of labour either precedes, or immediately follows, a shortening of the
working-day. [5]

(2.) Lengthening of the working-day. Let the necessary labour-time be 6 hours, or the value of
labour-power 3 shillings; also let the surplus-labour be 6 hours or the surplus-value 3 shillings. The
whole working-day then amounts to 12 hours and is embodied in a value of 6 shillings. If, now, the
working-day be lengthened by 2 hours and the price of labour-power remain unaltered, the surplus-value
increases both absolutely and relatively. Although there is no absolute change in the value of
labour-power, it suffers a relative fall. Under the conditions assumed in 1. there could not be a change of
relative magnitude in the value of labour-power without a change in its absolute magnitude. Here, on the
contrary, the change of relative magnitude in the value of labour-power is the result of the change of
absolute magnitude in surplus-value.

Since the value in which a day's labour is embodied, increases with the length of that day, it is evident
that the surplus-value and the price of labour-power may simultaneously increase, either by equal or
unequal quantities. This simultaneous increase is therefore possible in two cases, one, the actual
lengthening of the working-day, the other, an increase in the intensity of labour unaccompanied by such

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (6 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

lengthening.

When the working-day is prolonged, the price of labour-power may fall below its value, although that
price be nominally unchanged or even rise. The value of a day's labour-power is, as will be remembered,
estimated from its normal average duration, or from the normal duration of life among the labourers, and
from corresponding normal transformations of organised bodily matter into motion, £61 in conformity
with the nature of man. Up to a certain point, the increased wear and tear of labour-power, inseparable
from a lengthened working-day, may be compensated by higher wages. But beyond this point the wear
and tear increases in geometrical progression, and every condition suitable for the normal reproduction
and functioning of labour-power is suppressed. The price of labour-power and the degree of its
exploitation cease to be commensurable quantities.



SECTION 4

SIMULTANEOUS VARIATIONS IN THE DURATION, PRODUCTIVENESS, AND INTENSITY
OF LABOUR



It is obvious that a large number of combinations are here possible. Any two of the factors may vary and
the third remain constant, or all three may vary at once. They may vary either in the same or in different
degrees, in the same or in opposite directions, with the result that the variations counteract one another,
either wholly or in part. Nevertheless the analysis of every possible case is easy in view of the results
given in I., II., and III. The effect of every possible combination may be found by treating each factor in
turn as variable, and the other two constant for the time being. We shall, therefore, notice, and that
briefly, but two important cases.



A. Diminishing productiveness of labour with a simultaneous lengthening of the working-day.

In speaking of diminishing productiveness of labour, we here refer to diminution in those industries
whose products determine the value of labour-power; such a diminution, for example, as results from
decreasing fertility of the soil, and from the corresponding dearness of its products. Take the
working-day at 12 hours and the value created by it at 6 shillings, of which one half replaces the value of
the labour-power, the other forms the surplus-value. Suppose, in consequence of the increased dearness
of the products of the soil, that the value of labour-power rises from 3 shillings to 4, and therefore the
necessary labour-time from 6 hours to 8. If there be no change in the length of the working-day, the
surplus-labour would fall from 6 hours to 4, the surplus-value from 3 shillings to 2. If the day be
lengthened by 2 hours, i.e., from 12 hours to 14, the surplus-labour remains at 6 hours, the surplus-value
at 6 shillings, but the surplus-value decreases compared with the value of labour-power, as measured by
the necessary labour-time. If the day be lengthened by 4 hours, viz., from 12 hours to 16, the proportional
magnitudes of surplus-value and value of labour-power, of surplus-labour and necessary labour, continue



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (7 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

unchanged, but the absolute magnitude of surplus-value rises from 3 shillings to 4, that of the
surplus-labour from 6 hours to 8, an increment of 33 1/3 %. Therefore, with diminishing productiveness
of labour and a simultaneous lengthening of the working-day, the absolute magnitude of surplus-value
may continue unaltered, at the same time that its relative magnitude diminishes; its relative magnitude
may continue unchanged, at the same time that its absolute magnitude increases; and, provided the
lengthening of the day be sufficient, both may increase.

In the period between 1799 and 1815 the increasing price of provisions led in England to a nominal rise
in wages, although the real wages, expressed in the necessaries of life, fell. From this fact West and
Ricardo drew the conclusion, that the diminution in the productiveness of agricultural labour had brought
about a fall in the rate of surplus-value, and they made this assumption of a fact that existed only in their
imaginations, the starting-point of important investigations into the relative magnitudes of wages, profits,
and rent. But, as a matter of fact, surplus-value had at that time, thanks to the increased intensity of
labour, and to the prolongation of the working-day, increased both in absolute and relative magnitude.
This was the period in which the right to prolong the hours of labour to an outrageous extent was
established; [71 the period that was especially characterised by an accelerated accumulation of capital
here, by pauperism there. [8]



B. Increasing intensity and productiveness of labour with simultaneous shortening of the working-day.

Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour, both have a like effect. They both augment the
mass of articles produced in a given time. Both, therefore, shorten that portion of the working-day which
the labourer needs to produce his means of subsistence or their equivalent. The minimum length of the
working-day is fixed by this necessary but contractile portion of it. If the whole working-day were to
shrink to the length of this portion, surplus-labour would vanish, a consummation utterly impossible
under the regime of capital. Only by suppressing the capitalist form of production could the length of the
working-day be reduced to the necessary labour-time. But, even in that case, the latter would extend its
limits. On the one hand, because the notion of "means of subsistence" would considerably expand, and
the labourer would lay claim to an altogether different standard of life. On the other hand, because a part
of what is now surplus-labour, would then count as necessary labour; I mean the labour of forming a
fund for reserve and accumulation.

The more the productiveness of labour increases, the more can the working-day be shortened; and the
more the working-day is shortened, the more can the intensity of labour increase. From a social point of
view, the productiveness increases in the same ratio as the economy of labour, which, in its turn, includes
not only economy of the means of production, but also the avoidance of all useless labour. The capitalist
mode of production, while on the one hand, enforcing economy in each individual business, on the other
hand, begets, by its anarchical system of competition, the most outrageous squandering of labour-power
and of the social means of production, not to mention the creation of a vast number of employments, at
present indispensable, but in themselves superfluous.

The intensity and productiveness of labour being given, the time which society is bound to devote to
material production is shorter, and as a consequence, the time at its disposal for the free development,
intellectual and social, of the individual is greater, in proportion as the work is more and more evenly
divided among all the able-bodied members of society, and as a particular class is more and more



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (8 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

deprived of the power to shift the natural burden of labour from its own shoulders to those of another
layer of society. In this direction, the shortening of the working-day finds at last a limit in the
generalisation of labour. In capitalist society spare time is acquired for one class by converting the whole
life-time of the masses into labour-time.



Footnotes

fJJ Note in the 3rd German edition. — The case considered at pages 300-302 is here of course omitted.
— F.E.

\2] To this third law MacCulloch has made, amongst others, this absurd addition, that a rise in
surplus-value, unaccompanied by a fall in the value of labour-power, can occur through the abolition of
taxes payable by the capitalist. The abolition of such taxes makes no change whatever in the quantity of
surplus-value that the capitalist extorts at first-hand from the labourer. It alters only the proportion in
which that surplus-value is divided between himself and third persons. It consequently makes no
alteration whatever in the relation between surplus-value and value of labour-power. MacCulloch's
exception therefore proves only his misapprehension of the rule, a misfortune that as often happens to
him in the vulgarisation of Ricardo, as it does to J. B. Say in the vulgarisation of Adam Smith.

\3] "When an alteration takes place in the productiveness of industry, and that either more or less is
produced by a given quantity of labour and capital, the proportion of wages may obviously vary, whilst
the quantity, which that proportion represents, remains the same, or the quantity may vary, whilst the
proportion remains the same." ("Outlines of Political Economy, &c," p. 67.)

[41 "All things being equal, the English manufacturer can turn out a considerably larger amount of work
in a given time than a foreign manufacturer, so much as to counterbalance the difference of the
working-days, between 60 hours a week here, and 72 or 80 elsewhere." (Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st
Oct., 1855, p. 65.) The most infallible means for reducing this qualitative difference between the English
and Continental working hour would be a law shortening quantitatively the length of the working-day in
Continental factories.

[52 "There are compensating circumstances ... which the working of the Ten Hours' Act has brought to
light. "(Rep.of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct. 1848," p. 7.)

\6] "The amount of labour which a man had undergone in the course of 24 hours might be approximately
arrived at by an examination of the chemical changes which had taken place in his body, changed forms
in matter indicating the anterior exercise of dynamic force." (Grove: "On the Correlation of Physical
Forces.")

[7] "Corn and labour rarely march quite abreast; but there is an obvious limit, beyond which they cannot
be separated. With regard to the unusual exertions made by the labouring classes in periods of dearness,
which produce the fall of wages noticed in the evidence" (namely, before the Parliamentary Committee
of Inquiry, 1814-15), "they are most meritorious in the individuals, and certainly favour the growth of
capital. But no man of humanity could wish to see them constant and unremitted. They are most
admirable as a temporary relief; but if they were constantly in action, effects of a similar kind would

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (9 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seventeen

result from them, as from the population of a country being pushed to the very extreme limits of its
food." (Malthus: "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815, p. 48, note.) All honour to
Malthus that he lays stress on the lengthening of the hours of labour, a fact to which he elsewhere in his
pamphlet draws attention, while Ricardo and others, in face of the most notorious facts, make
invariability in the length of the working-day the groundwork of all their investigations. But the
conservative interests, which Malthus served, prevented him from seeing that an unlimited prolongation
of the working-day, combined with an extraordinary development of machinery, and the exploitation of
women and children, must inevitably have made a great portion of the working-class "supernumerary,"
particularly whenever the war should have ceased, and the monopoly of England in the markets of the
world should have come to an end. It was, of course, far more convenient, and much more in conformity
with the interests of the ruling classes, whom Malthus adored like a true priest, to explain this
"over-population" by the eternal laws of Nature, rather than by the historical laws of capitalist
production.

£8} "A principal cause of the increase of capital, during the war, proceeded from the greater exertions,
and perhaps the greater privations of the labouring classes, the most numerous in every society. More
women and children were compelled by necessitous circumstances, to enter upon laborious occupations,
and former workmen were, from the same cause, obliged to devote a greater portion of their time to
increase production." (Essays on Pol. Econ., in which are illustrated the principal causes of the present
national distress. Lond., 1830, p. 248.)



Transcribed by Alan Thurrott

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Eighteen: Various Formula for the Rate of Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch17.htm (10 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:18:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eighteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part V:

The Production of Absolute and of

Relative Surplus-Value



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN:

VARIOUS FORMULA FOR THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE



We have seen that the rate of surplus-value is represented by the following formulae:

Surplus-value (s) Surplus-value Surplus-labor



Variable Capital (v) Value of labor-power Necessary labor

The two first of these formulae represent, as a ratio of values, that which, in the third, is represented as a
ratio of the times during which those values are produced. These formulae, supplementary the one to the
other, are rigorously definite and correct. We therefore find them substantially, but not consciously,
worked out in classical Political Economy. There we meet with the following derivative formulae.

Surplus-labor Surplus-value Surplus-product
II. == ==

Working-day Value of the Product Total Product

One and the same ratio is here expressed as a ratio of labor-times, of the values in which those
labor-times are embodied, and of the products in which those values exist. It is of course understood that,
by "Value of the Product", is meant only the value newly created in a working-day, the constant part of
the value of the product being excluded.

In all of these formulae (II.), the actual degree of exploitation of labor, or the rate of surplus-value, is
falsely expressed. Let the working-day be 12 hours. Then, making the same assumptions as in former
instances, the real degree of exploitation of labor will be represented in the following proportions.

6 hours surplus-labor Surplus-value of 3 sh.



== 100



6 hours necessary labor Variable Capital of 3 sh

From formulae II. we get very differently,

6 hours surplus-labor Surplus-value of 3 sh.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch18.htm (1 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:18:22]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eighteen



== 50



Working-day of 12 hours



Value created of 6 sh



These derivative formulae express, in reality, only the proportion in which the working-day, or the value
produced by it, is divided between capitalist and laborer. If they are to be treated as direct expressions of
the degree of self-expansion of capital, the following erroneous law would hold good: Surplus-labor or
surplus-value can never reach 100%. £1} Since the surplus-labor is only an aliquot part of the
working-day, or since surplus-value is only an aliquot part of the value created, the surplus-labor must
necessarily be always less than the working-day, or the surplus-value always less than the total value
created. In order, however, to attain the ratio of 100: 100 they must be equal. In order that the
surplus-labor may absorb the whole day (i.e., an average dy of any week or year), the necessary labor
must sink to zero. But if the necessary labor vanish, so too does the surplus-labor, since it is only a
function of the former. The ratio

Surplus-labor Surplus-value
or



Working-day



Value created



can therefore never reach the limit 100/100, still less rise to 100+x/100. But not so the rate of
surplus-value, the real degree of exploitation of labor. Take, e.g., the estimate of L. de Lavergne,
according to which the English agricultural laborer gets only 1/4, the capitalist (farmer) on the other hand
3/4 of the product [2J or its value, apart from the question of how the booty is subsequently divided
between the capitalist, the landlord, and others. According to this, this surplus-labor of the English
agricultural laborer is to his necessary labor as 3: 1, which gives a rate of exploitation of 300%.

The favorite method of treating the working-day as constant in magnitude became, through the use of
formulae II., a fixed usage, because in them surplus-labor is always compared with a working-day of
given length. The same holds good when the repartition of the value produced is exclusively kept insight.
The working-day that has already been realized in given value, must necessarily be a day of given length.

The habit of representing surplus-value and value of labor-power as fractions of the value created — a
habit that originates in the capitalist mode of production itself, and whose import will hereafter be
disclosed — conceals the very transaction that characterizes capital, namely the exchange of variable
capital for living labor-power, and the consequent exclusion of the laborer from the product. Instead of
the real fact, we have false semblance of an association, in which laborer and capitalist divide the product
in proportion to the different elements which they respectively contribute towards its formation. [3]

Moreover, the formulae II. can at any time be reconverted into formulae I. If, for instance, we have

Surplus-labor of 6 hours



Working-day of 12 hours

then the necessary labor-time being 12 hours less the surplus-labor of 6 hours, we get the following
result,

Surplus-labor of 6 hours 100



Necessary labor of 6 hours



100



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch18.htm (2 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:18:22]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eighteen

There is a third formula which I have occassionally already anticipated; it is

Surplus-value Surplus-labor Unpaid labor
III. == == .



Value of labor-power Necessary labor Paid labor

After the investigations we have given above, it is no longer possible to be misled, by the formula

Unpaid labor



r

Paid labor



into concluding, that the capitalist pays for labor and not for labor-power. This formula is only a popular
expression for

Surplus -labor



Necessary labor

The capitalist pays the value, so far as price coincides with value, of the labor-power, and receives in
exchange the disposal of the living labor-power itself. His usufruct is spread over two periods. During
one the laborer produces a value that is only equal to the value of his labor-power; he produces its
equivalent. This the capitalist receives in return for his advance of the price of the labor-power, a product
ready made in the market. During the other period, the period of surplus-labor, the usufruct of the
labor-power creates a value for the capitalist, that costs him no equivalent. [4] This expenditure of
labor-power comes to him gratis. In this sense it is that surplus-labor can be called unpaid labor.

Capital, therefore, it not only, as Adam Smith says, the command over labor. It is essentially the
command over unpaid labor. All surplus-value, whatever particular form (profit, interest, or rent), it may
subsequently crystallize into, is in substance the materialization of unpaid labor. The secret of the
self-expansion of capital resolves itself into having the disposal of a definite quantity of other people's
unpaid labor.



Footnotes

JJJ Thus, e.g., in "Dritter Brief an v. Kirchmann von Rodbertus. Widerlegung der Ricardo'schen Lehre
von der Grundrente und Begrundung einer neuen Rententheorie". Berlin, 1851. 1 shall return to this letter
later on; in spite of its erroneous theory of rent, it sees through the nature of capitalist production.

NOTE ADDED IN THE 3RD GERMAN EDITION: It may be seen from this how favorably Marx
judged his predecessors, whenever he found in them real progress, or new and sound ideas. The
subsequent publications of Robertus' letters to Rud. Meyer has shown that the above acknowledgement
by Marx wants restricting to some extent. In those letters this passage occurs:

"Capital must be rescued not only from labor, but from itself, and that will be best effected, by treating
the acts of the industrial capitalist as economic and political functions, that have been delegated to him
with his capital, and by treating his profit as a form of salary, because we still know no other social
organization. But salaries may be regulated, and may also be reduced if they take too much from wages.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch18.htm (3 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:18:22]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eighteen

The irruption of Marx into Society, as I may call his book, must be warded off.... Altogether, Marx's
book is not so much an investigation into capital, as a polemic against the present form of capital, a form
which he confounds with the concept itself of capital."

("Briefe, &c, von Dr. Robertus-Jagetzow, herausgg. von Dr. Rud. Meyer", Berlin, 1881, 1, Bd. P.lll,
46. Breif von Rodbertus.) To such ideological commonplaces did the bold attack by Robertus in his
"social letters" finally dwindle down. — F.E.

\2] That part of the product which merely replaces the constant capital advanced is of course left out in
this calculation. Mr. L. de Lavergne, a blind admirer of England, is inclined to estimate the share of the
capitalist too low, rather than too high.

[3] All well-developed forms of capitalist production being forms of cooperation, nothing is, of course,
easier, than to make abstraction from their antagonistic character, and to transform them by a word into
some form of free association, as is done by A. de Laborde in "De l'Espirit d Association dans tout les
interets de la communaute". Paris 1818. H. Carey, the Yankee, occassionally performs this conjuring
trick with like success, even with the relations resulting from slavery.

[4J Although the Physiocrats could not penetrate the mystery of surplus-value, yet this much was clear to
them, viz., that it is "une richesse independante et disponible qu'il (the possessor) n'a point achetee et
qu'il vend." (Turgot: "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses", p. 11.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Nineteen: The Transformation of the Value (and Respective Price) of Labour-Power into

Wages

Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch18.htm (4 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:18:22]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part VI:
Wages



CHAPTER NINETEEN:

THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE VALUE (AND RESPECTIVE PRICE)

OF LABOUR-POWER INTO WAGES



On the surface of bourgeois society the wage of the labourer appears as the price of labour, a certain
quantity of money that is paid for a certain quantity of labour. Thus people speak of the value of labour
and call its expression in money its necessary or natural price. On the other hand they speak of the
market-prices of labour, i.e., prices oscillating above or below its natural price.

But what is the value of a commodity? The objective form of the social labour expended in its
production. And how do we measure the quantity of this value? By the quantity of the labour contained
in it. How then is the value, e.g., of a 12 hour working-day to be determined?. By the 12 working-hours
contained in a working-day of 12 hours, which is an absurd tautology. £1}

In order to be sold as a commodity in the market, labour must at all events exist before it is sold. But,
could the labourer give it an independent objective existence, he would sell a commodity and not labour.
[21

Apart from these contradictions, a direct exchange of money, i.e., of realized labour, with living labour
would either do away with the law of value which only begins to develop itself freely on the basis of
capitalist production, or do away with capitalist production itself, which rests directly on wage-labour.
The working-day of 12 hours embodies itself, e.g., in a money-value of 6s. Either equivalents are
exchanged, and then the labourer receives 6s, for 12 hours' labour; the price of his labour would be equal
to the price of his product. In this case he produces no surplus-value for the buyer of his labour, the 6s.
are not transformed into capital, the basis of capitalist production vanishes. But it is on this very basis
that he sells his labour and that his labour is wage-labour. Or else he receives for 12 hours' labour less
than 6s., i.e., less than 12 hours' labour. Twelve hours' labour are exchanged against 10, 6, &tc, hours'
labour. This equalization of unequal quantities not merely does away with the determination of value.
Such a self-destructive contradiction cannot be in any way even enunciated or formulated as a law. £31

It is of no avail to deduce the exchange of more labour against less, from their difference of form, the one
being realized, the other living. £4£ This is the more absurd as the value of a commodity is determined



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (1 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

not by the quantity of labour actually realized in it, but by the quantity of living labour necessary for its
production. A commodity represents, say, 6 working-hours. If an invention is made by which it can be
produced in 3 hours, the value, even of the commodity already produced, falls by half. It represents now
3 hours of social labour instead of the 6 formerly necessary. It is the quantity of labour required for its
production, not the realized form of that labour, by which the amount of the value of a commodity is
determined.

That which comes directly face to face with the possessor of money on the market, is in fact not labour,
but the labourer. What the latter sells is his labour-power. As soon as his labour actually begins, it has
already ceased to belong to him; it can therefore no longer be sold by him. Labour is the substance, and
the immanent measure of value, but has itself no value. [51

In the expression "value of labour," the idea of value is not only completely obliterated, but actually
reversed. It is an expression as imaginary as the value of the earth. These imaginary expressions, arise,
however, from the relations of production themselves. They are categories for the phenomenal forms of
essential relations. That in their appearance things often represent themselves in inverted form is pretty
well known in every science except Political Economy. [6[

Classical Political Economy borrowed from every-day life the category "price of labour" without further
criticism, and then simply asked the question, how is this price determined? It soon recognized that the
change in the relations of demand and supply explained in regard to the price of labour, as of all other
commodities, nothing except its changes i.e., the oscillations of the market-price above or below a certain
mean. If demand and supply balance, the oscillation of prices ceases, all other conditions remaining the
same. But then demand and supply also cease to explain anything. The price of labour, at the moment
when demand and supply are in equilibrium, is its natural price, determined independently of the relation
of demand and supply. And how this price is determined is just the question. Or a larger period of
oscillations in the market-price is taken, e.g., a year, and they are found to cancel one the other, leaving a
mean average quantity, a relatively constant magnitude. This had naturally to be determined otherwise
than by its own compensating variations. This price which always finally predominates over the
accidental market-prices of labour and regulates them, this "necessary price" (Physiocrats) or "natural
price" of labour (Adam Smith) can, as with all other commodities, be nothing else than its value
expressed in money. In this way Political Economy expected to penetrate athwart the accidental prices of
labour, to the value of labour. As with other commodities, this value was determined by the cost of
production. But what is the cost of production-of the labourer, i.e., the cost of producing or reproducing
the labourer himself? This question unconsciously substituted itself in Political Economy for the original
one; for the search after the cost of production of labour as such turned in a circle and never left the spot.
What economists therefore call value of labour, is in fact the value of labour-power, as it exists in the
personality of the labourer, which is as different from its function, labour, as a machine is from the work
it performs. Occupied with the difference between the market-price of labour and its so-called value,
with the relation of this value to the rate of profit, and to the values of the commodities produced by
means of labour, &tc, they never discovered that the course of the analysis had led not only from the
market-prices of labour to its presumed value, but had led to the resolution of this value of labour itself
into the value of labour-power. Classical economy never arrived at a consciousness of the results of its
own analysis; it accepted uncritically the categories "value of labour," "natural price of labour," &tc.,. as
final and as adequate expressions for the value-relation under consideration, and was thus led, as will be
seen later, into inextricable confusion and contradiction, while it offered to the vulgar economists a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (2 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

secure basis of operations for their shallowness, which on principle worships appearances only.

Let us next see how value (and price) of labour-power, present themselves in this transformed condition
as wages.

We know that the daily value of labour-power is calculated upon a certain length of the labourer's life, to
which, again, corresponds a certain length of working-day. Assume the habitual working-day as 12
hours, the daily value of labour-power as 3s., the expression in money of a value that embodies 6 hours
of labour. If the labourer receives 3s., then he receives the value of his labour-power functioning through
12 hours. If, now, this value of a day's labour-power is expressed as the value of a day's labour itself, we
have the formula: Twelve hours' labour has a value of 3s. The value of labour-power thus determines the
value of labour, or, expressed in money, its necessary price. If, on the other hand, the price of
labour-power differs from its value, in like manner the price of labour differs from its so-called value.

As the value of labour is only an irrational expression for the value of labour-power, it follows, of course,
that the value of labour must always be less than the value it produces, for the capitalist always makes
labour-power work longer than is necessary for the reproduction of its own value. In the above example,
the value of the labour-power that functions through 12 hours is 3s., a value for the reproduction of
which 6 hours are required. The value which the labour-power produces is, on the other hand, 6s.,
because it, in fact, functions during 12 hours, and the value it produces depends, not on its own value, but
on the length of time it is in action. Thus, we have a result absurd at first sight that labour which creates a
value of 6s. possesses a value of 3s. [7]

We see, further: The value of 3s. by which a part only of the working-day-i.e., 6 hours' labour-is paid for,
appears as the value or price of the whole working-day of 12 hours, which thus includes 6 hours unpaid
for. The wage-form thus extinguishes every trace of the division of the working-day into necessary
labour and surplus-labour, into paid and unpaid labour. All labour appears as paid labour. In the corvee,
the labour of the worker for himself, and his compulsory labour for his lord, differ in space and time in
the clearest possible way. In slave labour, even that part of the working-day in which the slave is only
replacing the value of his own means of existence, in which, therefore, in fact, he works for himself
alone, appears as labour for his master. All the slave's labour appears as unpaid labour. £8} In wage
labour, on the contrary, even surplus-labour, or unpaid labour, appears as paid. There the
property-relation conceals the labour of the slave for himself; here the money-relation conceals the
unrequited labour of the wage labourer.

Hence, we may understand the decisive importance of the transformation of value and price of
labour-power into the form of wages, or into the value and price of labour itself. This phenomenal form,
which makes the actual relation invisible, and, indeed, shows the direct opposite of that relation, forms
the basis of all the juridical notions of both labourer and capitalist, of all the mystifications of the
capitalistic mode of production, of all its illusions as to liberty, of all the apologetic shifts of the vulgar
economists.

If history took a long time to get at the bottom of the mystery of wages, nothing, on the other hand, is
more easy to understand than the necessity, the raison d' etre, of this phenomenon.

The exchange between capital and labour at first presents itself to the mind in the same guise as the
buying and selling of all other commodities. The buyer gives a certain sum of money, the seller an article
of a nature different from money. The jurist's consciousness recognizes in this, at most, a material

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (3 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

difference, expressed in the juridically equivalent formula: "Do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut des, facio ut
facias." [91

Furthermore, exchange-value and use-value, being intrinsically incommensurable magnitudes, the
expressions "value of labour," "price of labour," do not seem more irrational than the expressions "value
of cotton," "price of cotton." Moreover, the labourer is paid after he has given his labour. In its function
of means of payment, money realizes subsequently the value or price of the article supplied-i.e., in this
particular case, the value or price of the labour supplied. Finally, the use-value supplied by the labourer
to the capitalist is not, in fact, his labour-power, but its function, some definite useful labour, the work of
tailoring, shoemaking, spinning, &tc. That this same labour is, on the other hand, the universal
value-creating element, and thus possesses a property by which it differs from all other commodities, is
beyond the cognizance of the ordinary mind.

Let us put ourselves in the place of the labourer who receives for 12 hours' labour, say the value
produced by 6 hours' labour, say 3s. For him, in fact, his 12 hours' labour is the means of buying the 3s.
The value of his labour-power may vary, with the value of his usual means of subsistence, from 3 to 4
shillings, or from 3 to 2 shillings; or, if the value of his labour-power remains constant, its price may, in
consequence of changing relations of demand and supply, rise to 4s. or fall to 2s. He always gives 12
hours of labour. Every change in the amount of the equivalent that he receives appears to him, therefore,
necessarily as a change in the value or price of his 12 hours' work. This circumstance misled Adam
Smith, who treated the working-day as a constant quantity, [101 to the assertion that the value of labour is
constant, although the value of the means of subsistence may vary, and the same working-day, therefore,
may represent itself in more or less money for the labourer.

Let us consider, on the other hand, the capitalist. He wishes to receive as much labour as possible for as
little money as possible. Practically, therefore, the only thing that interests him is the difference between
the price of labour-power and the value which its function creates. But, then, he tries to buy all
commodities as cheaply as possible, and always accounts for his profit by simple cheating, by buying
under, and selling over the value. Hence, he never comes to see that, if such a thing as the value of labour
really existed, and he really paid this value, no capital would exist, his money would not be turned into
capital.

Moreover, the actual movement of wages presents phenomena which seem to prove that not the value of
labour-power is paid, but the value of its function, of labour itself. We may reduce these phenomena to
two great classes: 1.) Change of wages with the changing length of the working-day. One might as well
conclude that not the value of a machine is paid, but that of its working, because it costs more to hire a
machine for a week than for a day. 2.) The individual difference in the wages of different labourers who
do the same kind of work. We find this individual difference, but are not deceived by it, in the system of
slavery, where, frankly and openly, without any circumlocution, labour-power itself is sold. Only, in the
slave system, the advantage of a labour-power above the average, and the disadvantage of a
labour-power below the average, affects the slave-owner; in the wage-labour system, it affects the
labourer himself, because his labour-power is, in the one case, sold by himself, in the other, by a third
person.

For the rest, in respect to the phenomenal form, "value and price of labour," or "wages," as contrasted
with the essential relation manifested therein, viz., the value and price of labour-power, the same
difference holds that holds in respect to all phenomena and their hidden substratum. The former appear



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch19.htm (4 of 6) [23/08/2000 16:18:26]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nineteen

directly and spontaneously as current modes of thought; the latter must first be discovered by science.
Classical Political Economy nearly touches the true relation of things, without, however, consciously
formulating it. This it cannot, so long as it sticks in its bourgeois skin.



Footnotes

f 1 1 "Mr.Ricardo ingeniously enough avoids a difficulty which, on a first view, threatens to encumber his
doctrine — that value depends on the quantity of labour employed in production. If this principle is
rigidly adhered to, it follows that the value of labour depends on the quantity of labour employed in
producing it — which is evidently absurd. By a dexterous turn, therefore, Mr. Ricardo makes the value of
labour depend on the quantity of labour required to produce wages; or, to give him the benefit of his own
language, he maintains, that the value of labour is to be estimated by the quantity of labour required to
produce wages; by which he means the quantity of labour required to produce the money or commodities
given to the labourer. This is similar to saying, that the value of cloth is estimated, not by the quantity of
labour bestowed on its production, but by the quantity of labour bestowed on the production of the silver,
for which the cloth is exchanged." — "A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, &tc, of Value," pp. 50, 51.
