

The bourgeoisie has torn away from the
family its sentimental veil, and has reduced
the family relation to a mere money relation.

The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came
to pass that the brutal display of vigour in
the Kiddle Ages, which Beactionists so
much admire, found its fitting complement



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 17

in the most slothful indolence. It has been
the first to shew what man's activity can
bring about. It has accomplished wonders
far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, Roman
aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it has con-
ducted expeditions that put in the shade all
former Exoduses of nations and crusades.

The bourgeoisie cannot exist without con-
stantly revolutionising the instruments of
production, and thereby the relations of pro-
duction, and with them the whole relations
of society. Conservation of the old modes of
production in unaltered form, was, on the
contrary, the first condition of existence for
all earlier industrial classes. Constant revo-
lutionising of production, uninterrupted dis-
turbance of all social conditions, everlasting
uncertainty and agitation distinguish the
bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All
fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train
of ancient and venerable prejudices and
opinions, are swept away, all new-formed
t/j^es become antiquated before they can
ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all
that is holy is profaned, and man is at last
compelled to face with sober senses, his real
conditions of life, and his relations with his
kind.

The need of a constantly expanding market
for its products chases the bourgeoisie over
the whole surface of the globe. It must
nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, estab-
lish connexions everywhere.

The bourgeoisie has through its exploita-



18 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

tion of the world-market given a cosmopoli-
tan character to production and consumption
in every country. To the great chagrin of
Be-actionists, it has drawn from under the
feet of industry the national ground on
which it stood. All old-established national
industries have been destroyed or are daily
being destroyed. They are dislodged by new
industries, whose introduction becomes a life
and death question for all civilised nations,
by industries that no longer work up indig-
enous raw material, but raw material
drawn from the remotest zones; industries
whose products are consumed, not only at
home, but in every quarter of the globe. In
place of the old wants, satisfied by the pro-
ductions of the country, we find new wants,
requiring for their satisfaction the products
of distant lands and climes. In place of the
old local and national seclusion and self-
sufficiency, we have intercourse in every di-
rection, universal inter-dependence of na-
tions. And as in material, so also in intel-
lectual production. The intellectual crea-
tions of individual nations become common
property. National one-sidedness and nar-
row-mindedness become more and more im-
possible, and from the numerous national
and local literatures there arises a world-
literature.

The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement
of all instruments of production, by the im-
mensely facilitated means of communication,
draws all, even the most barbarian, nations



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 19

into civilisation. The cheap prices of its
commodities are the heavy artillery with
which it batters down all Chinese walls,
with which it forces the barbarians' in-
tensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to
capitulate. It compels all nations, on pain
of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode
of production; it compels them to introduce
what it calls civilisation into their midst,
i. e., to become bourgeois themselves. In a
word, it creates a world after its own image.

The bourgeoisie has subjected the country
to the rule of the towns. It has created
enormous cities, has greatly increased the
urban population as compared with the
rural, and has thus rescued a considerable
part of the population from the idiocy of
rural life. Just as it has made the country
dependent on the towns, so it has made bar-
barian and semi-barbarian countries de-
pendent on the civilised ones, nations of
peasants on nations of bourgeois, the East
on the West.

The bourgeoisie keeps more and more do-
in^ away with the scattered state of the
population, of the means of production, and
of property. It has agglomerated popula-
tion, centralised means of production, and
has concentrated property in a few hands.
The necessary consequence of this was po-
litical centralisation. Independent, or but
loosely connected provinces, with separate
interests, laws, governments and systems of
taxation, became lumped together in one na-



20 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

tion, with one government, one code of laws,
one national class-interest, one frontier and
one customs-tariff.

The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce
one hundred years, has created more massive
and more colossal productive forces than
have all preceding generations together.
Subjection of Nature's forces to man, ma-
chinery, application of chemistry to industry
and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways,
electric telegraphs, clearing of whole conti-
nents for cultivation, canalization of rivers,
whole populations conjured out of the
ground — what earlier century had even a
presentiment that such productive forces
slumbered in the lap of social labour P

We see then: the means of production and
of exchange on whose foundation the bour-
geoisie built itself up, were generated in
feudal society. At a certain stage in the de-
velopment of these means of production and
of exchange, the conditions under which
feudal society produced and exchanged, the
feudal organisation of agriculture and man-
ufacturing industry, in one word, the feudal
relations of property became no longer com-
patible with the already developed produc-
tive forces; they became so many fetters.
They had to burst asunder; they were burst
asunder.

Into their places stepped free competition,
accompanied by a social and political con-
stitution adapted to it, and by the economical
and political sway of the bourgeois class.



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 21

A similar movement is going on before our
own eyes. Modern bourgeois society with
its relations of production, of exchange and
of property, a society that has conjured up
such gigantic means of production and of ex-
change, is like the sorcerer, who is no longer
able to control the powers of the nether
world whom he has called up by his spells.
For many a decade past the history of indus-
try and commerce is but the history of the
revolt of modern productive forces against
modern conditions of production, against the
property relations that are the conditions for
the existence of the bourgeoisie and of its
rule. It is enough to mention the commer-
cial crises that by their periodical return
put on its trial, each time more threaten-
ingly, the existence of the entire bourgeois
society. In these crises a great part not only
of the existing products, but also of the
previously created productive forces, are pe-
riodically destroyed. In these crises there
breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier
epochs, would have seemed an absurdity—
the epidemic of over-production. Society
suddenly finds itself put back into a state of
momentary barbarism; it appears as if a
famine, a universal war of devastation had
cut off the supply of every means of sub-
sistence; industry and commerce seem to be
destroyed; and whyP Because there is too
much civilisation, too much means of sub-
sistence, too much industry, too much com-
merce. The productive forces at the dis-



22 COIOCITHIST XAHTFESTO

posal of society no longer tend to further the
development of the conditions of bourgeois
property; on the contrary, they have become
too powerful for these conditions, by which
they are fettered, and so soon as they over-
come these fetters, they bring disorder into
the whole of bourgeois society, endanger the
existence of bourgeois property. The con-
ditions of bourgeois society are too narrow
to comprise the wealth created by them. And
how does the bourgeoisie get over these
crisesF On the one hand by enforced de-
struction of a mass of productive forces; on
the other, by the conquest of new markets,
and by the more thorough exploitation of
the old ones. That is to say, by paving the
way for more extensive and more destructive
crises, and by diminishing the means
whereby crises are prevented.

The weapons with which the bourgeoisie
felled feudalism to the ground are now
turned against the bourgeoisie itself.

But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the
weapons that bring death to itself; it has
also called into existence the men who are to
wield those weapons — the modern working-
class — the proletarians.

In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i. e., capi-
tal, is developed, in the same proportion is
the proletariat, the modern working-class,
developed, a class of labourers, who live only
so long as they find work, and who find work
only so long as their labour increases capi-
tal. These labourers, who must sell them-



L



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 23

selves piecemeal, are a commodity, like every
other article of commerce, and are conse-
quently exposed to all the vicissitudes of
competition, to all the fluctuations of the
market.

Owing to the extensive use of machinery
and to division of labour, the work of the
proletarians has lost all individual character,
and, consequently, all charm for the work-
man. He becomes an appendage of the ma-
chine, and it is only the most simple, most
monotonous, and most easily acquired knack
that is required of him. Hence, the cost of
production of a workman is restricted, al-
most entirely, to the means of subsistence
that he requires for his maintenance, and for
the propagation of his race. Bu.t the price
of a commodity, and also of labour, is equal
to its cost of production. In proportion,
therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work
increases, the wage decreases. Nay more, in
proportion as the use of machinery and divi-
sion of labour increases, in the same propor-
tion the burden of toil also increases, whether
by prolongation of the working hours, by in-
crease of the work enacted in a given time,;
or by increased speed of the machinery, etc/

Modern industry has converted the little
workshop of the patriarchal master into the
great factory of the industrial capitalist.
Masses of labourers, crowded into the fac-
tory, are organised like soldiers. As pri-
vates of the industrial army they are placed
under the command of a perfect hierarchy of



24 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

officers and sergeants. Not only are they
the slaves of the bourgeois class, and of the
bourgeois State, they are daily and hourly
enslaved by the machine, by the over-looker,
and, above all, by the individual bourgeois
manufacturer himself. The more openly this
despotism proclaims gain to be its end and
aim, the more petty, the more hateful and
the more embittering it is.

The less the skill and exertion or strength
implied in manual labour, in other words,
the more modern industry becomes devel-
oped, the more is the labour of men super-
seded by that of women. Differences of age
and sex have no longer any distinctive so-
cial validity for the working class. All are
instruments of labour, more or less expen-
sive to use, according to their age and sex.

No sooner is the exploitation of the la-
bourer by the manufacturer, so far, at an
end, that he receives his wages in cash, than
he is set upon by the other portions of the
bourgeoisie, the landlord, the shopkeeper,
the pawnbroker, etc.

The lower strata of the Middle class — the
small tradespeople, shopkeepers, and retired
tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen
and peasants — all these sink gradually into
the proletariat, partly because their diminu-
tive capital does not suffice for the scale on
which Modern Industry is carried on, and is
swamped in the competition with the large
capitalists, partly because their specialised
skill is rendered worthless by new methods



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 25

of production. Thus the proletariat is re-
cruited from all classes of the population.

The proletariat goes through various stages
of development. With its birth begins its
struggle with the bourgeoisie. At first the
contest is carried on by individual labour-
ers, then by the workpeople of a factory,
then by the operatives of one trade, in one
locality, against the individual bourgeois
who directly exploits them. They direct their
attacks not against the bourgeois conditions
of production, but against the instruments
of production themselves; they destroy im-
ported wares that compete with their labour,
they smash to pieces machinery, they set
factories ablaze, they seek to restore by force
the vanished status of the workman of the
Middle Ages.

At this stage the labourers still form an
incoherent mass scattered over the whole
country, and broken up by their mutual
competition. If anywhere they unite to form
more compact bodies, this is not yet the con-
sequence of their own active union, but of
the union of the bourgeoisie, which class, in
order to attain its own political ends, is
compelled to set the whole proletariat in
motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able
to do so./ At this stage, therefore, the
proletarians do not fight their enemies, but
the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of
absolute monarchy, the landowners, the non-
industrial bourgeois, the petty bourgeoisie.
Thus the whole historical movement is con-



26 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

centrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie;
every victory so obtained is a victory for the
bourgeoisie.

But with the development of industry the
proletariat not only increases in number; it
becomes concentrated in greater masses, its
strength grows, and it feels that strength
more. The various interests and conditions
of *Ufe within the ranks of the proletariat
are more and more equalised, in proportion
as machinery obliterates all distinctions of
labour, and nearly everywhere reduces
wages to the same low level. The growing
competition among the bourgeois, and the
resulting commercial crises, make the wages
of the workers ever more fluctuating. The
unceasing improvement of machinery, ever
more rapidly developing, makes their liveli-
hood more and more precarious; the colli-
sions between individual workmen and indi-
vidual bourgeois take more and more the
character of collisions between two classes.
Thereupon the workers begin to form com-
binations (Trades' Unions) against the bour-
geois; they club together in order to keep
up the rate of wages; they found permanent
associations in order to make provision be-
forehand for these occasional revolts. Here
and there the contest breaks out into riots.

Now and then the workers are victorious,
but only for a time. The real fruit of their
battles lies, not in the immediate result, but
in the ever expanding union of the workers.
This union is helped on by the improved



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 27

means of communication that are created by
modern industry, and that place the workers
of different localities in contact with one an-
other. It was just this contact that was
needed to centralise the numerous local strug-
gles, all of the same character, into one na-
tional struggle between classes. But every
class struggle is a political struggle. And
that union, to attain which the burghers of
the Middle Ages, with their miserable high-
ways, required centuries, the modern prole-
terians, thanks to railways, achieve in a
few years.

This organisation of the proletarians into
a class, and consequently into a political
party, is continually being upset again by
the competition between the workers them-
selves. But it ever rises up again, stronger,
firmer, mightier. It compels legislative rec-
ognition of particular interests of the work-
ers, by taking advantage of the divisions
among the bourgeoisie itself. Thus the ten-
hours'-bill in England was carried.

Altogether collisions between the classes
of the old society further, in many ways,
the course of development of the proletariat.
The bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a
constant battle. At first with the aristoc-
racy; later on, with those portions of the
bourgeoisie itself, whose interests have be-
come antagonistic to the progress of indus-
try; at all times, with the bourgeoisie of for-
eign countries. In all these battles it sees
itself compelled to appeal to the proletariat,



28 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

to ask for its help, and thus, to drag it into
the political arena. The bourgeoisie itself,
therefore, supplies the proletariat with its
own elements of political and general educa-
tion, in other words, it furnishes the prol-
etariat with weapons for fighting the bour-
geoisie.

Further, as we have already seen, entire
sections of the ruling classes are, by the
advance of industry, precipitated into the
proletariat, or are at least threatened in their
conditions of existence. These also supply
the proletariat with fresh elements of en-
lightenment and progress.

Finally, in times when the class-struggle
nears the decisive hour, the process of dis-
solution going on within the ruling class,
in fact within the whole range of old so-
ciety, assumes such a violent, glaring char-
acter, that a small section of the ruling
class cuts itself adrift, and joins the revolu-
tionary class, the class that holds the future
in its hands. Just as, therefore, at an earlier
period, a section of the nobility went over to
the bourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bour-
geoisie goes over to the proletariat, and in
particular, a portion of the bourgeois ideolo-
gists, who have raised themselves to the
level of comprehending theoretically the his-
torical movements as a whole.

Of all the classes that stand face to face
with the bourgeoisie to-day, the proletariat
alone is a really revolutionary class. The
other classes decay and finally disappear in



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 29

the face of modern industry; the proletariat
is its special and essential product.

The lower middle-class, the small manu-
facturer, the shopkeeper, the artisan, the
peasant, all these fight against the bour-
geoisie, to save from extinction their exist-
ence as fractions of the middle class. They
are therefore not revolutionary, but con-
servative. Nay more, they are reactionary,
for they try to roll back the wheel of his-
tory. If by chance they are revolutionary,
they are so, only in view of their impending
transfer into the proletariat, they thus de-
fend not their present, but their future in-
terests, they desert their own standpoint to
place themselves at that of the proletariat.

The "dangerous class," the social scum,
that passively rotting mass thrown off by
the lowest layers of old society, may, here
and there, be swept into the movement by
a proletarian revolution; its conditions of life,
however, prepare it far more for the part
of a bribed tool of reactionary intrigue.

In the conditions of the proletariat, those
of old society at large are already virtually
swamped. The proletarian is without prop-
erty; his relation to his wife and children
has no longer anything in common with the
bourgeois family-relations; modern indus-
trial labour, modern subjection to capital, the
same in England as in France, in America as
in Germany, has stripped him of every trace
of national character. Law, morality, re-
ligion, are to him so many bourgeois preju-



30 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

dices, behind which lurk in ambush just as
many bourgeois interests.

All the preceding classes that got the up-
per hand, sought to fortify their already ac-
quired status by subjecting society at large
to their conditions of appropriation. The
proletarians cannot become masters of the
productive forces of society, except by abol-
ishing their own previous mode of appropria-
tion, and thereby also every other previous
mode of appropriation. They have nothing
of their own to secure and to fortify; their
mission is to destroy all previous securities
for, and insurances of, individual property.

All previous historical movements were
movements of minorities, or in the interest of
minorities. The proletarian movement is
the self-conscious, independent movement of
the immense majority, in the interest of the
immense majority. The proletariat, the low-
est stratum of our present society, cannot
stir, cannot raise itself up, without the whole
superincumbent strata of official society be-
ing sprung into the air.

Though not in substance, yet in form, the
struggle of the proletariat with the bour-
geoisie is at first a national struggle. The
proletariat of each country must, of course,
first of all settle matters with its own bour-
geoisie.

In depicting the most general phases of
the development of the proletariat, we traced
the more or less veiled civil war, raging
within existing society, up to the point where



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 31

that war breaks ou.t into open revolution,
and where the violent overthrow of the bour-
geoisie, lays the foundation for the sway of
the proletariat.

Hitherto, every form of society has been
based, as we have already seen, on the an-
tagonism of oppressing and oppressed classes.
But in order to oppress a class, certain con-
ditions must be assured to it under which it
can, at least, continue its slavish existence.
The serf, in the period of serfdom, raised
himself to membership in the commune, just
as the petty bourgeois, under the yoke of
feudal absolutism, managed to develop into
a bourgeois. The modern labourer, on the
contrary, instead of rising with the progress
of industry, sinks deeper and deeper below .
the conditions of existence of his own class.v
He becomes a pauper, and pauperism devel-
ops more rapidly than population and
wealth. And here it becomes evident, that
the bourgeoisie is unfit any longer to be the
ruling class in society, and to impose its
conditions of existence upon society as an
over-riding law. It is unfit to rule, because
it is incompetent to assure an existence to
its slave within his slavery, because it can-
not help letting him sink into such a state,
that it has to feed him, insead of being fed
by him. Society can no longer live under
this bourgeoisie, in other words, its exist-
ence is no longer compatible with society.

The essential condition for the existence,
and for the sway of the bourgeois class, is



32 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

the formation and augmentation of capital;
the condition for capital is wage-labour.
Wage-labour rests exclusively on competi-
tion between the labourers. The advance of
industry, whose involuntary promoter is the
bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the la-
bourers, due to competition, by their invol-
untary combination, due to association. The
development of Modern Industry, therefore,
cuts from under its feet the very foundation
on which the bourgeoisie produces and ap-
propriates products. What the bourgeoisie
therefore produces, above all, are its own
grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of
the proletariat are equally inevitable.

II.
PBOLETABIANS AND COMMUNISTS.

In what relation do the Communists stand
to the proletarians as a whole P

The Communists do not form a separate
party opposed to other working-class par-
ties.

They have no interests separate and apart
from those of the proletariat as a whole.

They do not set up any sectarian principles
of their own, by which to shape and mould
the proletarian movement.

The Communists are distinguished from
the other working class parties by this only:
1/ In the national struggles of the proleta-
rians of the different countries, they point
out and bring to the front the common inter-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 33

ests of the entire proletariat, independently
of all nationality. 2. In the various stages
of development wmcn tne struggle of the
working class against the bourgeoisie has to
pass through, they always and everywhere
represent the interests of the movement as a
whole.

The Communists, therefore, are on the one
hand, practically, the most advanced and
resolute section of the working class par-
ties of every country, that section which
pushes forward all others; on the other hand,
theoretically, they have over the great mass
of the proletariat the advantage of clearly
understanding the line of march, the condi-
tions, and the ultimate general results of the
proletarian movement.

The immediate aim of the Communists is
the same as that of all the other proletarian
parties: formation of the proletariat into a
class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy,
conquest of political power by the proletariat.

The theoretical conclusions of the Commun-
ists are in no way based on ideas or prin-
ciples that have been invented, or discov-
ered, by this or that would-be universal re-
former.

They merely express, in general terms, ac-
tual relations springing from an existing
class struggle, from a historical movement
going on under our very eyes. The abolition
of existing property-relations is not at all a
distinctive feature of Communism.

All property relations in the past have con-



34 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

tinually been subject to historical change
consequent upon the change in historical
conditions.

The French Bevolution, for example, abol-
ished feudal property in favour of bour-
geois property.

The distinguishing feature of Communism
is not the abolition of property generally,
but the abolition of bourgeois property. But
modern bourgeois private property is the
final and most complete expression of the
system of producing and appropriating pro-
ducts, that is based on class antagonism, on
the exploitation of the many by the few.

In this sense, the theory of the Commun-
ists may be summed up in the single sen-
tence: Abolition of private property.

We Communists have been reproached with
the desire of abolishing the right of person-
ally acquiring property as the fruit of a
man's own labour, which property is alleged
to be the ground work of all personal free-
dom, activity and independence.

Hard-won, self -acquired, self -earned prop-
erty! Do you mean the property of the petty
artizan and of the small peasant, a form of
property that preceded the bourgeois form?
There is no need to abolish that; the develop-
ment of industry has to a great extent al-
ready destroyed it, and is still destroying it
daily.

Or do you mean modern bourgeois private
property?

But does wage-labour create any property



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 35

for the labourer? Not a bit. It creates cap-
ital, i. e., that kind of property which ex-
ploits wage-labour, and which cannot in-
crease except upon condition of getting a
new supply of wage-labour for fresh exploit-
ation. Property, in its present form, is
based on the antagonism of capital and
wage-labour. Let us examine both sides of
this antagonism.

To be a capitalist, is to have not only a
purely personal, but a social status in pro-
duction. Capital is a collective product, and
only by the united action of many members,
nay, in the last resort, only by the united
action of all members of society, can it be
set in motion.

Capital is therefore not a personal, it is a
social power.

When, therefore, capital is converted into
common property, into the property of all
members of society, personal property is not
thereby transformed into social property. It
is only the social character of the prop-
erty that is changed. It loses its class-char-
acter.

Let us now take wage-labour.

The average price of wage-labour is the
minimum wage, i. e., that quantum of the
means of subsistence, which is absolutely re-
quisite to keep the labourer in bare existence
as a labourer. What, therefore, the wage-
labourer appropriates by means of his la-
bour, merely suffices to prolong and repro-
duce a bare existence. We by no means in-



36 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

tend to abolish this personal appropriation
of the products of labour, an appropriation
that is made for the maintenance and repro-
duction of human life, and that leaves no
surplus wherewith to command the labour of
others. All that we want to do away with is
the miserable character of this appropria-
tion, under which the labourer lives merely
to increase capital, and is allowed to live
only in so far as the interest of the ruling
class requires it.

In bourgeois society, living labour is but
a means to increase accumulated labour. In
Communist society, accumulated labour is
but a means to widen, to enrich, to promote
the existence of the labourer.

In bourgeois society, therefore, the past
dominates the present; in communist society,
the present dominates the past. In bour-
geois society capital is independent and has
individuality, while the living person is de-
pendent and has no individuality.

And the abolition of this state of things
is called by the bourgeois, abolition of indi-
viduality and freedom! And rightly so. The
abolition of bourgeois, individuality, bour-
geois independence, and bourgeois freedom is
undoubtedly aimed at.

By freedom is meant, under the present
bourgeois conditions of production, free
trade, free selling and buying.

But if selling and buying disappears, free
selling and buying disappears also. This
talk about free selling and buying, and all



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 37

the other "brave words" of our bourgeoisie
about freedom in general, have a meaning,
if any, only in contrast with restricted sell-
ing and buying, with the fettered traders of
the Middle Ages, but have no meaning when
opposed to the Communistic abolition of buy-
ing and selling, of the bourgeois conditions
of production, and of the bourgeoisie itself.

You are horrified at our intending to do
away with private property. But in your ex-
isting society, private property is already
done away with for nine-tenths of the popu-
lation; its existence for the few is solely due
to its non-existence in the hands of those
nine-tenths. You reproach us, therefore, with
intending to do away with a form of prop-
erty, the necessary condition for whose ex-
istence is, the non-existence of any property
for the immense majority of society.

In one word, you reproach us with intend-
ing to do away with your property. Pre-
cisely so: that is just what we intend.

From the moment when labour can no
longer be converted into capital, money, or
rent, into a social power capable of being
monopolised, i. e., from the moment when
individual property can no longer be trans-
formed into bourgeois property, into capi-
tal, from that moment, you say, individual-
ity vanishes.

You must, therefore, confess that by "in-
dividual" you mean no other person than the
bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of



38 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

property. This person must, indeed, be
swept out of the way, and made impossible.

Communism deprives no man of the power
to appropriate the products of society: all
that it does is to deprive him of the power
to subjugate the labour of others by means
of such appropriation.

It has been objected, that upon the aboli-
tion of private property all work will cease,
and universal laziness will overtake us.

According; to this, bourgeois society ought
long ago to have gone to the dogs through
sheer idleness; for those of its members who
work, acquire nothing, and those who ac-
quire anything, do not work. The whole of
this objection is but another expression of
the tautology: that there can no longer be
any wage-labour when there is no longer any
capital.

All objections urged against the Commun-
istic mode of producing and appropriating
material products, have, in the same way,
been urged against the Communistic modes
of producing and appropriating intellectual
products. Just as, to the bourgeois, the dis-
appearance of class property is the disap-
pearance of production itself, so the disap-
pearance of class culture is to him identical
with the disappearance of all culture.

That culture, the loss of which he laments,
is, for the enormous majority, a mere train-
ing to act as a machine.

But don't wrangle with us so long as you
a PPly> to our intended abolition of bourgeois



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 39

property, the standard of your bourgeois no-
tions of freedom, culture, law, etc. Your
very ideas are but the outgrowth of the con-
ditions of your bourgeois production and
bourgeois property, just as your jurispru-
dence is but the will of your class made into
a law for all, a will, whose essential charac-
ter and direction are determined by the eco-
nomical conditions of existence of your class.

The selfish misconception that induces you
to transform into eternal laws of nature and
of reason, the social forms springing from
your present mode of production and form
of property— historical relations that rise and
disappear in the progress of production— this
misconception you share with every ruling
class that has preceded you. What you see
clearly in the case of ancient property, what
you admit in the case of feudal property, you
are of course forbidden to admit in the case
of your own bourgeois form of property.

Abolition of the family! Even the most
radical flare up at this infamous proposal
of the . Communists.

On what foundation is the present family,
the bourgeois family, based? On capital, on
private gain. In its completely developed
form this family exists only, among the bour-
geoisie. But this state of things finds its
complement in the practical absence of the
family among the proletarians, and in pub-
lic prostitution.

The bourgeois family will vanish as a v mat-
ter of course when its complement vanishes,



40 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

and both will vanish with the vanishing of
capital.

Bo you charge us with wanting to stop
the exploitation of children by their parents?
To this crime we plead guilty.

But, you will say, we destroy the most hal-
lowed of relations, when we replace home
education by social.

And your education! Is not that also so-
cial, and determined by the social conditions
under which you educate, by the interven-
tion, direct or indirect, of society by means
of schools, &c.P The Communists have not
invented the intervention of society in edu-
cation; they do but seek to alter the char-
acter of that intervention, and to rescue edu-
cation from the influence of the ruling class.

The bourgeois clap-trap about the family
and education, about the hallowed co-rela-
tion of parent and child, become all the more
disgusting, the more, by the action of Modern
Industry, all family ties among the proleta-
rians are torn asunder, and their children
transformed into simple articles of com-
merce and instruments of labour.

But you Communists would introduce com-
munity of women, screams the whole bour-
geoisie in chorus*

The bourgeoisies in his wife a mere in-
strument of production. He hears that the
instruments of production are to be exploited
in common, and, naturally, can come to no
other conclusion, than that the lot of being



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 41

common to all will likewise fall to the
women.

He has not even a suspicion that the real
point aimed at is to do away with the status
of women as mere instruments of production.

For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous
than the virtuous indignation of our bour-
geois at the community of women which,
they pretend, is to be openly and officially
established by the Communists. The Com-
munists have no need to introduce commun-
ity of women; it has existed almost from time
immemorial.

Our bourgeois, not content with having
the wives and daughters of their proleta-
rians at their disposal, not to speak of com-
mon prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in
seducing each others' wives.

Bourgeois marriage is in reality a system
of wives in common and thus, at the most,
what the Communists might possibly be re-
proached with, is that they desire to intro-
duce, in substitution for a hypocritically con-
cealed, an openly legalised community of
women. For the rest, it is self-evident, that
the abolition of the present system of pro-
duction must bring with it the obolition of
the community of women springing from
that system, i. e., of prostitution both public
and private.

The Communists are further reproached
with desiring to abolish countries and na-
tionalities.

The working men have no country. We



42 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

cannot take from them what they have not
got. Since the proletariat must first of all
acquire political supremacy, must rise to be
the leading class of the nation, must con-
stitute itself the nation, it is, so far, itself
national, though not in the bourgeois sense
of the word.

National differences, and antagonisms be-
tween peoples, are daily more and more van-
ishing, owing to the development of the
bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the •
world-market, to uniformity in the mode of
production and in the conditions of life cor-
responding thereto.

The supremacy of the proletariat will cause
them to vanish still faster. United action,
of the leading civilised countries at least, is
one of the first conditions for the emancipa-
tion of the proletariat.

In proportion as the exploitation of one in-
dividual by another is put an end to, the
exploitation of one nation by another will
also be put an end to. In proportion as the
antagonism between classes within the na-
tion vanishes, the hostility of one nation to
another will come to an end.

The charges against Communism made
from a religious, a philosophical, and gen-
erally, from an ideological standpoint, are
not deserving of serious examination.

Does it require deep intuition to compre-
hend that man's ideas, views, and concep-
tions, in one word, man's consciousness,
changes with every change in the conditions



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 43

of his material existence, in his social rela-
tions and in his social life?

What else does the history of ideas prove,
than that intellectual production changes in
character in proportion as material produc-
tion is changed? The ruling ideas of each
age have ever been the ideas of its ruling
class.

When people speak of ideas that revolu-
tionize society, they do but express the fact,
that within the old society, the elements of a
new one have been created, and that the dis-
solution of the old ideas keeps even pace
with the dissolution of the old conditions of
existence.

When the ancient world was in its last
throes, the ancient religions were overcome
by Christianity. When Christian ideas suc-
cumbed in the 18th century to rationalist
ideas; feudal society fought its death-battle
with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The
ideas of religious liberty and freedom of
conscience, merely gave expression to the
sway of free competition within the domain
of knowledge.

"Undoubtedly," it will be said, "religious,
moral, philosophical and juridical ideas have
been modified in the course of historical de-
velopment. But religion, morality, philoso-
phy, political science, and law, constantly
survived this change."

"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as
Freedom, Justice, etc., that are common to all
states of society. But Communism abolishes



44 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

eternal truth*, it abolishes all religion, and
all morality, instead of constituting them
on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradic-
tion to all past historical experience."

What does this accusation reduce itself to?
The history of all past society has consisted
in the development of class antagonisms,
antagonisms that assumed different forms at
different epochs.

But whatever form they may have taken,
one fact is common to all past ages, viz., the
exploitation of one part of society by the
other. No wonder, then, that the social con-
sciousness of past ages, despite all the mul-
tiplicity and variety it displays, moves with-
in certain common forms, or general ideas,
which cannot completely vanish except with
the total disappearance of class antagonisms.

The Communist revolution is the most rad-
ical rupture with traditional property-rela-
tions; no wonder that its development in-
volves the most radical rupture with tradi-
tional ideas.

But let us have done with the bourgeois
objections to Communism.

We have seen above, that the first step in
the revolution by the working class, is to
raise the proletariat to the position of rul-
ing class, to win the battle of democracy.

The proletariat will use its political su-
premacy, to wrest, by degrees, all capital
from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instru-
ments of production in the hands of the
State, i. e., of the proletariat organised as



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 45

the ruling class; and to increase the total of
productive forces as rapidly as possible.

Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be
effected except by means of despotic inroads
on the rights of property, and on the condi-
tions of bourgeois production; by means of
measures, therefore, which appear econom-
ically insufficient and untenable, but which,
in the course of the movement, outstrip
themselves, necessitate further inroads upon
the old social order, and are unavoidable as
a means of entirely revolutionising the mode
of production.

These measures will of course be different
in different countries.

Nevertheless in the most advanced coun-
tries the following will be pretty generally
applicable:

1. Abolition of property in land and ap-
plication of all rents of land to public pur-
poses.

2. A heavy progressive or graduated in-
come tax.

3. Abolition of all right of inheritance.

4. Confiscation of the property of all emi-
grants and rebels.

5. Centralisation of credit in the hands of
the State, by means of a national bank with
State capital and an exclusive monopoly.

6. Centralisation of the means of communi-
cation and transport in the hands of the
State.

7. Extension of factories and instruments
of production owned by the State; the bring-



46 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

ing into cultivation of waste lands, and the
improvement of the soil generally in accord-
ance win a common plan.

8. Equal liability of all to labour. Es-
tablishment of industrial armies, especially
for agriculture.

9. Combination of agriculture with manu-
facturing industries; gradual abolition of the
distinction between town and country, by a./
more equable distribution of the population
over the country.

10. Free education for all children in pub-
lic schools. Abolition of children's factory
labour in its present form. Combination of
education with industrial production, etc.,
etc.

When, in the course of development, class
distinctions have disappeared, and all pro-
duction has been concentrated in the hands
of a vast association of the whole nation,
the public power will lose its political char-
acter. Political power, properly so called, is
merely the organised power of one class for
oppressing another. If the proletariat dur-
ing its contest with the bourgeoisie is com-
pelled, by the force of circumstances, to or-
ganise itself as a class, if, by means of a
revolution, it makes itself the ruling class,
and, as such, sweeps away by force the old
conditions of production, then it will, along
with these conditions, have swept away the
conditions for the existence of class antag-
onisms, and of classes generally, and will



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 47

thereby have abolished its own supremacy
as a class.

In place of the old bourgeois society, with
its classes and class antagonisms, we shall
have an association, in which the free de-
velopment of each is the condition for the
free development of all.



III.

SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERA-
TURE.

1. Reactionary Socialism*

a. Feudal Socialism.

Owing to their historical position, it be-
came the vocation of the aristocracies of
France and England to write pamphlets
against modern bourgeois society. In the
French revolution of July, 1830, and in the
English reform agitation, these aristocracies
again succumbed to the hateful upstart.
Thenceforth, a serious political contest was
altogether out of the question. A literary
battle alone remained possible. But even in
the domain of literature the old cries of the
restoration period * had become impossible.

In order to arouse sympathy, the aristoc-
racy were obliged to lose sight, apparently,
of their own interests, and to formulate their
indictment against the bourgeoisie in the in-
terest of the exploited working class alone.
Thus the aristocracy took their revenge by

♦Not the English Restoration 1660 to 1689, but the
French Restoration 1814 to 1830.



48 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

singing lampoons on their new master, and
whispering in his ears sinister prophecies of
coming catastrophe.

In this way arose feudal socialism: half
lamentation, half lampoon; half echo of the
past, half menace of the future; at times,
by its bitter, witty and incisive criticism,
striking the bourgeoisie to the very hearts 9
core, but always ludicrous in its effect,
through total incapacity to comprehend the
march of modern history.

The aristocracy, in order to rally the people
to them, waved the proletarian alms-bag in
front for a banner. But the people, so often
as it joined them, saw on their hindquarters
the old feudal coats of arms, and deserted
with loud and irreverent laughter.

One section of the French Legitimists, and
"Young England," exhibited this spectacle.

In pointing out that their mode of * ex-
ploitation was different to that of the bour-
geoisie, the feudalists forget that they ex-
ploited under circumstances and conditions
that were quite different, and that are now
antiquated. In showing that, under their
rule, the modern proletariat never existed,
they forget that the modern bourgeoisie is
the necessary offspring of their own form of
society.

For the rest, so little do they conceal the
reactionary character of their criticism, that
their chief accusation against the bourgeoisie
amounts to this, that under the bourgeois
regime a class is being developed, which is



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 49

destined to cut up root and branch the old
order of society.

What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with
is not so much that it creates a proletariat,
as that it creates a revolutionary proletariat.

In political practice, therefore, they join in
all coercive measures against the working-
class; and in ordinary life, despite their
high f alutin phrases, they stoop to pick up
the golden apples dropped from the tree of
industry, and to barter truth, love, and hon-
our for traffic in wool, beetroot-sugar, and
potato spirit. *

As the parson has ever gone hand in hand
with the landlord, so has Clerical Socialism
with Feudal Socialism.

Nothing is easier than to give Christian
asceticism a Socialist tinge. Has not Chris-
tianity declaimed against private property,
against marriage, against the State? Has it
not preached in the place of these, charity
and poverty, celibacy and mortification of the
flesh, monastic life and Mother Church?
Christian Socialism is but the Holy Water
with which the priest consecrates the heart-
burnings of the aristocrat.

♦This applies chiefly to Germany where the
landed aristocracy and squirearchy have large
portions of their estates cultivated for their own
account by stewards, and arc, moreover, extensive
beetroot-sugar manufacturers and distillers of po-
tato spirits. The wealthier British aristocracy
are, as yet, rather above that; but they, too,
know how to make up for declining rents by
lending their names to floaters of more or less
shady joint-stock companies.



50 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

b. Petty Bourgeois Socialism.

The feudal aristocracy was not the only
class that was ruined by the bourgeoisie, not
the only class whose conditions of existence
pined and perished in the atmosphere of mod-
ern bourgeois society. The medieval bur-
gesses and the small peasant bourgeoisie,
were the precursors of the modern bour-
geoisie. In those countries which are but
little developed, industrially and commer-
cially, these two classes still vegetate side
by side with the rising bourgeoisie.

In countries where modern civilisation has
become fully developed, a new class of petty
bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating be-
tween proletariat and bourgeoisie, and ever
renewing itself as a supplementary part of
bourgeois society. The individual members
of this class, however, are being constantly
hurled down into the proletariat by the ac-
tion of competition, and, as modern industry
develops, they even see the moment ap-
proaching when they will completely disap-
pear as an independent section of modern so-
ciety, to be replaced, in manufactures, agri-
culture and commerce, by overlookers, bail-
iffs and shopmen.

In countries, like France, where the peas-
ants constitute far more than half of the
population, it was natural that writers who
sided with the proletariat against the bour-
geoisie, should use, in their criticism of the
bourgeois regime, the standard of the peasant
and petty bourgeois, and from the stand-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 51

point of these intermediate classes should
take up the cudgels for the working-class.
Thus arose petty bourgeois Socialism. Sis-
mondi was the head of this school, not only
in France, but also in England.

This school of Socialism dissected with
great acuteness the contradictions in the con-
ditions of modern production. It laid bare
the hypocritical apologies of economists. It
proved, incontrovertibly, the disastrous ef-
fects of machinery and division of labour;
the concentration of capital and land in a
few hands; overproduction and crises; it
pointed out the inevitable ruin of the petty
bourgeois and peasant, the misery of the
proletariat, the anarchy in production, the
crying inequalities in the distribution of
wealth, the industrial war of extermination
between nations, the dissolution of old moral
bonds, of the old family relations, of the old
nationalities.

In its positive aims, however, this form of
Socialism aspires either to restoring the old
means of production and of exchange, and
with them the old property relations, and the
old society, or to cramping the modern means
of production and of exchange, within the
frame work of the old property relations that
have been, and were bound to be, exploded
by those means. In either case, it is both
reactionary and Utopian.

Its last words are: corporate guilds for
manufacture; patriarchal relations in agri-
culture.



52 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts
had dispersed all intoxicating effects of self-
deception, this form of Socialism ended in a
miserable fit of the blues.

German or "True" Socialism.

The Socialist and Communist literature of
Trance, a literature that originated under
the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power, and
that was the expression of the struggle
against this power, was introduced into Ger-
many at a time when the bourgeoisie, in
that country, had just begun its contest with
feudal absolutism.

German philosophers, would-be philosoph-
ers, and beaux esprits, eagerly seized on this
literature, only forgetting, that when these
writings immigrated from France into Ger-
many, French social conditions had not im-
migrated along with them. In contact with
German social conditions, this French litera-
ture lost all its immediate practical signifi-
cance, and assumed a purely literary aspect.
Thus, to the German philosophers of the
Eighteenth Century, the demands of the first
French Revolution were nothing more than
the demands of "Practical Reason" in gen-
eral, and the utterance of the will of the
revolutionary French bourgeoisie signified in
their eyes the laws of pure Will, of Will as it
was bound to be, of true human Will gen-
erally.

The work of the German literati consisted
solely in bringing the new French ideas into



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 53

harmony with their ancient philosophical
conscience, or rather, in annexing the French
ideas without deserting their own philo-
sophic point of view.

This annexation took place in the same
way in which a foreign language is appro-
priated, namely by translation.

It is well known how the monks wrote silly
lives of Catholic Saints over the manuscripts
on which the classical works of ancient
heathendom had been written. The German
literati reversed this process with the pro-
fane French literature. They wrote their
philosophical nonsense beneath the French
original. For instance, beneath the French
criticism of the economic functions of money,
they wrote "Alienation of Humanity," and
beneath the French criticism of the bour-
geois State they wrote, "Dethronement of the
Category of the General," and so forth.

The introduction of these philosophical
phrases at the back of the French historical
criticisms they dubbed "Philosophy of Ac-
tion," "True Socialism," "German Science of
Socialism," "Philosophical Foundation of So-
cialism," and so on.

The French Socialist and Communist litera-
ture was thus completely emasculated. And,
since it ceased in the hands of the German
to express the struggle of one class with the
other, he felt conscious of having overcome
"French one-sidedness" and of representing,
not true requirements, but the requirements
of Truth, not the interests of the proletariat,



54 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

but the interests of Human Nature, of Man
in general, who belongs to no class, has no
reality, who exists only in the misty realm
of philosophical phantasy.

This German Socialism, which took its
school-boy task so seriously and solemnly,
and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such
mountebank fashion, meanwhile gradually
lost its pedantic innocence.

The nght of the German, and, especially, of
the Prussian bourgeoisie, against feudal aris-
tocracy and absolute monarchy, in other
words, the liberal movement, became more
earnest.

By this, the long-wished-for opportunity
was offered to "True Socialism" of confront-
ing the political movement with the socialist
demands, of hurling the traditional anathe-
mas against liberalism, against representa-
tive government, against bourgeois competi-
tion, bourgeois freedom of the press, bour-
geois legislation, bourgeois liberty and
equality, and of preaching'to the masses that
they had nothing to gain, and everything to
lose, by this bourgeois movement. German
Socialism forgot, in the nick of time, that
the French criticism, whose silly echo it was,
presupposed the existence of modern bour-
geois society, with its corresponding eco-
nomic conditions of existence, and the po-
litical constitution adapted thereto, the very
things whose attainment was the object of
the pending struggle in Germany.

To the absolute governments, with their



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 55

following of parsons, professors, country
squires and officials, it served as a welcome
scarecrow against the threatening bour-
geoisie.

It was a sweet finish after the bitter pills
of floggings and bullets, with which these
same governments, just at that time, dosed
the German working-class risings.

While this "True" Socialism thus served
the governments as a weapon for fighting
the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time,
directly represented a reactionary interest,
the interest of the German Philistines. In
Germany the petty bourgeois class, a re-
lique of the 16th century, and since then
constantly cropping up again under various
forms, is the real social basis of the exist-
ing state of things.

To preserve this class, is to preserve the ex-
isting state of things in Germany. The in-
dustrial and political supremacy of the bour-
geoisie threatens it with certain destruc-
tion; on the one hand, from the concentra-
tion of capital; on the other, from the rise
of a revolutionary proletariat. "True" So-
cialism appeared to kill these two birds with
one stone. It spread like an epidemic.

The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroid-
ered with flowers of rhetoric, steeped in the
dew of sickly sentiment, this transcendental
robe in which the German Socialists wrapped
their sorry "eternal truths" all skin and
bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale
of their goods amongst such a public.



56 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

And on its part, German Socialism recog-
nised, more and more, its own calling as the
bombastic representative of the petty bour-
geois Philistine.

It proclaimed the German nation to be the
model nation, and the German petty Philis-
tine to be the typical man. To every vil-
lainous meanness of this model man it gave
a hidden, higher, socialistic interpretation,
the exact contrary of its true character. It
went to the extreme length of directly oppos-
ing the "brutally destructive" tendency of
Communism, and of proclaiming its supreme
and impartial contempt of all class strug-
gles. With very few exceptions, all the so-
called Socialist and Communist publications
that now (1847) circulate in Germany be-
long to the domain of this foul and enervat-
ing literature.



2. Conservative or Bourgeois Socialism.

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of re-
dressing social grievances, in order to secure
the continued existence of bourgeois society.

To this section belong economists, philan-
thropists, humanitarians, improvers of the
condition of the working class, organisers of
charity, members of societies for the preven-
tion of cruelty to animals, temperance fa-
natics, hole and corner reformers of every
imaginable kind. This form of Socialism
has, moreover, been worked out into com-
plete systems.



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 57

We may cite Proudhon's "Philosophic de
la Misere" as an example of this form.

The socialistic bourgeois want all the ad-
vantages of modern social conditions with-
out the struggles and dangers necessarily re-
sulting therefrom. They desire the existing
state of society minus its revolutionary and
disintegrating elements. They wish for a
bourgeoisie without a proletariat. The bour-
geoisie naturally conceives the world in
which it is supreme to be the best; and bour-
geois socialism develops this comfortable
conception into various more or less com-
plete systems. In requiring the proletariat
to carry out such a system, and thereby to
march straightway into the social New Jeru-
salem, it but requires in reality, that the
proletariat should remain within the bounds
of existing society, but should cast away all
its hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie.

A second and more practical, but iess sys-
tematic form of this socialism sought to de-
preciate every revolutionary movement in
the eyes of the working class, by showing
that no mere political reform, but only a
change in the material conditions of exist-
ence, in economical relations, could be of any
advantage to them. By changes in the ma-
terial conditions of existence, this form of
Socialism, however, by no means understands
abolition of the bourgeois relations of pro-
duction, an abolition that can be effected
only by a revolution, but administrative
reforms, based on the continued existence of



58 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

these relations; reforms, therefore, that in no
respect affect the relations between capital
and labour, but, at the best, lessen the cost,
and simplify the administrative work, of
bourgeois government.

Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate ex-
pression, when, and only when, it becomes a
mere figure of speech.

Free trade: for the benefit of the working
class. Protective duties: for the benefit of
the working class. Prison Beform: for the
benefit of the working class. This is the last
word and the only seriously meant word of
bourgeois Socialism.

It is summed up in the phrase: the bour-
geois is a bourgeois— for the benefit of the
working class.

3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Commun-
ism.

We do not here refer to that literature
which, in every great modern revolution,
has always given voice to the demands of
the proletariat: such as the writings of Ba-
beauf and others.

The first direct attempts of the proletariat
to attain its own ends, made in times of
universal excitement, when feudal society
was being overthrown, these attempts neces-
sarily failed, owing to the then undevel-
oped state of the proletariat, as well as to
the absence of the economic conditions for
its emancipation, conditions that had yet to
be produced, and could be produced by the



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 59

impending bourgeois epoch alone. The revo-
lutionary literature that accompanied these
first movements of the proletariat had nec-
essarily a reactionary character. It incul-
cated universal asceticism and social level-
ing in its crudest form.

The Socialist and Communist systems
properly so called, those of St. Simon, Four-
ier, Owen and others, spring into existence
in the early undeveloped period, described
above, of the struggle between proletariat
and bourgeoisie, (see section I. Bourgeoisie
and Proletariat).

The founders of these systems see, indeed,
the class antagonisms, as well as the action
of the decomposing elements in the prevail-
ing form of society. But the proletariat, as
yet in its infancy, offers to them the spec-
tacle of a class without any historical initia-
tive or any independent political movement.

Since the development of class antagonism
keeps even pace with the development of in-
dustry, the economic situation, as they find
it, does not as yet offer to them the material
conditions for the emancipation of the prole-
tariat. They therefore search after a new
social science, after new social laws, that are
to create these conditions.

Historical action is to yield to their per-
sonal inventive action, historically created
conditions of emancipation to phantastic
ones, and the gradual, spontaneous class-or-
ganisation of the proletariat to an organisa-
tion of society specially contrived by these



60 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

inventors. Future history resolves itself, in
their eyes, into the propaganda and the prac-
tical carrying out of their social plans.

In the formation of their plans they are
conscious of caring chiefly for the interests
of the working-class, as being the most suf-
fering class. Only from the point of view
of being the most suffering class does the
proletariat exist for them.

The undeveloped state of the class strug-
gle, as well as their own surroundings, cause
Socialists of this kind to consider themselves
far superior to all class antagonisms. They
want to improve the condition of every mem-
ber of society, even that of the most fa-
voured. Hence, they habitually appeal to
society at large, without distincton of class;
nay, by preference, to the ruling class. For
how can people, when once they understand
their system, fail to see in it the best pos-
sible plan of the best possible state of so-
cietyP

Hence, they reject all political, and espe-
cially all revolutionary action; they wish to
attain their ends by peaceful means, and
endeavour, by small experiments, necessa-
rily doomed to failure, and by the force of
example, to pave the way for the new social
Gospel.

Such phantastic pictures of future society,
painted at a time when the proletariat is still
in a very undeveloped state, and has but a
phantastic conception of its own position,
correspond with the first instinctive yearn-



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 61

Ings of that class for a general reconstruc-
tion of society.

But these Socialist and Communist publi-
cations contain also a critical element. They
attack every principle of existing society.
Hence they are full of the most valuable ma-
terials for the enlightenment of the working
class. The practical measures proposed in
them, such as the abolition of the distinc-
tion between town and country, of the fam-
ily, of the carrying on of industries for the
account of private individuals, and of the
wage system, the proclamation of social har-
mony, the conversion of the functions of the
State into a mere superintendence of produc-
tion, all these proposals point solely to the
disappearance of class-antagonisms which
were, at that time, only just cropping up,
and which, in these publications, are recog-
nised under their earliest, indistinct and un-
defined forms only. These proposals, there-
fore, are of a purely Utopian character.

The significance of Critical-Utopian So-
cialism and Communism bears an inverse re-
lation to historical development. In propor-
tion as the modern class struggle develops
and takes definite shape, this phantastic
standing apart from the contest, these phan-
tastic attacks on it lose all practical value
and all theoretical justification. Therefore,
although the originators of these systems
were, in many respects, revolutionary, their
disciples have, in every case, formed mere
reactionary sects. They hold fast by the orig-



62 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

inal views of their masters, in opposition to
the progressive historical development of the
proletariat. They, therefore, endeavour, and
that consistently, to deaden the class strug-
gle and to reconcile the class antagonisms.
They still dream of experimental realisation
of their social Utopias, of founding isolated
"phalansteres," of establishing "Home Colo-
nies," of setting up a "Little Icaria"*— duo-
decimo editions of the New Jerusalem, and
to realise all these castles in the air, they
are compelled to appeal to the feelings and
purses of. the bourgeois. By degrees they
sink into the category of the reactionary
conservative Socialists depicted above, dif-
fering from these only by more systematic
pedantry, and by their fanatical and super-
stitious belief in the miraculous effects of
their social science.

They, therefore, violently oppose all po-
litical action on the part of the working
class; such action, according to them, can
only result from blind unbelief in the new
Gospel.

The Owenites in England, and the Four-
ierists in France, respectively oppose the
Chartists and the "Beformistes."



IV.



POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS IN RE-
LATION TO THE VARIOUS EXIST-
ING OPPOSITION PARTIES.

Section II. has made clear the relations of
the Communists to the existing working
class parties, such as the Chartists in Eng-
land and the Agrarian Reformers in Amer-
ica.

*Phalansteres were socialist colonies on the plan
of Charles Fourier. Icaria was the name given
by Cabot to his Utopia and, later on, to his Ameri-
can Communist colony.



COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 63

The Communists light for the attainment
of the immediate aims, for the enforcement
of the momentary interests of the working
class; but in the movement of the present,
they also represent and take care of the future
of that movement. In France the Commun-
ists ally themselves with the Social-Demo-
crats,* against the conservative and radical
bourgeoisie, reserving, however, the right to
take up a critical position in regard to
phrases and illusions traditionally handed
down from the great Bevolution.

In Switzerland they support the Radicals,
without losing sight of the fact that this
party consists of antagonistic elements, part-
ly of Democratic Socialists, in the French
sense, partly of radical bourgeois.

In Poland they support the party that in-
sists on an agrarian revolution, as the prime
condition for national emancipation, that
party which fomented the insurrection of
Cracow in 1846.

In Germany they fight with the bourgeoisie
whenever it acts in a revolutionary way,
against the absolute monarchy, the feudal
squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.

But they never cease, for a single instant,
to instill into the working class the clearest
possible recognition of the hostile antago-
nism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in
order that the German workers may straight-
way use, as so many weapons against the
bourgeoisie, the social and political condi-
tions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily
introduce along with its supremacy, and in
order that, after the fall of the reactionary

♦The party then represented in parliament by
Ledru-Rollln. in literature by Louis Blatic, in the
daily press by the R6forme. The nw.e of Social
Democracy signified, with these its Inventors, a
section of the Democratic or Repuf|!aan party
more or less tinged with Socialism.



€4 COMMUNIST MANIFESTO

classes in Germany, the fight against the
bourgeoisie itself may immediately begin.

The Communists turn their attention chief-
ly to Germany, because that country is on
the eve of a bourgeois revolution, that is
bound to be carried out under more advanced
conditions of European civilisation, and
with a more developed proletariat, than that
of England was in the seventeenth, and of
France in the eighteenth century, and be-
cause the bourgeois revolution in Germany
will be but the prelude to an immediately
following proletarian revolution.

In short, the Communists everywhere sup-
port every revolutionary movement against
the existing social and political order of
things.

In all these movements they bring to the
front, as the leading question in each, the
property question, no matter what its de-
gree of development at the time.

Finally, they labour everywhere for the
union and agreement of the democratic par-
ties of all countries.

The Communists disdain to conceal their
views and aims. They openly declare that
their ends can be attained only by the forci-
ble overthrow of all existing social condi-
tions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a
Communistic revolution. The proletarians
have nothing to lose but their chains. They
have a world to win.

Working men of all countries unite!



No Compromise

No Political Trading



BY

WILHELM LIEBKNECHT



THAN SLAT ID BY

A. M. SIMONS and MARCUS HITCH



REVISED EDITION



80



CHICAGO:

CHARLES H. KERR & COMPANY (Co-Operative)

1907



PEEFACE.



The following pamphlet is not an address, as
was my first one on Tactics;* but it is occasioned
by an address which I delivered this summer, at
the request of my Berlin constituents, on the last
Bavarian legislative elections in particular and
on compromises in general. For some time past
and from different directions persistent efforts
have been made to bring our party nearer to the
other political parties; this, together with the
incessant demand for taking part in the Prussian
legislative elections, has aroused in a part of the
Berlin voters, as well as among the comrades all
over Germany, an apprehension that there may
exist in the party certain tendencies which, though
not having that aim, nevertheless must have the
result, of leading the Social Democratic party
over into the field of spoils politics, pure and sim-
ple. This apprehension was nourished by Bern-
stein's book of repentance, a solemn renunciation
of social democratic principles by a comrade who
up to that time had been considered a guardian
of our principles, and by his recantation of the
social democratic heresy and his reconfession
of faith in the bourgeois philosophy as the only
means of salvation. Bernstein's pamphlet in it-
self is insignificant and contains not a single
new, original idea, but merely acknowledges as
correct what the enemies of the Social Democ-
racy for decades past have said against it a hun-
dred times; yet, taken in connection with the
confusing agitation for taking part in the Prus-
sian legislative elections and with the unfortunate
Isegrim articles against the militia system and

♦On the Political Stand of the Social Democracy,
especially with Reference to the Reichstag. Berlin,
1893. Vorwaerts Publishing House.



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 3

in favor of militarism, the pamphlet, considered
as a symptom, acquired an importance which
could not be ignored.

The party was engaged in a fight against the
penitentiary bill, and other attempts at coercion
on the part of the dominant reactionists, and
was just beginning to forget Schippelism and
Bernsteinism, expecting from the next party con-
vention a thorough shaking up and cleaning out,
when suddenly the report came of the political
" cow-trade' ' or log-rolling in Bavaria. We
have been accustomed to Bavarian peculiarities
for years; we know that Bavarian affairs, and in
general South Qerman affairs, are not to be
measured according to the North Qerman stand-
ard; and no one can be more tolerant than the
Berlin comrades who, in front of the gates of
the Imperial Capital, have to deal with peculiari-
ties which, though of a different kind, are quite
as striking as the Bavarian possibly can be. We
know particularly that where the religious ele-
ment cuts a figure in politics and the clerical
Center party prevents a normal political develop-
ment, class-consciousness is easily crowded out
by other considerations. And also outside of
Bavaria we have heard of some very strange cam-
paign alliances. Nevertheless, what happened
this time in Bavaria was in its way an innova-
tion. A formal alliance was entered into, not
underhanded, not over the heads of the mass by
particular comrades, but by one party with an-
other party, by the leaders of the Social Democ-
racy in Bavaria, with the leaders of the Center
party in Bavaria.

This event stirred up a great commotion and
caused the most intense anxiety everywhere in
party circles. At first the astonishment, the dis-
approval, found no expression. As the legislative
elections in Bavaria are indirect, one could not
Immediately raise a protest, for in so doing one
would only have embarrassed the Bavarian com-



4 i*0 COMPROMISE.

rades, who were then in the midst of the fight,
and would perhaps have incurred a grave respon-
sibility. Therefore, the Bavarian supporters of
the political cow trade had the field to themselves
for the time being. Under such circumstances,
it is easy to understand that the apprehensions
of comrades, who thought they saw indications
of a designed and methodical stagnation of the
party, were aroused to the utmost. Berlin com-
rades turned to me. I explained why the Vor-
waerts hud not yet taken a stuud towurds tho
Bavarian cow trade, but made no secret of the
fact that my views on compromises were not the
same as those of the editorial staff; I wrote an
article, which in spite of its unusually calm tone,
was looked upon by the Bavarian comrades as
a grievous attack; I also explained my views in
a meeting of the voters 1 club of the Sixth Berlin
election district. Although, for the sake of sweet
peace, I prevented a vote of censure for the
Bavarian comrades, nevertheless both myself and
the Berlin comrades were, on account of this
meeting, violently attacked by the Bavarian party
members, and not always in elegant terms. One
who feels that he is in the wrong generally makes
up for the weakness of his case by the violence of
his speech. I have always taken the insolence of
my opponents as an involutary compliment, and
never bothered myself about it.

About the time of the Bavarian cow trade the
entrance of a socialist — Millerand — into a reac-
tionary bourgeois cabinet took place in France
and was the cause of a split in the French Social
Democracy. The ablest of our French comrades,
— Guesde, Lafargue and Yaillant, the founders of
the modern socialist movement in France, — pro-
tested against the entrance of Millerand into the
cabinet of the reactionary capitalist, Waldeck-
Rousseau, and of Qallifet, the butcher of the
Communists; they withdrew from the socialist



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 5

/group, which they were convinced had abandoned
the platform of the class 1 struggle.

Here we could see the dangers of a compro-
mise policy in their life-size and entire outlines.
In the meantime an article appeared in For-
waert8, in the issue of July 28, entitled "Mo-
mentary Alliances," which sought to justify the
compromise policy. I therefore determined, at
the request of comrades in Berlin and vicinity, to
write a pamphlet and express myself, as I know,
in harmony with an overwhelming majority of
the Berlin comrades, on the question of tactics,
especially on compromises and alliances; and
thus, so far as in my power lies, afford the party
an opportunity, before the party convention is
held, to realize in their proper connection and in
their entire extent the consequences which an
abandonment of the time-tried policy of our
party would bring about. ,

When I speak here of our policy, I use the
word without regard to anything immaterial and
superficial, but in the sense which since the begin-
.ning of the party it has had for us in contrast to
all other parties, — in the sense of the policy of
the class struggle, which has very often changed
in form, but in substance has remained the same,
— our unique proletarian class policy, which sep-
arates us from all other political parties in tho
world of bourgeois society and excludes us from
intercourse with them.

The pamphlet is a vacation task. It was writ-
ten on the move in the true sense of the word,
in house and field, on mountains, in the cars, here
and there. This, of course, necessarily marred its
unity, but shows also how seriously I took the
matter, to sacrifice for it the quiet of my vaca-
tion. W. LIEBKNECHT.

August, 1899.



• »o ooMPBomaii

NO COMPROMISE.
NO POLITICAL TRADING.



By Wilhelm Liebknecht.

(Published at the Bequest of the Members of
the Social Democratic Party in Berlin and
Vicinity.)

THE PARTY LAW.

t The question of compromises has, in one form
or another, engaged the attention of our party
ever since its entrance into the political arena.
But I have not now the time nor is this the place
for a complete historical presentation of the sub-
ject. The present state of party law in reference
to the compromise question is expressed in the
resolutions of the party conventions held at
Cologne, Hamburg and Stuttgart. The resolu-
tion of the Cologne convention, passed October
28, 1893, is as follows:

"Whereas, The three-class electoral system of
Prussia, which, according to Bismarck's own ex-
pression, is the most wretched of all systems of
election, makes it impossible for the Social Dem-
ocracy to take an independent part in the elec-
tions for the Prussian legislature with any pros-
pect of success; and whereas, it contradicts the
principles heretofore followed by the party in
elections to enter into compromises with hostile
parties, because this would necessarily lead to
demoralization and to strife and dissension in the
ranks of the party; therefore, resolved, that it
is the duty of the party members in Prussia to
abstain from participation in the election for
the legislature.

And whereas, the electoral systems in the scp-



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 7

arate states constitute an excellent specimen of
reactionary election laws and particularly the
plutocratic character of the three-class electoral
system in Prussia makes it impossible for the
laboring class to send its own representatives
to the legislature; therefore, the convention calls
upon the party members to begin a systematic
and energetic agitation in all the separate states
for the introduction of universal, equal, recret
and direct suffrage in elections for the legislature
as demanded by our party platform.' ' j

Four years later, on October 9, 1897, the Ham-
burg convention passed the following resolution:

"The resolution of the Cologne convention
forbidding the Prussian members of the party to
participate in the legislative elections under the
three-class system of voting, is repealed. Par-
ticipation in the next Prussian legislative elec-
tions is recommended everywhere where the con-
ditions render it possible for the party members
to do so. Just how far it is possible to take part
in the elections in the separate election districts
much be decided by the party members of each
election district according to local circumstances.

Compromises and alliances with other parties
must not be entered into."

The repeal of the Cologne resolution was
passed by 160 votes against 50. The entire reso-
lution was passed by 145 votes against 64, one
delegate not voting.

After the vote on the separate parts of the
resolution and after the vote on the whole, in
order to prevent any question from arising as to
the practical meaning of the Hamburg resolution,
the chairman, Singer, with the express consent of
Bebel, who had offered the resolution, and with-
out objection by anyone, and with unanimous
consent, entered on the minutes, made the follow-
ing announcement:

"I wish to state that the convention is unani-
mous in the view that under the resolution



8 NO COMPROMISE.

adopted here no participation in the elections can
take place except by putting up social demo-
cratic candidates."

That comrades should, in the first instance, vote
for candidates of the liberal party was, as Bebel
remarked, absolutely excluded, and would belong
under the head of compromises and alliances with
other parties.

In spite of the clear language of the resolution
and of the clear and authoritative interpretation
thereof on a point susceptible of different con-
structions, the convention had hardly adjourned
when differences of opinion began to be ex-
pressed. In sharp contradiction to the facts and
to the record of the proceedings, it was denied
that voting in the first instance by our party for
candidates of the liberal party would be a com-
promise; and the claim was even made that
the convention had been bulldozed by Singer.

Last year's convention was held at Stuttgart
immediately before the elections for the Prussian
legislature. There was such a difference of opin-
ion that it was not possible to think of disposing
of the matter, especially as the order of business
before the convention was overloaded without
that. So nothing could be done but leave the
final disposition of the matter for a future con-
vention, and for the present pass an emergency
resolution.

On October 5, 1898, the Stuttgart convention
adopted unanimously the following resolution,
agreed upon by a committee, to- wit:

"Participation in the Prussian legislative elec-
tions under the three-class electoral system can-
not be regarded, as is the case in elections for
the Reichstag, as a marshaling of forces; it is
not a means of attaining a moral effect by the
number of our votes, but is only a means of
attaining certain practical results, especially
warding off the danger of allowing the most hide-
bound reactionists to get a majority In the



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 9

legislature. Proceeding from this view, the con-
vention declares that participation in the Prussian
legislative elections is not required in all elec-
tion districts, the less so as the shortness of the
time which remains before the Prussian legisla-
tive elections makes it impossible to bring to-
gether the widely divergent views now existing
within the party on this question, so to make
harmonious action by the party possible. Under
these circumstances the convention leaves it to
the comrades of the separate election districts
to decide on the question of participation. If it
is decided in an election district to take part, and
if a proposition is made to support candidates of
our political opponents, then the candidates must
pledge themselves, in case of their election to
the legislature, to work for the introduction of the
universal, equal, direct and secret ballot, for the
elections to the legislature, the same as it now
exists for the elections to the Reichstag, and to
resist energetically all measures in the legislature
which tend to diminish or abolish the existing
rights of the people in the separate states. All
propositions introduced under the head of 'Prus-
sian Legislative Elections ' shall be considered
disposed of by the adoption of this resolution."
This was the Stuttgart resolution. As can be
seen, it is only temporary and leaves the question
of tactics exactly on the basis of the Hamburg
resolution. In spite of that, the comrades of
some election districts considered themselves jus-
tified in making, contrary to this resolution, ar-
rangements with other parties which were clearly
compromises within the meaning of the Ham-
burg resolution. And the latest events in Bavaria,
the alliance with the Center party, which was
characterized as a cow trade by the comrades
themselves, who took part in it, has shown that
when once the thin end of the opportunist wedge
has forced itself into the policy of the party the
thick end soon follows.



1# NO COMPROMISE.

PROLETARIAN SOCIALISM.

For our party and for our party tactics there
is but one valid basis: the basis of the doss strug-
gle, out of which the Social Democratic party
has sprung up, and out of which alone it can
draw the necessary strength to bid defiance to
every storm and to all its enemies. The founders
of our party, — Marx, Engels and Lassalle, — im-
pressed upon the workingmen the necessity of
the class character of our movement so deeply that
down to a very recent time there were no consid-
erable deviations or getting off the track. The
Cologne resolution was called forth by a proposal
made by Edward Bernstein, then living in Lon-
don, and as editor of the Social Democrat hon-
ored by the members of the party.

Till the year 1803 there never was any talk in
public about the possibility or advisability of tak-
ing part in the Prussian legislative elections. In
the beginning of the '80s, the cooperation of the
Social Democracy with the political democrats
was advocated on the quiet by the democrats
of Frankfort for the purpose of gaining a socialist
and a democratic representative for Frankfort in
the legislature; but the proposition was declined,
also on the quiet, without getting noised abroad.
What turned the scale was this consideration,
viz.: That the class character of the party would
be weakened by an alliance of this "kind; aid
that the advantage of gaining a representative
would be far more than offset by the disadvantage
of an alliance in a legislative election with a
party which we are compelled to fight in the
Reichstag election. The importance of a seat in
the Prussian legislature was not overlooked by
anyone. But it was looked upon as more import-
ant that the representatives of the party should
depend exclusively upon the strength of the party,
and not upon an alliance with parties which
might have momentarily a common interest with



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 11

as, but which in their political make-up are hos-
tile to us and will remain permanently hostile.

Bernstein's proposal, which contemplated a
participation of the Social Democracy in the
Prussian legislative elections, found little response
and no advocates; so that the resolution intro-
duced and supported by Bebel against such par-
ticipation was adopted unanimously.

That the question of taking part in the Prussian
legislative elections should come up again after
many years and even lead to quite animated de-
bates, appears at first sight unintelligible. But
it is explained by two circumstances which I
will here set forth.

First. In reference to the Prussian three-class
electoral system the views of many of the com-
rades had in the course of time undergone a
change. It had escaped the memory of some
of them, here and there, that the logically and
cunningly realized purpose of the three-class
electoral system was to exclude with hermetic
sealing all democratic thought and sentiment,
and that the capitalistic era, which began about
the same time with the introduction of the "most
wretched of all electoral systems,'* had by creat-
ing a class conscious proletariat rendered the vote
of the socialist masses more insignificant than the
vote of the democratic masses had been origin-
ally. How badly many of the speakers (both men
and women) at the Hamburg convention de-
ceived themselves as to the working of the three-
class electoral system is clear from the fact that
some of them entertained the delusion that the
reform of the Prussian legislative elections could
be used as the means of a grand arousing of the
masses. In the jubilation over the success which
had been achieved under other non-democratic
laws regulating legislative elections, especially in
Saxony, many had forgotten that the Prussian
three-class system made the publicity of the bal-
lot obligatory, and thereby in advance practically



12 NO COMPROMISE.

disfranchised all who were dependent, either
economically, socially or politically, that is, the
great majority of the population, and by this
means alone rendered it impossible for the masses
to take part in the election or get up any general
enthusiasm.

The optimistic self-deception in regard to the
three-class electoral law went so far that not a
few of the comrades imagined in all seriousness
that we social democrats would be in a position
by our own strength without fusion or even an
alliance with other parties, to win a number, if
only a small number, of seats. To-day no one is
laboring under this delusion any longer. To-day
everybody knows that we cannot win a single
seat in the Prussian legislature without a com-
promise or an alliance. It was different two
years ago when the party convention, its majority
being under the curse of optimistic self-deception,
pronounced in favor of taking part in the Prus-
sian legislative elections. Fortunately, however,
the heads and supreme council of the party be-
thought themselves of the origin and nature of
the party and by an unqualified prohibition of all
compromises and alliances with other parties
sought to prevent the self-deception from causing
steps which might injure the party and lead it
astray into wrong paths.

The Hamburg resolution has been called con-
tradictory and illogical. True, if the party the
same as before rejected all compromises and
alliances with other parties, then there was no
sense in repealing the Cologne resolution. The
contradiction is explained, as already indicated,
by the fact that a portion of the party deceived
itself or was deceived as to the nature of the Prus-
sian three-class election law. But from this con-
tradiction to conclude, as has actually been done,
that the party had more at heart its desire to par-
ticipate in the Prussian legislative elections than
its aversion to compromises, and that therefore,



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 13

as a contradiction existed, it must be solved by
unqualifiedly advocating participation in tbe elec-
tions and by repealing the prohibition against
compromises and election alliances; such a con-
clusion gives evidence of just as little logic as
of regard for the principles and history of the
party.

Second. This brings me to the second reason
why the question of participation in the legisla-
tive elections could become a matter of serious
party strife. In certain circles there exists an
inclination, or let us say an effort, to desert
the platform of the class struggle and enter into
the common arena of the other parties. As all the
other parties stand upon the basis of a political
state, therefore their field of activity is necessarUy
confined to the spoils of politics. I do not say
that the advocates of the new tactics all wish this:
as to some of them I am convinced that they do
not wish it. But others wish it; and it is no
mere accident that it was just Bernstein who first
proposed the participation of the social democ-
racy in the Prussian legislative elections. This
tactics corresponds perfectly with Bernstein's
program which aims at the politicalization of the
Social Democracy; whereas, it is decidedly Il-
logical from the standpoint of those who do not
wish to deny or destroy the militant character of
our party as carrying on a class struggle.

STATE CAPITALISM.

I do not hesitate to repeat Yny former declara-
tion that a practical surrender of our party prin-
ciples appears to me far more dangerous than all
of Bernstein's theoretical will-o -the-wisps put
together. It has been claimed that in the spoils
parties political nerve has died out; that they
have lost the spirit of freedom and justice. The
claim certainly does not lack foundation, and yet
that condition is no recent matter. Disregarding



14 NO COMPROMISE.

short periods, the German bourgeoisie never did
have what is understood by "political nerve." But
however that may be, it cannot be denied that we
are now living under the influence of politico-
economie conditions which tend to sharpen in
the highest degree the economic and political
antagonisms on the one hand, and yet on the
other hand tend towards an opportunist relaxa-
tion of principles. In addition to that we must
take into consideration the political backward-
ness of the bourgeoisie in Germany, which is the
cause of the fact that there does not exist here
a really liberal party, to say nothing of a demo-
cratic party. This fact has this as its natural
result: that the honestly liberal and democratic
elements of the bourgeoisie gravitate more and
more towards the side of the Social Democracy
as the only party which is fighting for democratic
principles in Germany. But these democratic ele-
ments do not thereby become Socialists, though
many believe they are socialists. In short, we
have now in Germany a phenomenon which has
been observable in France for half a century and
longer, and which has contributed much to the
confusion of party relations in France, viz.: that
a part of the radical bourgeoisie rallies around
the Socialist flag without understanding the
nature of socialism. This political socialism,
which in fact is only philanthropic humanitarian
radicalism, has retarded the development of so-
cialism in France exceedingly. It has diluted and
blurred the principles and weakened the socialist
party because it brought into it troops upon
which no reliance could be placed in the decisive
moment.

Marx in his articles on the class struggles in
France,* characterized for us this political social-
ism. And it would be an unparalleled ease of

♦The Class Struggles In France, 1848-50. with an
Introduction by Frederick Engels, Berlin, 1S»B. For-
toaerU Publishing House.



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 15

flying the track and going astray if the German
Social Democracy, which has had such wonder-
ful success and such a wonderful growth for the
very reason that it has marched ahead unterri-
fied on the basis of the class struggle, should sud-
denly face about and plunge into mistakes, the
avoidance of which has been the power and pride
of our party, and has put the German Social
Democracy at the head of the international social
democracy of all countries.

The disappearance of fear and aversion to us
in political circles of course brings political ele-
ments into our ranks. As long as this takes place
on a small scale it causes no apprehension be-
cause the political elements are outnumbered by
the proletarian elements and are gradually as-
similated. But it is a different thing if the politi-
cal elements in the party become so numerous
and influential that their assimilation becomes
difficult and even the danger arises that the pro-
letarian socialist element will be crowded to the
rear. This danger of politicalization threatens
the German Social Democracy from two sources
on account of the backwardness of our bour-
geoisie. First, the democratic elements of the bour-
geoisie, which find no political satisfaction in
their own class, flow to us in greater numbers
than in countries with a normally developed
bourgeoisie; second, the bureaucratic, though
capitalistic, spirit of our governments tends to-
wards a state socialism which, in fact, is only
state capitalism, but which is dazzling and mis-
leading for those who are easily deceived by ex-
ternal similarities and catch words. The German,
or more accurately the Prussian, state socialism
whoso ideal is a military, landlord and police
state, hates democracy above everything else.
The Kanitzes and their followers claim to be out
and out radical socialists, but will have nothing
to do with democracy. Democracy is their



If NO COMPROMISE.

enemy. It is to them something inherently polit-
ical. But all politics is diametrically opposed to
what is socialist. So by this trick logic we ar-
rive at the conclusion which has gained footing
here and there, even in social democratic circles,
that democracy as savoring of politics has noth-
ing in common with socialism, but on the con-
trary is opposed to it. Certain errors, for ex-
ample the opposition to the militia system, can be
traced to this piece of sophistry, as also at one
time the false teachings of von Schweitzer. But
the truth is that democracy is not a thing that is
specifically political, and we must never forget
that we are not merely a socialist party, but a
social democratic party because we have per-
ceived that socialism and democracy are insepar-
able.

BISMARCK.
As Prince Bismarck, in the '60s, wanted to
move the "Acheron 11 of socialism, and through
the intervention of Brass offered to me the edi-
torship of the North German Gazette, and then
later through Bucher offered to Marx even the
editorship of the StaaU Aneeiger, in both cases
with full freedom to advocate socialism unreserv-
edly, clear down to its ultimate consequences, it
was of course not love for socialism or knowledge
of socialism that led Prince Bismarck to do this.
He understood nothing about socialism at that
time, and never did understand anything about it
down to his death; in fact, he never had any
conception of the moving forces of political and
social life at all. There probably never lived at
any time in any country a "statesman" who was
less scientific, who had less knowledge, and who
relied so purely on experience and a sort of
half-gambler, half-peddler cunning, as Bismarck.
Those offers to socialists place in the clearest
light the untruthfulness of Prince Bismarck's
claim that he always regarded the social democ-



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 17

racy as incompatible with the existence of the
state. Bismarck wanted to use socialism for the
purpose of breaking up and dissolving the bour-
geois liberal opposition, especially the Progres-
sive party. This, in itself, is the most conclusive
proof that he had no conception of the real na-
ture of socialism. Of course the fate of the boy-
magician was repeated. The elemental force
which was conjured up grew over the head of the
dabbler, and he did not get the best of socialism;
socialism got the best of him.

The question of tactics came up then in our
party for the first time. Should we, in considera-
tion of certain concessions to the laborers, aid
Bismarck against the Progressive party and other
opponents of his policy in the expectation of be-
ing then after that strong enough for a successful
struggle against him and against the landlord,
police and military state embodied in his person?
Or did prudence and party interest demand that
we, taking advantage of Bismarck's quarrel with
the Progressive bourgeoisie and the other op-
ponents of his policy, contest the Bismarckian
policy and organize the proletariat into an inde-
pendent political party for the purpose of pre-
paring it for the conquest of political power t

For a while the proletariat wavered, but after
a few years the tactics, advocated principally by
Herr von Schweitzer, of drawing closer to the
Bismarckian policy, was given up and the tactics
was everywhere accepted which has ever since
been in force for the party down to the present
day. This tactics consists in keeping clear the
class character of the socialist party as a prole-
tarian party; to train it by agitation, education
and organization for the victorious completion of
the emancipation struggle; to wage a systematic
war against the dlass state, in whose hands the
political and economic power of capitalism is con-
centrated, and in this war to draw advantages



18 NO COICPROlCISt.

a mLs as possible out of the quarrels and eon-
flievj of the different political parties with each
other.

BOUBGEOIS AND BOUBGEOISIB.

I» Germany the bourgeoisie has never at-
tained political power as in France and England.
Though the English bourgeoisie two and a half
centuries ago, and the French bourgeoisie more
than a century ago, cleared away all the medieval
rubbish, the German bourgeoisie has never yet
been in the position to bring about a political
revolution and to realize in the state what is
called political liberty. The loss of the world's
commerce in consequence of the discovery of
America, and in connection with that the stunt-
ing of industrial activity; the political splitting
up and ruin of Germany; the paralysis of the
national spirit bordering almost on doath; the
rise of dynastic interests hostile to the people
and to enlightenment; all these prevented the
growth of a strong citizenry. As in 1848 a belated
opportunity was offered, the German people even
then did not have the strength for a political revo-
lution. After a brief revel of freedom it bowed
its bead again under the old yoke. From fear of
the laborers, in whom it scented a new and dan-
gerous power, it became reactionary, without
ever having been revolutionary; it did penance
for its dreams of freedom, which appeared to it
as youthful indiscretions, and threw itself into
the arms of political reactionism, filled with but
one remaining ideal, viz.: to get rich. The citi-
zen disappeared from the political arena and
became either politically indifferent or else cap-
italistic. And to be capitalistic means to recog-
nize and support the government unconditionally,
provided it is a class government and represents
and promotes exclusively the interests of capital-
ism.

To prevent misunderstandings and wrong im-
pressions, we must become fully conscious of



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 19

the difference between "political" and " capital-
istic' ' These two ideas, which because of the
ambiguity of the German word "Buerger" are
very easily confused by us, must be clearly
separated from each other. In France the word
"bourgeois," which in the middle ages had the
same meaning as our "Buerger," in the course of
time and of economic development gradually as-
sumed the meaning of ' ' great-capitalist ; ' ' where-
as we Germans for this latter idea borrow the
French word "bourgeois," but also use concur-
rently the German words "Buerger," and
"buergerlich" without noticing the difference.
So there arises a confusion of language which is
anything but conducive to clearness of concep-
tion. We speak of "buergerlich" society, and
mean modern capitalistic bourgeois society. We
speak of "buergerlich" spirit, "buergerlich"
freedom, and mean a democratic spirit of free-
dom such as the citizenry had in former times
when it was fighting the priests and feudal land-
lords, which spirit, however, is diametrically op-
posed to the spirit, of the capitalistic, and Lence
reactionary, landlord and priest coddling citizenry,
or bourgeoisie of to-day.

The correctness of the so-called materialistic
conception of history, which considers the political
development as dependent on the economic,
cannot be brought more strikingly and con-
vincingly to the mind than by the change which in
the course of the Nineteenth century has been
wrought in the bourgeoisie. It can be demon-
strated with the greatest precision how with the
change in the productive relations a change of
political view and attitude has taken place in the
bourgeoisie. Every step forward in economic
development has been a step forward in the
development of class antagonisms and a step in
the approach of the bourgeoisie towards its old
wnermes, the landlords and priests, and a step
*.ii drawing away from the rising proletariat,



29 NO COMPROMISE

which in order to effect its emancipation, mart
advocate equal rights for all men and the demo-
cratic principles formerly supported by the
bourgeoisie. The moment the proletariat steps
forth as a class separate from the bour-
geoisie and having interests opposed to it*
from that moment the bourgeoisie ceased
to be democratic. In the states of tbn
European continent this reaction falls in a chav*
acteristic manner just in a period which is usual
ly called the revolutionary period par excellence
— in the period of the February and March
revolutions. The contradiction is only an ap-
parent one. The February revolution was a
tardy victory of bourgeois idealism which stirred
up the material interests of bourgeois realism to
contradiction, to opposition and to reaction. The
premature outbreak of the proletarian revolution
(in the battle of June, 1848, at Paris), which
followed upon the heels of the belated outbreak
of the bourgeois revolution, drove the bourgeoisie
over to the side of its hereditary enemy, because
it foresaw in the victory of the proletariat the
downfall of capitalism. In France Napoleon was
elected President, and in Germany the bour-
geoisie even in the honeymoon of the March
revolution longed for a deliverer which would
down the red specter. Thus the "black reaction,"
which in 1849 followed our revolution, was in
fact simply the true character of this revolution,
stripped of its fantastic deceptive dress of gilded
phrases. Under the rule of capitalism the bour-
geoisie was forced to become politically reac-
tionary so far as it was capitalistic or stood under
capitalistic influence. The "black reaction"
which half a century ago spread over the Euro-
pean continent, was just as much a historical
necessity as the still blacker reaction of' 'the
present zigzag policy of penitentiary bJj Qg which
capitalism in a fit of desperation has forwi upon



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 21

THE GERMAN BOURGEOISIE NEVER

PASSED THROUGH THE LIBERAL

STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT.

In Germany where capitalism was developed
later than in England and France, and where
it was not preceded, as in those two countries,
by an era of economic prosperity for the bour-
geoisie as well as of political supremacy by it,
the whole political development was obliged to
take on a different character. Thero a soil
cleared of medieval mould and undergrowth;
here, the most modern of modern conditions, as
modern as in France and England, in between
medieval mould and undergrowth; the healthy
growth entwined with ivy which sucks the life
out of everything that it clasps with its tendrils;
which only lives from death and rottenness and
which must bo torn off and grubbed up to pre-
vent the healthy and growing from being sacri-
ficed to the dead. The German bourgeoisie,
which was sleeping the sleep of impotence at
the time when in other lands the bourgeoisie im-
pressed upon the state its bourgeois character,
docs not even now possess the strength to tear
away and extirpate the romantic and death-briqg-
ing parasitic ivy of landlordism and medieval
semi-barbarism.

The political impotence of the German citi-
zenry in past and present is what distinguishes
the political life of Germany from that of the
other advanced countries, and has assigned to
the German proletariat the mission not only of
solving its own strictly proletarian problem, but
also of accomplishing the work left undone by
our bourgeoisie. Tactics is determined by the
nature of the conditions. So far as the bour-
geoisie is capitalistic, we have to fight it; so far
as the bourgeoisie opposes capitalism and the
reactionism which it shields and assists, we have



22 NO COMPROMISE

either to support it positively or at least not
assume a hostile attitude towards it, unless it
gets in our line of tie, as for example, in the
elections for the Beichstag where a bourgeois
and a social democratic candidate are running
against each other

Disregarding the yon Schweitzer episode, the
German Social Democracy has consistently and
consciously followed the tactics prescribed in the
Communist Manifesto, to direct its main attack
against political reactionism and to lend aid to
the bourgeoisie, so far as it is liberal or demo-
cratic, in its struggle against political reaction-
ism and in no case to throw itself on the side
of political reaction in its struggle against the
bourgeoisie. It is necessary to emphasize this,
because Bernstein in his polemic written against
the Social Democratic party of Germany, and
which has been so suspiciously praised and rec-
ommended, has accused us of something which
is a favorite old legend of Eugene Bichter's, viz.:
that we blindly opposed the German bourgeoisie
to the advantage of political reactionism and
repelled and terrorized it so much that in its
alarm it took refuge under the wings of a reac-
tionary landlord, police and military state. It is
not possible to slap the truth squarer in the
face than is done by saying this.

THE VAILUBE OP THE PBOGBESSIVE
PABTY.

At the time of the great eonstitutional struggle
in the '60s there was no socialist party worth
speaking of. In 1864, at the time Lassalle was
killed in a duel with the Wallachian noble Bako-
witz, the Universal German Working Men's
Union numbered in all Germany 5,000 or 6,000
members on paper; in reality still fewer. This
little band could not have scared the German
Progressive party out of its wits, even though



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 23

we measure the latter 's valor by the microscopic
scale of rabbit courage, befitting the German
bourgeoisie. Yet it surrendered to Bismarck;
and after the success of the civil war of 1866 it
granted him indemnity and bowed itself under
the Caudine yoke which he set up. To claim that
the Social Democracy is to blame for that is
simply ridiculous. It is true that Lassalle had
attacked the bourgeoisie very bitterly, but in so
doing had found very little sympathy among
German workingmen. And although Lassallo in
his opposition to the Progressive party occa-
sionally got perhaps somewhat too close to the
Bismarckian reactionary policy, still it must not
be forgotten that at the beginning of the con-
stitutional struggle he had stood on the side of
the Progressive party and only separated from
it after it had obstinately refused to carry on the
struggle in earnest in spite of his repeated de-
mands that it do so.

The German bourgeoisie — and this is the key
to its otherwise unaccountable conduct— did not
have in 1862 any more than it had in 1848 and
earlier, the stuff for a political revolution. It
feared — as I told one of the leaders of the Pro-
gressive party to his face in the beginning of the
year 1863 — it feared a revolution more than a
reaction. And Bismarck with his cynical con-
tempt of men and his horse-trader cuteness, soon
brought out that fact. The Progressists did not
strike him as ' ' imposing ; ' ' and the more impu-
dent ho was in his intercourse with them the easier
he curled them around his finger. To hold the
German Social Democracy responsible for the
treason to liberty committed by the Prussian
Progressive party is not only an insult to his-
torical truth; it indicates also a complete misun-
derstanding of the role which the German bour-
geoisie has played since the middle ages.

I simply put the two facts side by side: In
the period of the constitutional struggle when



£4 no ooicpROiass.

the Progressive party stood at the height of its
power and had the people behind it, Bismarck,
then in the beginning of his career, turned it
down with the greatest ease. In the period of
the anti-Socialist law, when Bismarck stood at
the height of his power and with all the re-
sources of capitalism was exercising a bourgeois
dictatorship, he was turned down by the Social
Democracy with the greatest ease, though it had
all the political parties against it. That shows
who can fight reactionism in Germany and who
can not

The wretchedness of the German bourgeoisie
does not, however, release us from the duty of
assisting it, wherever it does earnestly oppose
reactionism, provided our own interests do not
thereby suffer. And this has been done without
exception ever since the German Social Democ-
racy entered the arena as an independent party.
For myself, I need only to mention the fact that
in 1865 I was expelled from Prussia because I
foiled Bismarck's attempt to crush the Progres-
sive party with the aid of the Socialists as be-
tween two millstones. I can say with a good
conscience that in all my struggles against the
Bismarckian reaction I have fought for political
liberty. And in my oft-quoted pamphlet on the
political attitude of the Social Democracy I
emphasized the democratic character of our move-
ment not less than has been done recently by
Bernstein, who recommends to us as brand new
wisdom what we have already been practicing for
thirty-odd years.

THE PAMPHLET ON TACTICS.

I must here say a word about my above men-
tioned pamphlet on tactics. The speech out of
which it arose was delivered in the year 1869
at the time of the North German Confederation;
this was a temporary arrangement which could
not possibly last and which would nave to end



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 25

either with the breaking down of Bismarck's
Great-Prussian policy or with its victory by a
union with the South German States, excepting
Austria. In this temporary state or interim the
tactics forced upon us by the logic of the facts
was that of opposition at any price. Bismarck
had introduced a universal suffrage of the Napo-
leonic pattern, not to establish the sovereignty
of the people, but to cover up his despotic dic-
tatorship. As Napoleon through his prefects
directed the universal sufTrago as he pleased, so
Bismarck thought he could do the same through
his local counsellors. It seemed to him an instru-
ment easier to handle than the three class electoral
system, which the bourgeoisie had got control of,
and in the first two classes of which it had cre-
ated for itself an impregnable stronghold.

The history of the Prussian three class electoral
system is interesting because it shows so plainly
how the most craftily planned political schemes
of reactionists enn be overthrown by economic
development and temporarily turned so as to
have an opposite effect from that intended. De-
signed with cunning shrewdness to bar out all
democratic or opposition elements, it answered
this purpose perfectly for a decade, until one
fine day the bourgeoisie, having grown econom-
ically strong and being provoked by the dis-
gusting orgies of landlord and police stewardship
began to feel its political strength; it came upon
the idea that it only needed to will the thing in
order to obtain a majority in the first two
electoral classes, and thereby win a 'ictory in
the election of the deputies. The idea was made
a reality, and I'rince Bismarck damned the ma-
chinery which so outrageously refused to work
as it was expected to; the three class electoral
system then became the "most wretched of sll
electoral systems ; ' ' but on the other hand, uni-
versal, equal and direct suffrage, this God-be-
with-us of the "frantic year" 1848, and which



26 NO COMPROMISE.

in Napoleonic France bad shown such splendid
results, now beamed as a brilliant salvation of
the state and of society through Caesarism.

So we got the universal franchise; and for
another reason as well The dynastic-feudal
revolution from above which topped off Bis-
marck's "national 11 policy, would have hung in
mid-air unless there had been given to it at
least the appearance of a revolution from below.
He needed the people even though only for a
dummy; and there was no better bait than the
universal franchise of 1848. It united the Bis-
marckian revolution from above with the '48er
revolution from below and put the unthinking
masses in the delusion that Prussia, enlarged at
the expense of Germany and turned into a land-
lord, police and soldier state, »was the realization
of German democracy. To-day we know how
deep this delusion had taken root; it required
decades of brutal misgovernment to root it out
again.

But in one thing Bismarck miscalculated, viz.:
in the strength of the revolutionary idea. What
was possible in France after the battle of June,
which drove the whole bourgeoisie into the wild-
est reactionism, was not possible in Germany
where the power of the state was not so closely
centralized and where, fed by the development
of capitalism, a healthy workingmen's movement
grew up which was determined to exploit the
national and dynastic crises and struggles in
the interest of the proletariat; to make socialism
the decisive power in Germany and to help it on
to victory and supremacy. The German pro-
letariat had the advantage of being able to draw
practical lessons from the labor movement in
other countries which were (and are) ahead of
Germany in political and economic development.
It also had the extraordinary good fortune to be
led into the field of political action by its great
teachers, Marx, Engels and Lassalle, right at



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 27

the beginning of its career. It was thereby
spared from the errors of pure and simple union-
ism on the ono hand, and of aimless planless,
through and through bourgeois-anarchistic plot-
ting and bawling for revolutions on the
other hand. Though the German working-class
in 1867, when the universal franchise went into
effect, was only to a very small extent filled with
class consciousness, it was nevertheless the only
class, and the socialist party was the only party,
which clearly saw the moaning of voting and
the value of the franchise. There was oven a
slight overestimation of it, but this was useful
because it increased the enthusiasm.

If Prince Bismarck entertained the hope that
the universal franchise could be exploited in
Napoleonic style and that the Reichstag would
remain what I called it in 1867, the figleaf to
partly cover the naked figure of absolutism, the
political basis of this hope was overthrown by the
expansion of the North German Confederation
into the German Empire. The highest triumph
of Bismarckian politics carried its downfall and
bankruptcy within it. "What the stiff Prussian
military and police spirit could perhaps have
prevented for an indefinite time within the limits
of the North German Confederation, viz.: the
rise and growth of an independent popular move-
ment, this could not be prevented on the larger
field of the German Empire. The power of the
people could not be suppressed, and the jealousy
of the "Federal Princes' ' at Prussian supremacy
helped along, so that the trees of Bismarck's
feudal Cffisarism could not shoot up as high
as the trees of Napoleon's prefect-Caesarism. It
was not possible by any allurements to take from
the workingmen the recognition of the insepara-
bility of socialism from democracy and of de-
mocracy from socialism.

"The question" (thus I began my speech
in 1869), "what attitude should the Social



28 NO C0MPB0MI8K.

Democracy take in the political itruggle, is
answered with ease and certainty if we have
attained a clear conception of the insepara-
bility of socialism and democracy. Socialism and
democracy are not the same, but they are only
different expressions of the same fundamental
idea. They oolong to each other, round out each
other, and can never stand in contradiction to
each other. Socialism without democracy is
pseudo-socialism, just as democracy without so-
cialism is pseudo-democracy. The democratic
state is the only possible form of a socialistically
organised society." ,

This truth, the inseparableness of democracy
and socialism, served for the German working
class as a sure guide amidst the greatest con-
fusion of political issues, so that the dangerous
shoals of state socialism were avoided towards
which the Prussian reaction was headed even in
the '40s; for the ideal of the garrison and police
state was of course a garrison and police social-
ism, which is euphemistically called state so-
cialism. The sophisms of Wagoner and von
Schweitzer that democracy has something bour-
geois about it, and that socialism, being directed
against bourgeois society, must consequently be
anti-democratic, did, it is true, confuse many a
man in von Schweitzer's time; out it never found
acceptance among the mass of laborers. This
pseudo-logic bobbed up again recently in the well
known militia debate, but has no longer any sig-
nificance.

WHAT IS A COMPROMISBt

Before we go farther we must get a clear idea
of the meaning of the word "compromise," other-
wise every debate on it will be completely with-
out aim and without result, because every one
will have in mind something different and conse-
quently no one will meet the arguments of an-
other. If compromise is understood as a con-
cession of theory to practice, then our entire life



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 29

and activity is a compromise and all huinaL.
history and the history of the race from the ttie
of the individual up to that of nations and of
mankind is an endless, unbroken chain of com-
promises. That conception of history according
to which tabula rasa, i. e., a clean sweep, is tem-
porarily made and must be made in order
to start a new administration and system
free from the old, is in the highest degree un-
scientific and stands in the most direct contra-
diction to experience. The clean sweep theory
is a spook which exists to-day only in the heads
of police politicians who accuse us of wanting to
1 'ruinate" everything that does not fit into our
scheme. These gentlemen thereby give judgment
against themselves, for they think they are the
ones who possess this magical power of being
able to "ruinate" anything and everything which
Time's eternal loom has woven and is weaving, if
perchance it has been done without first getting
a permit from the chief of police. The framers
of the anti-socialist law and penitentiary law dis-
play by their foolish activity only their bottom-
less ignorance. The organic laws according to
which political and social development goes on,
cannot be arbitrarily changed or nullified, just
as little as this can be done with the laws under
which an animal or a plant grows and develops.
Whoever interferes there with violence can only
disturb and destroy; this has always been the
effect wrought by the police politicians. What
these fuddlers, who call themselves "statesmen,"
say against us social democrats, viz.: that we
cannot create anything, but only destroy is
simply the reflection of their own actings and
doings; there is not among the innumerable sins
and vices, of which they accuse us, a single one
which they have not taken from themselves.

To add one new example to the old ones, I
will simply refer to the charge, which has been
stereotyped for twenty years, viz.: that ike



80 NO COMPROMISE

Social Democracy has for its object a pruiecaim*.
dictatorship. The truth is that since the battle
of June at Paris, that is for fifty-one years, we
have actually had on the continent of Europe the
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. A dictatorship
which has been exercised with fire and sword
against the working class; which, after the battle
of June, brought us the horrible butcheries of
the Commune, and hundreds of smaller butch-
eries of laborers; a dictatorship which extends to
the disfranchisement of the working class and
deprives the proletariat of the enjoyment not
only of political rights, but also of simple legal
rights; a dictatorship which has expressed itself
in dozens of exceptional laws and force laws and
which we Germans have to thank for the Anti-
Socialist law, the penitentiary bill and class law
decrees such as the Loebtau judgment and the
perjury trial at Essen. And if "King Stumm,"
who is now king in the realm of "social reform,"
should accomplish his purpose of annihilating
every organization of workingmen, what in com-
parison with such a dictatorship would be the
dictatorship of a Marius or a Sulla or of the
French convention of 1792-17941 The political
power which the social democracy aims at and
which it will win, no matter what its enemies
may do, has not for its object the establishment
of a dictatorship of the proletariat, but the sup-
pression of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
Just as the class struggle which the proletariat
carries on is only a counter struggle in self de-
fense to resist the class struggle of the bour-
geoisie against the proletariat; and the end of
this struggle by the victory of the proletariat
will be the abolition of the class struggle in every
form.

We Social Democrats know that the laws ac-
cording to which political and social evolution
goes on can no more be changed or stopped by
us than by the authorities of capitalistic society.



NO POLITICAL TRATOKG. %\

We know that we can no more introduce at will
socialistic production and a socialist form of
society than the German Kaiser nine years ago
could carry out his February proclamations
against the representatives of the capitalistic
class struggle. Therefore we were able to watch
with smiling indifference the attempt of our
opponents to crush the labor movement by force.
We were and still are sure of our success, as
sure as of the solution of a mathematical problem.
But we know also that tho shifting of relations,
though it goes on unceasingly, yet goes on grad-
ually because it is an organic movement; and it
goes on, too. without destruction of the existing
relations (the removal of the dead is not de-
struction). The destruction of the exist-
ing, of the living, is in general impossible.
We saw that plainly in the French revolution,
which was probably the best planned and most
energetically carried out of all political up-
heavals; but nevertheless after the "golden
period" of ideological groping around and of
phantastic and Utopian illusions was past, it was
compelled to take things as they were and fit
the new on to the old. In the first rush it may
be possible occasionally to crowd out the living;
but history teaches us that the most revolutionary
and despotic governments were finally compelled
by the logic of facts to yield and to recognize
perhaps in another form, that which was unnat-
urally and mechanically abolished. In short,
viewed historically, the present is, as a rule, a
compromise between the past and the future.

Therefore to reject a compromise in this sense
would be unscientific folly. And practical folly
it would be for a political party to fail to draw
advantages out of the opportunities of political
life and utilize for itself the quarrels of the dif-
ferent opposing parties. Prudence demands this;
principles do not come into the question; no
obligations are assumed and not to do what



82 HO OOMPBOMISt



pro

Soci



ctance demands would be stupidity. That wt
cial Democrats in the Reichstag sometimes om
a socio-political question Tote with the Conserva-
tives for the government, and on political and
commercial questions sometimes vote with the
Radicals against the government, that is a com-
mon requirement of political warfare. Though it
is undoubtedly a compromise between theory and
practice, it has nothing at all in common with the
compromises against which the party has re-
peatedly declared itself distinctly and expressly.
What the party had in mind and what it by
formal resolutions made the duty of the members,
was the avoidance of alliances, agreements, ar-
rangements, contracts or whatever they might be
called, which would involve a surrender of prin-
ciples or in general a change in the relation of
our party towards the bourgeois parties in a
manner injurious to us. This last point must
be especially emphasized, because the question
hinges principally on this. In the debate on
taking part in the Prussian legislative elections
the question at issue was exclusively this last
point; for none of those who advocated partici-
pation had the slightest idea of sacrificing party
principles in an alliance with the Progressive
party, though it must not be overlooked that
questions of tactics very easily shift into questions
of principle.

If the circumstances and necessities of the sit-
uation demand cooperation with other parties,
this can always be accomplished without a com-
promise. I take for example Belgium. The
Liberal party had there a common interest with
the Socialist party in fighting the Clericals. The
two parties united and worked together up to a
certain point. That would have been done even
without any fusion. But it was done by fusion,
and what was the result f Quarrel and strife.
Fusions have shown themselves to be entirely
superfluous. When that point is passed up to



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 83

which community of interests existed and wp to
which the community of interests, without any
fusion, would have induced united action, then
united action ceases. If class consciousness is
not strong enough among laborers, it certainly
is among the gentlemen of the bourgeoisie, in
whom the class instinct is much more active than
in laborers. And this is true even in countries
with democratic laws and institutions. I refer to
the separation between bourgeois democrats and
socialists in Switzerland, Bernstein's Eldorado,
where, according to Bernstein's doctrine, class
antagonism should properly have entirely disap-
peared; but we know it exists there just as strong
as in less democratic countries. But it is not
denied that the acuteness of class struggles is
lessened by democratic institutions.

In Belgium with its free institutions on one
hand and its priest-ridden government on the
other hand, election alliances between the Social
Democracy and the bourgeois parties have here-
tofore found a fertile soil. At any rate, in all
alliances which it formed there our party had
the advantage of being in the lead. It could not
bo exploited nor deceived. And yet the Belgium
comraden have found a drawback in compro-
mises. Comrade Vandervelde, writing in the
Wiener Arbeiterzeitung, welcomes the introduc-
tion of the proportional system in Belgium as
the end of election alliances. "In future," he
writes, "secondary factors will no longer enter
into the class struggle; the confusing side issues
will disappear which render it so difficult for
the masses to grasp the truth of the class strug-
gle.' ' Friend Vandervelde has therefore found
out that compromises, even there where they
take place under conditions and circumstances
the most favorable for the laborers, have an
injurious effect because "they render it difficult
for the masses to grasp the truth of the class
struggle; 99 in other words, alliances by removing



34 NO COMPROMISE.

the laborers from the ground of the class struggle
take away from them the possibility of developing
their full power and making it count. This they
are only able to do on the platform of the class
struggle.

The harm of a compromise does not consist
in the danger of a formal selling out or side-
tracking of party principles. That has probably
never been intended by any one in our party.
Even when our comrades in Essen in the election
before the last voted for the "cannon king" out
of spite, they had no idea of surrendering even
one iota of our program. The danger and root
of the evil does not lie here. It lies In giving tp,
keeping in the background or forgetting the
class struggle basis, for this is the source of the
whole modern labor movement. It is necessary
here to distinguish sharply, and not be misled
by catchwords; in short, we must have an emanci-
pation from phrases, as I said decades ago, with
reference to the phraseology of anarchism, which
poses as revolutionary, but in fact is only small
bore reactionism, merely a late-arrival caricature
of the bourgeois ideal of freedom and a theatrical
masquerade of commercial free competition.

SOCIALISM AND ETHICS.

Pity for poverty, enthusiasm for equality and
freedom, recognition of social injustice and a de-
sire to remove it, is not socialism. Condemna-
tion of wealth and respect for poverty, such as
we find in Christianity and other religions, is not
socialism. The communism of early times, as it
was before the existence of private property, and
as it has at all times and among all peoples been
the elusive dream of some enthusiasts, is not
socialism. The forcible equalization advocated
by the followers of Baboeuf, the so-called equali-
tarians, is not socialism.

In all these appearances thore is lacking the



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 35

real foundation of capitalist society with its class
antagonisms. Modern socialism is the child of
capitalist society and its class antagonisms. With
out these it could not be. Socialism and ethics
are two separate things. This fact must be kept
in mind.

Whoever conceives of socialism in the sense
of a sentimental philanthropic striving after hu-
man equality, with no idea of the existence of
capitalist society, is no socialist in the sense of
the class struggle, without which modern social-
ism is unthinkable. To be sure Bernstein is nom-
inally for the class struggle — in the same manner
as the Hessian peasant is for "the Republic and
the Grand Duke." Whoever has come to a full
consciousness of the nature of capitalist society
and the foundation of modern socialism, knows
also that a socialist movement, that leaves the
basis of the class struggle may be anything else,
but it is not socialism.

This foundation of the class struggle, which
Marx — and this is his immortal service — has
given to the modern labor movement, is the main
point of attack in the battle which the bourgeois
political economy is waging with socialism. The
political economists deny the class struggle and
would make of the labor movement only a part
of the bourgeois party movements, and the Social
Democracy only a division of the bourgeois
democracy. The bourgeois political economy
and politics direct all their exertions against the
class character of the modern labor movement.
If it were possible to create a breach in this bul-
wark, in this citadel of the Social Democracy,
then the Social Democracy is conquered, and the
proletariat thrown back under the dominion of
capitalistic society. However small such a breach
may be in the beginning, the enemy has the
power to widen it and the certainty of final vic-
tory. And the enemy is most dangerous when he
comes as a friend to the fortress, when he slinks



36 NO COMPROMISE.

in under the cover of friendship, and is recog-
nized as a friend and comrade.

The enemy who comes to us with open visor
we face with a smile; to set our foot upon his
neck is mere play for us. The stupidly brutal
acts of violence of police politicians, the out-
rages of anti-socialist laws, the anti-revolution
laws, penitentiary bills — these only arouse feel-
ings of pitying contempt; the enemy, however,
that reaches out the hand to us for a political
alliance, and intrudes himself upon us as a friend
and brother, — him and him alone have we to
fear.

Our fortress can withstand every assault — it
can not be stormed nor taken from us by siege —
it can only fall when we ourselves open the doors
to the enemy and take him into our ranks as a
fellow comrade. Growing out of the class strug-
gle, our party rests upon the class struggle as a
condition of its existence. Through and with
that struggle the party is unconquerable; without
it the party is lost, for it will have lost the source
of its strength. Whoever fails to understand
this or thinks that the class struggle is a dead
issue, or that class antagonisms are gradually be-
ing effaced, stands upon the basis of bourgeois
philosophy.

The present discussion over tactics in relation
to participation in the elections to the Prussian
legislature, has been compared to the discussion
which took place among the Social Democratic
members of the Reichstag in the middle of the
'80s concerning the steamship subsidy. If one
examines the matter only superficially the com-
parison appears strikingly close, but ceases to
be so as soon as the kernel of the question is
reached. At that time we were concerned with
the application of universally recognized prin-
ciples to a concrete case. That the Social Demo-
cratic faction in the Reichstag was interested in
the furtherance of German shipping and com-



NO COMPROMISE. 87

mercial interests was as universally admitted as
that they were opposed to the colonial policy and
all other imperialistic reactionary tendencies. The
only question was whether the subsidy was pri-
marily in the interest of the German commer-
cial interests, which were national in their chnr-
acter, or whether it was a part of colonial pol-
itics that served only the private interests of re-
actionary individuals at the expense of the pub-
lic. No one suggested at that time to change
the old tactics or alter the course of the party.
The present discussion, however, is concerned
with the question of a complete change of the
old tactics and aims; a change of tactics that
would mean a change in the character of the
party. It turns upon the question of the reten-
tion or abandonment of the class struggle stand-
point which distinguishes us from all bourgeois
parties; in short, it involves a decisive step, upon
which depends whether we shall remain a social-
ist party, or whether we shall brHg* over the
Rubicon of the class struggle and become the
left wing of the bourgeois democracy.

THEORETICAL DIFFERENCES OF OPIN-
ION, NOT MATERIAL: TACTICS
IS MATERIAL.

Diversity of opinions on theoretical points is
never dangerous to the party. There are for us
no bounds to criticism, and however great our
respect may be for the founders and pioneers of
our party, we recognize no infallibility and no
other authority than science, whose sphere is
ever widening and continually proves what it
previously held as truths to be errors; destroys
the old decayed foundations and creates new
ones; does not stand still for an instant; but in
perpetual advance moves remorselessly over
every dogmatic belief. At the Union Conven-
tion held at Gotha twenty-four years ago I said,



38 NO COMPROMISE

i

"We recognize no infallible Pope, not even a
literary one." And when in 1891, in Erfurt, I
explained and advocated the newly drafted plat-
form, which was unanimously adopted, I declared
that just because our program was a scientific
one it most be constantly changed at minor
points to meet the continuous advance of science.
And I maintain that no man — Marx, in spite
of his comprehensive and deep intellect, as little
as any other — can bring science to final perfec-
tion; and this position is for everyone who un-
derstands the nature of science a foregone con-
clusion. No socialist, therefore, has the right
to condemn attacks on the theoretical ideas of
the Marxian teachings or to excommunicate any
one from the party because of such attacks. But
it is wholly different when such attacks imply a
complete overturning of our whole conception of
society, as, for example, is the case with Bern-
stein. Then vigorous defense is in order.

Far more dangerous than theoretical assaults
are practical disavowals of our principles. The-
oretical discussions interest only a comparatively
small portion of our membership; whereas prac-
tical disavowal of principles and tactical offenses
against the party program touch every
party comrade and arouse the attention of
every party comrade; and when they are not
quickly checked and corrected they bring con-
fusion into the whole party. I do not believe
I shall be disputed by any one who is familiar
with the circumstances and with the party, when
I say that the masses within the party care little
for Bernstein's writings. They only find sym-
pathy among those who have formerly held sim-
ilar views, and they arouse a sensation only
among our opponents who wish to see fulfilled
their old hopes of a split in the party, or to see
the whole Social Democracy go over with drums
beating, into the bourgeois camp. I will wager
that not ten thousand of our comrades have



NO POLITICAL TRADING/ 39

ever read Bernstein's book, and I am far from
considering it as a reproach to the party that
they show no inclination to busy themselves
once more with the underbrush that the founders
of socialism, more than a generation ago, yes,
in some cases more than two generations ago,
hewed down in clearing the way for socialism.
One might just as well accuse our comrades of
being unscientific because they no longer read
the antedeluvian writings of Schultzo-Delitzsch
that may be lying around somewhere in country
villages as dust-covered and shopworn goods.

Look at the list of those who have commented
on Bernstein's book. There is not a single la-
borer among them. It is only those comrades
whose professional duty it is to read and discuss
such writings. With what interest, on the con-
trary, the whole party followed the question of
participation in the Prussian legislative elections,
or the election alliance in Bavaria — how lively
was the discussion! This lively interest showed
the maturity of the party. We are past the
stage of theoretical debates about platforms.
The establishment, elaboration and clarifying of
our program we leave to science, which in our
present society is the business of only a few.
But the practical application of our program,
and the tactics of the party are the business of
all j here all work together.

The supreme importance of tactics and the
necessity of maintaining its class struggle char-
acter, is something the party has been well con-
scious of from the beginning. If we read the
proceedings of the early conventions held in
the 70s we find that in all questions of tactics the
thought was continually kept in the foreground
that the party must be kept clean from all mix-
ture with all other parties, every one of which,
no matter how much they differed from each
other or how furiously they fought among them-
selves, stood upon the ground of bourgeois so-



40 NO C0MPB01O8B.

cietv as a common basis. This separation of the
Social Democracy from all other parties, this
essential difference, which silly opponents take
as a reason or pretext for declaring us political
outlaws, is our pride and our strength.

In the Hamburg convention, where under the
influence of a series of confusing circumstances,
the mass of the delegates appeared decided to
break with the old tactics and traditions, the
party still recovered itself at the last moment
boforo the leap into tho dark and doc la red itsolf
by an overwhelming majority as opposed to
every compromise. And this resolution has re-
mained in force to the present day. If two or
three election districts have been induced to enter
into an alliance with a bourgeois party, this was
done upon their own responsibility and in un-
doubted violation of the Hamburg resolution,
which, let me repeat, was not repealed by the
Stuttgart resolution. On the other hand, the
Berlin comrades, who have been complained of
by the friends of compromise as violators of the
Hamburg resolution, have conscientiously fol-
lowed the spirit and letter of it, and by their
decisive stand maintained the authority of the
supreme party council and performed a service
to the party.

The advocates of compromise tactics overesti-
mate the value of parliamentary activity and
parliamentary representation. Not that I do not
recognize the enormous value of parliamentary
activity, but this is not an end, but only a means
to an end. Our power is not measured by the
number of representatives, but by the total num-
ber of votes that are behind us.

It is a bourgeois feeling to overvalue the pos-
session of representatives. In representation as
in money there is power — power over others.
Whoever places the purity and the greatness of
our party above all else, for him representatives
have value only in so far as they serve to give ex-



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 41

pression to the power and extent of Social De-
mocracy. What do ten, what do a hundred repre-
sentatives signify, when our escutcheon has lost
its gloss through their acquisition f The value
of a representative is small. But the value of the
integrity of our party is immeasurable. In it
rests our strength. As with the shorn hair, that
signified his manhood's honor, the strength of
Samson disappeared, so the strength of our party
would cease if we allowed the bourgeois Delilahs
to flatter away our most precious jewel and the
roots of our triumphal strength— 4he party purity,
the party honor.

WE ABE A PECULIAB PEOPLE.

We may not do as other parties, because we
are not like the others. We are — and this cannot
be too often repeated — separated from all other
parties by an insurmountable barrier, a barrier
that any individual can easily surmount; but
once on the other side of it, and he is no Social
Democrat.

We are different from the others; "we are
other than the others." What for the others are
necessities and conditions of life are death to us.
What is it that has made of us in Germany the
pivotal party, which according to the significant
testimony of Caprivi and the teaching of daily
experience makes us the axle around which gov-
ernmental politics turns f Most assuredly not our
representatives in the Reichstag. We might have
three times as many representatives, and the
allied bourgeois parties would have nothing to
fear from us. No, it is the avalanche-like in-
crease of our supporters that gradually, with the
certainty of a natural law, or more correctly of
a natural force, grows from tens of thousands to
hundreds of thousands, and from hundreds of
thousands to millions, and is daily increasing,
bidding defiance to our opponents and driving



42 NO COMPROMISE.

them into impotent rage. And this avalanche-
like increase has come, and is coming, as a con-
sequence of our opposition to and struggle with
all other parties.

All who are weary and heavy laden; all who
suffer under injustice; all who suffer from the
outrages of the existing bourgeois society; all
who have in them the feeling of the worth of
humanity, look to us, turn hopefully to us, as
the only party that can bring rescue and deliver-
ance. And if we, the opponents of this unjust
world of violence, suddenly reach out the hand of
brotherhood to it, conclude alliances with its
representatives, invite our comrades to go hand
in hand with the enemy whose misdeeds have
driven the masses into our camp, what confusion
must result in their minds I How can the masses
longer believe on usf If the men of the clerical
party, of the progressive party, and the other
boodle parties are our comrades, wherefore then
the struggle against capitalist society, whose rep-
resentatives and champions all of these aref
What reason have we, then, for existence f It
must be that for the hundreds and thousands,
for the millions that have sought salvation under
our banner, it was all a colossal mistake for
them to come to us. If we are not different
from the others, then we are not the right ones
— the Savior is yet to come; and the Social
Democracy was a false Messiah, no better than
the other false ones!

Just in this fact lies our strength, that we are
not like the others, and that we are not only
not like the others, and that we are not simply
different from the others, but that we are their
deadly enemy, who have sworn to storm and
demolish the Bastile of Capitalism, whose de-
fenders all those others are. Therefore we are
only strong when we are alone.

This is not to say that we are to individualize
or to isolate ourselves. We have never lacked



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 43

for company, and we never shall so long as the
fight lasts. On the essentially true but literally
false phrase about a "single reactionary mass,"
the Social Democracy has never believed since it
passed from the realm of theory to that of prac-
tice. We know that the individual members and
divisions of the "single reactionary mass" are in
conflict with each other, and we have always used
these conflicts for our purposes. We have used
opponents against opponents, but have never
allowed them to use us. We have in the person
of Bismarck, the agrarian, fought personified
capitalism and militarism and utilized all his
capitalistic opponents to weaken him; thus we
have used particularism; and thus the bourgeois
democracy. That was, however, no compromise,
not even a momentary truce. Just as little as it
is a compromise or momentary truce when we in
the Reichstag vote against the Agrarians in favor
of some measure of the Progressive party.

This exclusiveness of the German Social De-
mocracy as opposed to other parties is especially
required of us. because of the historical develop-
ment and political conditions of Germany. We
have no revolutionary bourgeois with whom we
might temporarily unite as in France and Bel-
gium.

We have no Democratic institutions that make
it possible for a Social Democrat to take part
in the government side by side with members of
other parties. In Switzerland the government is
little more than an administration, and one chosen
by the people at that. A Social Democrat, as a
member of the government of a canton signifies
little more than a Social Democrat in a com-
mon council. Accordingly our comrades in
Switzerland could vote unreservedly for the gov-
ernment monopoly of grain and brandy without
feeling that the money secured thereby would
be squandered for purposes hostile to the people
and injurious to the community.



44 NO 00MPR0MI8I.

Even in France things are somewhat different
from here, although the government is emphat-
ically a class government (occasionally so in a
degree scarcely equaled by any other govern-
ment) ; yet the relations are so little consolidated,
and the influence of the democracy and of the
social democracy is so great that any permanent
misuse of the governmental powers for reaction-
ary and oppressive purposes is not to be feared.
Accordingly it was possible a few years ago for
the socialist Jaures to introduce a bill in the legis-
lative chamber regarding the grain traffic, which
was externally but little different from the bill
introduced in the German Reichstag by Count
Kanitz of the Agrarian party. Tet the inner dif-
ference was all the greater. In France there is
no agrarian class; the bourgeoisie rules directly,
yet under conditions that would prevent it from
making the means of government — police, army
and class judiciary — the end and purpose of the
state, as in Germany is not only possible, but is
the actual case. We here come again and again
upon the tragical fate that robbed Germany of
the liberal stage of political development. We
have, to be sure, a capitalist class state, and that
in the worst sense of the word, but the bourgeois
capitalism only rules indirectly; it has to be
satisfied to let the purely Catholic clerical party,
the Center, hold the balance of power in the
German house of representatives, and to let the
Prussian agrarian class, a backward anachron-
istic class, that has no essential function to fulfill
either in political or economic life, and has a
purely parasitical existence, control the adminis-
tration. The result of this is that the social
democracy of Germany must fulfill the role of
champions of political freedom. The task of
uniting the struggle for economic independence
with that for political liberty has fallen upon the
German laboring class; in other words, besides
performing its own class mission, it must do



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 45

what in normally developed lands was long ago
done by the bourgeoisie.

THE INCLINED PLANE OF COMPROMISE.

All parties without exception recognize us as
a political power, and exactly in proportion to our
power. Even the craziest reactionary that 'denies
us the right of existence courts our favor and
by his acts gives the lie to his words. From the
fact that our assistance is sought by other parties,
some of our comrades draw the strange conclu-
sion that we should reverse the party tactics, and
in place of the old policy of the class struggle
against all other parties, substitute the commer-
cial politics of log rolling, wire pulling and com-
promise. Such persons forget that the power
which makes our alliance sought for, even by
our bitterest enemies, would have had absolutely
no existence were it not for the old class struggle
tactics. If Marx, Engels and Lassalle had ac-
cepted from Bernstein and his modest or not
modest fellow thinkers the tactics of compromise
and dependence upon bourgeois parties, then there
never would have been any Social Democracy;
we would have been simply the tail of the Pro-
gressive party. That we accept as a part of our
tactics the utilization of the quarrels among the
bourgeois parties is self-explaining. And this
course has been followed ever since we have
had a German Social Democracy. To recognize
this, we do not need the counsel of the newly
baked party statesmen. That we have here and
there worked with the Center or the Progressive
party against a reactionary governmental party
is understood by the comrades without the neces-
sity of a special party manifesto. And in different
election districts we have obtained greater ad-
vantages by co-operation with the Center party
without fusion than through the recent alliance in
Bavaria. One rule does not fit every case.

We Social Democrats dare not be like the



46 NO COMPROMISE.

other parties, all of whom are equally guilty of
the injustices of the present system and equally
responsible for them. Every one who suffers
under these injustices looks to us for deliverance.
Every one of us has had these victims of society
after failing to get justice from the courts, from
the government, from the Emperor himself, and
from all the other parties, come to us as the last
and only ones that can help them. They do not
know our scientific program; thoy do not know
what capital and capitalism mean; but they have
the belief, the feeling, that we are a party that
can help when all other parties fail This belief
is for us an inexhaustible source of power. It
was a similar faith of despair that spread more
and more in the decaying Roman empire and
slowly undermined the heathen world until it
finally collapsed. We give up this inexhaustible
source of power if we ally ourselves with other
parties and drive suffering humanity from us by
saying to it: "We are not essentially different
from tho others." Once the boundary line of
the class struggle is wiped away and we have
started upon the inclined plane of compromise,
there is no stopping. Then we can only go
down and down until there is nothing deeper.
We have had many instructive experiences of
this in the Beichstag. Practical politics com-
pelled us to make concessions to the society
in which we lived. But every step on the
way of concessions to present society was
,hard for us, and was only done with reluc-
tance. There are some who ridicule us for this.
But he who fears to take a step on the inclined
plane is at all events a more trustworthy com-
rade than he who pours out scorn upon the
cautious one.

The catch word "revolution" is certainly ridicu-
lous. Ridiculous it certainly is — and no one has
expressed this more clearly than I myself — to
drop the words ' ' revolution ' ' and * ' revolutionary ' '



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 47

out of the mouth at every opportunity. It can
become as mechanical a song as saying one's
beads. But ridiculous as it is to boast of be-
longing to the party and to express one's views
at every opportunity when there is no necessity
for it, still such exaggerations do not justify us
in throwing away the good with the bad, and
declaring that to emphasize the revolutionary
character of our party is, under all circumstances,
ridiculous. To emphasize it is a very serious
and a very necessary thing. It is serious, be-
cause membership in the social democracy means
a struggle, a political struggle with grievous per-
secutions, and a private struggle for existence, a
struggle that for the majority is far more difficult
and heavy than the political struggle. And it is
necessary, because the courage for this twofold
struggle is created only by the consciousness that
the injustice of society by which the great ma-
jority of mankind are to-day oppressed, cor-
rupted and crippled, can only be abolished
through a revolutionary movement, that is, a
movement that shall completely exterminate capi-
talism with every fiber of its roots.

I know that it has here and there become the
fashion to laugh at the warning about sliding
down inclined planes. They refer us to the fable
of the sheep and the wolf. The comparison
limps, however, and finally turns against the
laugher. The wolf was actually there and at
last broke into the fold. And in our case it is
also no imaginary danger from which we are
warned. And at all events the interests of the
party are at least as carefully guarded by tho
warners as by the scorners. Heretofore distrust
was counted as a democratic virtue, and over-
confidence as a democratic vice. Here and there
are found persons who would reverse this maxim.

BLUECHER'S MOTTO.

The proletariat stands politically as well as



socially in the most abrupt contradiction to the
present class state. It must fight it on all fields
and upon every question, both of domestic and
of foreign policy. To be sure it is not always
easy to decide rightly. Where the interests are
not clearly visible the feelings may be easily de-
ceived. Fortunately we have at the points where
|t is hardest to decide an infallible compass in
the actions of our enemies. If there are questions
on which we can temporarily unite with them it
is still inconceivable that anything that is fought
for by our enemies as a question of great im-
portance, or especially as of vital importance to
them, can be desirable for the proletariat. We
shall never go wrong if we do what is opposed to
the interests of our enemy. On the other hand,
we shall almost never go right if we do what
our enemies applaud. Historical development is
a continuous conflict, a conflict of interests, a
conflict of races, a conflict of classes. And if
friendship does not count even in ordinary busi-
ness, how much less so in such a conflict. Good-
naturedness and sentimentality have no place in
politics. They have never won a victory, but
have brought unnumbered defeats. Bluecher's
motto, "Always follow the eannon's roar and
throw yourself upon the enemy," is the best rule
also in political warfare.

Just a word in this connection. The class in-
stinct of the bourgeoisie is far better developed
than that of the proletariat. The governing
class naturally knows its interests better than
the governed, who have so much less opportunity
to become informed and are also sometimes in-
tentionally, and sometimes not, systematically de-
ceived and misled from a recognition of their
interests. Do not say that it is the rough form
in which socialism is often set forth that frightens
and embitters the bourgeoisie. That is absolutely
false. It is not the form; it is the content which
they detest; and the more harmless the form so



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 49

much the more dangerous do the contents appear
to the gentlemen of the bourgeoisie. The fineness
of the form makes no difference to them. That is
clear from the manner in which they fight out
their quarrels among themselves.

What a lot of abuse and fiction has been
brought out about "Toelke's club!" "Toelke's
club'* really never touched any one un gently.
But club tactics has existed in Germany for
decades, and has even yet not wholly disap-
peared. But it is not laborers and also not
socialists with whom the club counts, as the
ultima ratio, the conclusive argument. It is the
tactics of the noblest of the nation, the national
liberals, who in the middle and southwestern por-
tions of Germany organized battalions of brawl-
ing club heroes, and thereby sought to retain
their political domains through a brutal terror-
ism. But the advancing social democracy has
well nigh stamped them out.

COMPROMISES LIKE TREATIES ARE NOT
KEPT.

At any rate we may be sure that the political
instinct of our bourgeois opponents, as soon as
their class interests come into play, will lead them
to take a position hostile to us. A classical ex-
ample is furnished by Belgium, where, as already
remarked, a compromise was concluded under
the most favorable circumstances conceivable,
between the socialists and the liberals. Our
party was in undisputed possesion of the loader-
ship and was therefore in no danger of being
cheated out of the fruits of the common victory.
The end sought was universal, equal and direct
suffrage. But the clerical party knows its boys,
knows its Pappenheimers. It knows that the
bourgeoisie has no class interest in giving the
laborers, who, in modern industrial states, con
stitute a majority of the population, the uni-
versal suffrage and thereby the prospect of win-



50 no coifPROinsi.

ning a majority and getting political supremacy.
It made a counter demand for proportional rep-
resentation with plural voting, that is, giving
more votes to the rich, and thereby granting to
the radical bourgeoisie a share in the govern-
ment, if it would assist in defeating universal
and direct suffrage. And behold, without a min-
ute's hesitation the gentlemen of the radical bour-
geoisie broke their agreement with the socialists
and joined the clericals in their fight against
universal suffrage and the social democracy.
Whoever is not convinced by this example that
the emancipation struggle of the proletariat is a
class struggle is one on whom further arguments
would be wasted.

There is no political party upon whose firm
support the social democracy can reckon. And
every assistance that we can possibly expect from
bourgeois parties in the complications of political
life must, if we act skillfully, come to us anyhow
without compromise. It is the same with com-
promises and fusions between parties as with
treaties between nations. They are observed so
long, and only so long, as they are in the interest
of the parties concerned. When common inter-
ests exist, however, no compromise, fusion or
contract is necessary. Suppose, to cite an actual
instance, suppose the securing of six more repre-
sentatives in the legislature was of great im-
portance to our party in Bavaria; with the
strength and influence which our party had it
could have found a way to get them without any
"cattle trade." The strengthening of the Center
party, aside from the question of principles, was
a great tactical error. This error was all the
greater in that it checked the process of dissolu-
tion which the Center party is now undergoing.
This party holds together so long as the laborers
who come within the sphere of its influence have
not yet attained to class consciousness, have not
yet learned to set their class interests above their



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 51

sectarian interests; this is a process which the
economic development necessarily carries along
with itself, and which we aim to hasten by our
propaganda. In Offenbach and other election
districts this has been so far attained that in tho
last election the majority of the Catholics voted
for our candidates on the first ballot instead of for
the candidates of their own party. The class
struggle tactics is not only more correct in prin-
ciple; it is also more practical and successful than
compromise tactics.

The standpoint of utility, which was empha-
sized by the advocates of the Bavarian compro-
mise, is certainly a very useful point, but there
are other factors than utility which must be
taken into consideration. The purity of our prin-
ciples, the idealism of our struggle, these are
factors of strengthening and drawing power that
have given to us courage for all our battles, and
have given to our doctrines an irresistible at-
traction for all who feel themselves oppressed
and have a sense of honor. Certainly the alliance
with the Center party was very useful; it has
given us half a dozen legislative votes; but what
is it Gretchen sayst

"How scornfully I once reviled
When some poor maiden was beguiled I
More speech than any tongue suffices
I craved to censure others' vices.
Black as it seemed I blackened still,
And blacker yet was in my will;
And blessed myself and boasted high —
And now — a living sin am I ! ' '

Yes, how bravely we could once scold at the
political log rollers, especially at the black ones!
We painted them blacker than black. And to-
day! We dare not do all that our opponents do.
We dare not sacrifice everything for advantages.
For what is an advantage to our opponents is
deadly poison to us. The nobility say of them-



52 NO COMPROMISE.

selves, noblesse oblige; so we may say, sooialistne
oblige, socialism imposes its obligations.

If tactics prescribes or allows us to obligate
ouselves to our opponents in order to attain a
temporary success by a. temporary alliance, then
Schuhwacher in Sobngen acted as a good tacti-
cian in the opportunist sense by fusing with the
Progressive party last year at the Reichstag elec-
tions to rescue the party from us. He did not
become a bourgeois, not at all; he only used the
bourgeoisie to overthrow us, the false socialists,
and to help true socialism on to victory, just as
Millerand is going to crush out militarism by a
compact with Gallifet and Waldeck-Bousseau.
Schuhmacher can give exactly the same reasons
for his action as Millerand can for his. Treason
to the party is what we call it.

With the growth of Social Democracy and
with its entrance into fields hitherto dominated
by other parties, and with the extension of our
practical activity, we come more and more fre-
quently into momentary unions, or momentary
relations with other parties. But these momen-
tary relations must never become momentary
alliances. We must never bind the party. We
must always keep our hand free; exploit the con-
ditions; let our opponents do the dirty work for
us; and with the goal of the party firmly in mind,
keep in the middle of the road, and go our own
way, only going along with opposing parties
when our way happens to be the same as theirs.
That we are a party of the class struggle, who
have nothing in common with any other party,
and who have to fight and conquer all other
parties, in order to attain our goal, is something
which we must never for a mome nt Jo se sight or.

MILLERAND.

Concerning the case of Millerand, and the
question of party union, I wrote at the invitatioa
of the French comrades, on the occasion of the



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 53

last anual convention of the Labor Party (the
Marxists) at Epernay, the following letter:

"Dear Friends; You know that I have made
it a rule not to interfere with the affairs of the
socialists in other countries. But as you wish to
know my opinion on the burning question that
is occupying the attention of the whole laboring
and socialist portion of France, and as many of
your countrymen, who have wholly different
views upon this question from yours, have also
turned to me, I have no longer any reason to
withhold my opinion. The situation with which
you are now occupied in France is at bottom not
a foreign affair as to Germans.

1 ' The internationality of socialism is a f act that
is daily becoming more evident and more signifi-
cant. We socialists are one nation to ourselves,
•—one and the same international nation in all
the lands of the earth. And the capitalists with
their agents, instruments and dupes are likewise
an international nation, so that we can truthfully
say, there are to-day only two great nations in
all lands that battle with each other in the great
class struggle, which is the new revolution — a
class struggle on one side of which stands the
proletariat, representing socialism, and on the
other the bourgeoisie, representing capitalism.

"While the bourgeois world of capitalism con-
tinues and the bourgeoisie rules, so long are all
states necessarily class states, and all governments
class governments, serving the purposes and in-
terests of the ruling class, and destined to lead tho
class struggle for the bourgeoisie against the pro-
letariat — for capitalism against socialism, for our
enemies and against us. From the standpoint of
tho class struggle which is the foundation of mili-
tant socialism, that is a truth which has been
raised by the logic of thought and of facts be-
yond the possibility of a doubt. A socialist who
goes into a bourgeois government, either goes
over to the enemy or else puts himself in the



54 HO OOltPitOMISl.

power of the enemy, la any case th» socialist
who becomes a member of a bourgeois govern-
ment separates himself from us, the militant so-
cialists. He mar claim to be a socialist but he
is no longer such. He may be convinced of his
own sincerity, but in that case he has not com-
prehended the nature of the class struggle— does
not understand that the class struggle is the
basis of socialism.

" In these days, under the rule of capitalism, a
government, even if it is full of philanthropy
and animated by the best of intentions, can do
nothing of real value to our cause. One must
keep free from illusions. Decades ago, I said:
'If the way to hell is paved with good intentions,
the way to defeat is paved with illusions. ' In the
present society, a non-capitalist government is
an impossibility. The unfortunate socialist who
casts in his lot with such a government if he will
not betray his class only condemns himself to
impotency. The English bourgeoisie offers the
best example of weakening the opposition by per-
mitting them to participate in the government.
It has become the traditional policy of all parties
in England that the most radical member of the
opposition who is naive enough to be taken in
should be given a place in the government. This
man serves as a shield to the government and
disarms his friends who cannot shoot at him —
just as in battle one may not shoot at the host-
ages that the enemy has placed in front of itself.

"That is my answer concerning the question of
the entrance of a socialist into a bourgeois gov-
ernment.

' ' Now, aa to the second question : The question
of unity and agreement. The answer is dictated
to me by the interests and principles of the party.
I am for the unity of the party— for the national
and international unity of the party. But it must
be a unity of socialism and socialists. The unity
with opponents — with people who have other



1T0 POLITICAL TRADING. 65

aims and other interests, is no socialist unity. We
must strive for unity at any price and with all
sacrifices. But while we are uniting and organ-
izing, we must rid ourselves of all foreign and
antagonistic elements. What would one say of
a general who in the enemy's country sought
to fill the ranks of his army with recruits from
the ranks of the enemy! Would that not be the
height of foolishness f Very well, to take into
our army — which is an army for the class strug-
gle and the class war — opponents, soldiers with
aims and interests entirely opposite to our own,
—that would be madness, that would be suicide.

"On the ground of the class struggle we are
invincible; if we leave it we are lost, because we
are no longer socialists. The strength and power
of socialism rests in the fact that we are leading
a class struggle; that the laboring class is ex-
ploited and oppressed by the capitalist class, and
that within capitalist society effectual reforms,
which will put an end to class government and
class exploitation, are impossible.

"We cannot traffic in our principles, we can
make no compromise, no agreement with the rul-
ing system. We must break with the ruling
system and fight it to a finish. It must fall that
socialism may arise, and we certainly cannot ex-
pect from tho ruling class that it will give to
itself and its domination the death blow. The
International Workingmen's Association accord-
ingly preached that 'The emancipation of the
laboring class must be the work of the laborers
themselves. '

"Undoubtedly there are bourgeois who from a
feeling of justice and humanity place themselves
upon the side of the laborers and socialists, but
these are only the exceptions; the mass of the
bourgeoisie has class consciousness, a conscious-
ness of being the ruling and exploiting class.
Indeed, the mass of the bourgeoisie, just because
they are a ruling class, have a much sharper and



M NO COMPROMISE.

stronger class consciousness than the proletariat.

"I conclude: You have asked my opinion, and
I hare given it to you. It is for you to do what
the interests and principles of the party de-
mand that you should do.

"Fraternal greeting to the convention at Eper-
nay. Long live the France of the socialists and
the laborers 1 Long live international socialism 1

"Weimar, Aug. 10, 1899. W. Likbkmkcht. ' '

I have nothing to add to my letter. The events
since then have justified it. The presence of a
socialist in the government has accomplished
nothing and prevented nothing that could not
have been accomplished or prevented without
this presence. On the other hand, in so far as
the Social Democracy has caused or endorsed
the entrance of a socialist into the government it
has become in part responsible for all the sins of
omission and of commission done by the govern-
ment during the time in which a socialist was a
member.

THE SITUATION IN FBANCE.

It may be said in excuse or justification that
they have acted under extraordinary conditions,
—to rescue the republic, which would otherwise
have been lost. This excuse will not stand ex-
amination. The republic of France is not upheld
by a few men in the government, including the
socialist, but by the French laborers with whom
the greater part of the peasants and small bour-
geoisie stand side by side, and also by the great
majority of the French people, who do not allow
themselves to be led astray by the priests, nor
coerced by the reactionary capitalists. Militar-
ism is by far less strong and dangerous in France
than in Germany, and the French army is to a
much greater extent than in Germany a people's
army. The army is as large as in Germany, al-
though the population is fifteen million less; it
contains therefore a larger per cent of the total



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 57

population. France is actually at the point where
it must break with the Prussian-German military
system which it adopted after the war of 1870-71 ;
it must either do as the minister of war, General
Gallifet. has recommended — replace it with a
well-drilled Praetorian Guard — or enter at once
upon the militia system, and arm every person
capable of bearing arms. A coup d'etat is im-
possible with such an army. No matter how re-
actionary a portion of the officers may be, the
mass of soldiers are too close to the people
to be used for such purposes.

If, as has been represented to us, the actual
formation of the Waldcck-Rousseau Ministry
was necessary to protect the republic against a
coup d'etat, then the republican sentiment of the
French protetariat was security enough for the
government — in every way a far better security
than the participation of a socialist in the cabinet.

The circumstance that the chief of this min-
istry was a particularly clear-cut capitalist, and
that the Minister of War was one of the most
notorious "saberers M of the "Little Napoleon,"
and one of the most bloodthirsty murderers of
the Communists, made the impropriety of Miller-
and's action all the more evident. But even if
in place of Waldeck-Rousseau there had been a
genuine Democrat, as for example, Brisson, and
in place of Gallifet an honorable soldier not yet
stained with laborers' blood, the step would have
been no less objectionable from our standpoint,
though it would not have wounded the feelings
so much.

Class antagonism accompanied by the class strug-
gle is now an existing fact. The state is, so loug
as this class opposition and class struggle exists,
necessarily a class state, and the government of
this state, with like necessity, is a class govern-
ment. The socialist who allows himself to be-
come a member of such a government will soon
lose his class-consciousness, if he has not already



58 NO COMPROMISE.

laid it down at the door of the cabinet, like a
Mohammedan does his shoes at the entrance of
the mosque, unless he has the courage to seise
the first opportunity offered for a conflict and a
break.

I do not care to busy myself with the purely
scholastic question as to whether a case might
ever possibly arise in which a socialist should
enter into a non-socialist government. Such an
occasion could only arise after a catastrophic
overthrow of the state, for example, during the
course of a world war, when the government of
a class state had broken down without the neces-
sary elements being yet present for the formation
of a socialist state.

Such an occasion has certainly not yet arisen
in France, and perhaps the last persons whose
mission it is to "rescue the Republic" are just
these same Waldeck-Rousseau and Gallifet. It
is the Socialist party which was and is and re-
mains the only party whose mission it is to be
the rescuer and safeguard of the Republic, and
this with or without Millerand.

Guesde and Lafargue, the leading representa-
tives of scientific socialism in France, have set
forth in a scathing critique of " Ministerial ' ' op-
portunist socialism, the distinction between the
activity of a member of a popularly elected body
and an officer of an executive body of the govern-
ment itself of the established state. The officials
and the government are the organs of class rule,
who must from their very nature act in the inter-
ests of the ruling class. The participation in a
popularly elected body (Reichstag, legislature,
common council, etc.) is on the contrary an ex-
pression of popular sovereignty, which, though
it is subject to the influences of the class rule,
is really above it, and is the only power that can
make an end of it. The representatives of the
Social Democracy in such popular bodies are
like the basalt blocks, which, pushed up from the



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 59

interior of the earth, have broken through the
sandstone and slate strata:— they arise from tho
heart of the people, are a part of the people, and
have in themselves the right and the power of
popular sovereignty, which overtops and domin-
ates all political and social matters. They are
not there by the grace of the powers that be, but
against their will, and in spite of their power-
servants to be sure, but honorable servants, ser-
vants, not of the possessors of power, but of the
people, who have chosen them to secure the reali-
zation of their sovereign will. Therefore, it is
fundamentally incorrect to designate our activity
in the Reichstag and other representative bodies
as a compromise with the ruling powers. To bo
sure, wo have to work there together with our
enemies, but as an independent power, exercising
the mandates we have received from the people.
That is no co-operation upon the basis of com-
mon views and aims; it is a labor that is a
battle — a mutual struggle, a measuring of forces,
whose play, direction and intensity, according to
the eternal law of the parallelogram of forces,
results in legislation and government.

It is in the nature of things that out of this
mutual wrestling and struggle, changing groups
and momentary contacts should result; to call
such momentary groupings compromises is a
pure distortion of terms. A coming together
as a result of conditions, and a working and
striving in the same direction owing to circum-
stances, is just as little a contract, an alliance or
a compromise, as the reciprocal touching of the
pieces of glass in a kaleidoscope is a contract, an
alliance or a compromise. Whether the shaking
power is a mechanical one, or is the force of
organized law is all the same. Such approaches
are without any obligations, are productions of
the moment, born of the moment and swept away
with the moment.

It is no less incorrect to compare co-operation



6t NO COMPROMISE.

at iecond ballotings to Buch alliances as were
proposed for the Prussian legislative elections
and as were actually made for the Bavarian elec-
tions. Such co-operation is only an episode of
the battle at the polls which is fought by the
party as a whole. After the first and chief elec-
tion day an after battle follows, in which the un-
decided points are fought out. That we, in these
subsequent elections in electoral districts where
we cannot ourselves put up a candidate,
should vote for that one of the opposition can-
didates whose election offers the most advant-
ages to our party, is a requirement of elementary
intelligence. I previously advocated this as an
act of self-evident desirability at a time when
some of those who are to-day enthusiastic for a
participation in the Prussian legislative elections
accused me of a half-betrayal of our principles.
If, at a time when an exception law exists, or is
in sight, we did not give our votes in these special
elections to that one of two bourgeois candidates
who was opposed to the exception law, we should
be asses deserving the cudgel. But that is no
compromise. We pledge ourselves to nothing,
we sacrifice no principle, we sacrifice no interest;
on the contrary, we act solely in our own in-
terest, which we should have injured had we
acted otherwise. The obligations rest upon our
opponents. This tactics is so simple and natural
that it was only brought into question for a time
by an unclear hobby-riding of principles; as soon
as the party leaders ceased to recommend this
tactics, the rank and file of the party, following
a sound instinct, carried it out anyhow over the
heads of those leaders. And from time to time a
special line of action was decided upon for each
particular case. No trafficking, no underhand
work; open and above board we attack the ene-
my; and where two enemies stand in opposition,
ene of whom must win the mandate, we strike the
most dangerous of the two to earth. This is a



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 61

policy of fighting such as befits a fighting party.

In the original elections for the Reichs-
tag, we are a fighting party that by its own
strength wins its share in the popular representa-
tion. We offer battle front to all parties, not
even excepting those for whose members we may
vote at the supplemental elections as the interest
of our party may require. But in the Prussian
legislative elections it is impossible for us to win
a single representative by our own strength; in
order to gain ono or more it is necessary to turn
to a bourgeois party and make a political trade
with them. In the Reichstag elections we are
the strongest party in Germany, but in the Prus-
sian legislative elections we are the weakest of
all, indeed, completely helpless; because under
the "worst of all election laws' ' we have, to be
sure, a vote, but our vote is rendered nugatory,
and a mandate can only be secured under the
condition that we become dumb voting cattle of
a bourgeois party.

In the Bavarian legislative election things are
somewhat different. In Bavaria, the election laws
do not make it impossible to secure a mandate.
This does not argue in favor of a compromise,
butj on the contrary, places the "cattle trade,"
which took place this summer, in a still worse
light

I will not here enter upon the grounds of oppo-
sition to participating in the Prussian legislative
election. The demoralization through the change
of front in the Reichstag elections and the legis-
lative elections, the confusion in the minds, the
loosening of discipline, and above all the obliter-
ation of the class struggle character of our party
has been already, and by myself among others,
so often and so emphatically set forth that I will
not tire the reader by a repetition.

Only one thing more.

If the bourgeois parties still had any vitality
left they would not need our help to secure a



62 NO COMPROMISE.

victory in the Prussian legislative elections. The
first two classes belong to the bourgeois electors.
No one can rob them of a majority if they do not
themselves surrender it. How then can we help
themf Can one make the lame or the drunk
walkf One can help them up, but as soon as one
lets go they fall to the ground like an empty
sack. We cannot escape this dilemma; either the
bourgeoisie still has political vitality— in which
case they do not need our help; or they do not
have it, and in that case our help would be use-
less. Can we be expected to make an alliance
with a corpse!

INDEPENDENT ACTION IS THE ONLY
THING THAT IS PRACTICAL.

Fault has been found because I said in a news-
paper article that a new anti-socialist law would
be a less evil than the abolition of class antagon-
ism and party lines through fusion with the Prus-
sian Progressive party in the legislative elections.
The more I consider it the more I am convinced
of the correctness of this position. What is to
become of our party if we allow ourselves to be
pressed out of the path of our principles by
threatened or threatening dangers and disadvant-
ages! Fear is proverbially a poor adviser for
human action; for a party it is destruction. Fear
of the labor movement and socialism has caused
the political downfall of the German bourgeoisie;
and the days of the Social Democracy are num-
bered as soon as tho cry of fear finds a response
in us. We should not challenge, but we should
not sound the alarm and be misled by fear into
taking steps that do not accord with the princi-
ples, the nature and the honor of our party. One
does not disarm an enemy through timidity and
gentleness; one simply emboldens him. Not
that we should seek to run our heads through a
wall. We wish to be and must be "practical."
But has this ever been denied or questioned! We



NO POLITICAL TRADING. 63

have always been "practical," Bernstein to the
contrary notwithstanding. We have always based
our efforts on existing conditions and worked
methodically with our eye upon the goal. In
cities, states and empire, all reasonable improve-
ments have at least been supported, if not pro-
posed by the Social Democracy. Think only of
the greatest of all reforms, the reform of the
social evil, in which the government, if it does
not wish to build ruins or air castles, must take
hold of the demands made by us over ten years
ago.

We can say of ourselves, that not only are we
practical, but that we are the only practical party,
—practical in the sense of reasonable. Only those
who recognize the organic laws of development
and systematically strive in harmony with them
towards a definite goal are practical. And this is
the way we work. Our opponents either do not
know these laws, or else if they recognize them
they seek to bend or break them. Whoever seeks
to compel water to run up hill is certainly not
practical, and such is the foolish aim of our op-
ponents. To be sure it has been said that the
laborers cannot alone secure the emancipation of
the laboring class: that the intelligent and cul-
tured elements of the other classes must co-
operate with them. We are pointed to the many
measures useful to the laboring class which are
enacted or supported by the bourgeois parties.
But this is sophistical reasoning. For (and on
this point the evidence of Bismarck is decisive)
none of these social reform measures, and surely
they are few enough, would ever have been en-
acted without the initiative and the pressure of
the proletariat and the Social Democracy.

Bernstein claims that socialism is the ultimate
outcome of liberalism. To claim this is to abso-
lutely deny the existence of any class antagonism.

This sentence was reversed by Miquel, my
former comrade in communismo, and present



64 NO COMPROMISE.

Chancellor in re, so as to read, liberalism ifl
the ultimate outcome of communism. And that
the liberalism of Miquel is very near to conserv-
atism, in the German sense, that is, to the agra-
rian medieval ideal of personal bondage, every
one knows who has ears to hear and eyes to see.

No, Social Democracy must remain for itself,
must seek for and generate its power within itself.
Every power outside of ourselves on which we
seek to lean is for us only weakness. In the
consciousness of our strength, in our faith in the
world-conquering mission of socialism lies the
secret of our extraordinary, almost miraculous
success.

Islam was unconquerable so long as it trusted
in itself alone and saw an enemy in every non-
Mohammedan. From the moment when Islam
entered upon the path of compromise and united
with the non-Mohammedan, the so-called civil-
ized powers, its conquering power was gone. With
Islam it could not have been otherwise. It was
not the true world redeeming faith. Socialism,
however, is this, and socialism cannot conquer
nor redeem the world if it ceases to believe upon
itself alone.

Therefore, we will not turn from the old tactics,
nor from the old program. Ever advancing with
science and economic development, we are what
we were and we will remain what we are.

Or— the Social Democracy will cease to exist.



atil*



This book is a preservation photocopy

produced on Weyerhaeuser acid free

Cougar Opaque 50# book weight paper,

which meets the requirements of

ANSI/NISO 239.48-1992 (permanence of paper)

Preservation photocopying and binding

by

Acme Bookbinding

Charlestown, Massachusetts

£Q

1995



I
Capital: Volume One

CApiTAl

VoLume One

The Process of ProcHjctlon of Capita!

Written: 1867

Source: First english edition of 1887 (4th German edition changes included as indicated).

Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, USSR

First Published: 1887

Translated: Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling — edited by Fredrick Engels

Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1995, 1999

Transcribed: Zodiac, Hinrich Kuhls, Allan Thurrott, Bill McDorman, Bert Schultz and Martha Gimenez

(1995-1996)

HTML Markup: Stephen Baird and Brian Basgen (1999)

Download: Macintosh I Windows



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm (1 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:14:50]



Capital: Volume One



CO IN TEN IS:



Has Kapital



Kiritilt der politisclien O&konomiy.



V.n



Karl Marx.



Rr«iti Bind.

(■Ill br Prn<4iLlJrtilpT#etH Jll K If 11 1



Pu PHhl «rr g^hluljihl *ir4 "KHM



HjinL'Lr;

V^rfkg ™n OlLu M«Saaer-
l*6T,

Niir-Viit: J-. V. 3cbmi*. 11 B.«l»y-Sn**L.



Cover of the original 1 867
[German] edition



Prefaces and Afterwords

Part I: Commodities and Money

Ch. 1 : Commodities

Ch. 2: Exchange

Ch. 3: Money, or the Circulation of Commodities

Part II: The Transformation of Money in Capital

Ch. 4: The General Formula for Capital

Ch. 5: Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital

Ch. 6: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm (2 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:14:50]



Capital: Volume One



Part III: The Production of Absolute Surplus- Value

Ch. 7: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus-Value

Ch. 8: Constant Capital and Variable Capital

Ch. 9: The Rate of Surplus-Value

Ch. 10: The Working-Day

Ch. 1 1 : Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value



Part IV: Production of Relative Surplus Value

Ch. 12: The Concept of Relative Surplus- Value
Ch. 13: Co-operation

Ch. 14: Division of Labour and Manufacture
Ch. 15: Machinery and Modern Industry



Part V: The Production of Absolute and of Relative Surplus- Value

Ch. 16: Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value

Ch. 17: Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value

Ch. 18: Various Formula for the Rate of Surplus-Value



Part VI: Wages

Ch. 19: The Transformation of the Value (and Respective Price) of Labour-Power into Wages

Ch. 20: Time-Wages

Ch. 21: Piece-Wages

Ch. 22: National Differences of Wages



Part VII: The Accumulation of Capital

Ch. 23: Simple Reproduction

Ch. 24: Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital

Ch. 25: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation



Part VIII: Primitive Accumulation

Ch. 26: The Secret of Primitive Accumulation

Ch. 27: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land

Ch. 28: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing down of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm (3 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:14:50]



Capital: Volume One

Wages by Acts of Parliament

Ch. 29: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer

Ch. 30: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial

Capital

Ch. 31: Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist

Ch. 32: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation

Ch. 33: The Modern Theory of Colonisation

( full table of contents listing)

Marx/Engels Works Index I Marxists Internet Archive



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm (4 of 4) [23/08/2000 16:14:50]



Capital Vol. I — Prefaces and Afterwords

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Prefaces and Afterwords



1867: Dedication to Wilhelm Wolff

1867: Preface to the First German Edition (Marx)

1872: Preface to the French Edition (Marx)

1873: Afterword to the Second German Edition (Marx)

1875: Afterword to the French Edition (Marx)

1883: Preface to the Third German Edition (Engels)

1886: Preface to the English Edition (Engels)

1890: Preface to the Fourth German Edition (Engels)

1867: Marx's thank you letter to Engels



Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/part0.htm [23/08/2000 16:14:55]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Parti:

Commodities and Money



CHAPTER ONE:
COMMODITIES



Contents

Section 1 - The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use-Value and Value
Section 2 - The Two-fold Character of the Labour Embodied in Commodities
Section 3 - The Form of Value or Exchange-Value

A. Elementary or Accidental Form of Value

1. The Two Poles of the Expression of Value: Relative Form and Equivalent Form

2. The Relative Form of Value

a. The Nature and Import of this Form

b. Quantitative Determination of Relative Value

3. The Equivalent Form of Value

4. The Elementary Form of Value Considered as a Whole

B. Total or Expanded Form of Value

1. The Expanded Relative Form of Value

2. The Particular Equivalent Form

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded Form of Value

C. The General Form of Value

1. The Altered Character of the Form of Value

2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and of the Equivalent Form

3. Transition from the General Form of Value to the Money-Form

D. The Money-Form

Section 4 - The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (1 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One



SECTION 1

THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY:

USE-VALUE AND VALUE

(THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE)



The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails, presents itself as "an
immense accumulation of commodities," £1} its unit being a single commodity. Our investigation must
therefore begin with the analysis of a commodity.

A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by its properties satisfies human
wants of some sort or another. The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the
stomach or from fancy, makes no difference. [2} Neither are we here concerned to know how the object
satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence, or indirectly as means of production.

Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c, may be looked at from the two points of view of quality and
quantity. It is an assemblage of many properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways. To
discover the various uses of things is the work of history. [3] So also is the establishment of
socially-recognized standards of measure for the quantities of these useful objects. The diversity of these
measures has its origin partly in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured, partly in convention.

The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. [4] But this utility is not a thing of air. Being limited by the
physical properties of the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. A commodity, such
as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a use-value, something useful.
This property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful
qualities. When treating of use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite quantities, such as
dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The use-values of commodities furnish the material for
a special study, that of the commercial knowledge of commodities. [51 Use- values become a reality only
by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the social form
of that wealth. In the form of society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material
depositories of exchange- value.

Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative relation, as the proportion in which values
in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort, [6] a relation constantly changing with time
and place. Hence exchange-value appears to be something accidental and purely relative, and
consequently an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that is inseparably connected with, inherent in
commodities, seems a contradiction in terms. [71 Let us consider the matter a little more closely.

A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x blacking, y silk, or z gold, &c. — in
short, for other commodities in the most different proportions. Instead of one exchange-value, the wheat
has, therefore, a great many. But since x blacking, y silk, or z gold &c, each represents the
exchange- value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk, z gold, &c, must, as exchange- values, be



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (2 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

replaceable by each other, or equal to each other. Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given
commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, generally, is only the mode of
expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in it, yet distinguishable from it.

Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The proportions in which they are exchangeable,
whatever those proportions may be, can always be represented by an equation in which a given quantity
of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: e.g., 1 quarter corn = x cwt. iron. What does this equation tell
us? It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter of corn and x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal
quantities something common to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in itself is
neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far as it is exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to
this third.

A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In order to calculate and compare the areas of
rectilinear figures, we decompose them into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by
something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the product of the base multiplied by
the altitude. In the same way the exchange-values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in
terms of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or less quantity.

This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other natural property of
commodities. Such properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the utility of those
commodities, make them use-values. But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act characterised
by a total abstraction from use-value. Then one use-value is just as good as another, provided only it be
present in sufficient quantity. Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as another, if the
values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in things of equal value.... An hundred pounds'
worth of lead or iron, is of as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold. " [8] As
use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as exchange-values they are merely
different quantities, and consequently do not contain an atom of use-value.

If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of commodities, they have only one common property
left, that of being products of labour. But even the product of labour itself has undergone a change in our
hands. If we make abstraction from its use-value, we make abstraction at the same time from the material
elements and shapes that make the product a use-value; we see in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or
any other useful thing. Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight. Neither can it any longer be
regarded as the product of the labour of the joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of
productive labour. Along with the useful qualities of the products themselves, we put out of sight both
the useful character of the various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that
labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the same sort of
labour, human labour in the abstract.

Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists of the same unsubstantial reality in
each, a mere congelation of homogeneous human labour, of labour-power expended without regard to the
mode of its expenditure. All that these things now tell us is, that human labour-power has been expended
in their production, that human labour is embodied in them. When looked at as crystals of this social
substance, common to them all, they are — Values.

We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange-value manifests itself as something
totally independent of their use-value. But if we abstract from their use-value, there remains their Value
as defined above. Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in the exchange-value of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (3 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value. The progress of our investigation will show
that exchange-value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be
expressed. For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value independently of this, its
form.

A use- value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human labour in the abstract has been
embodied or materialised in it. How, then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Plainly, by the
quantity of the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article. The quantity of labour,
however, is measured by its duration, and labour-time in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and
hours.

Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour spent
on it, the more idle and unskilful the labourer, the more valuable would his commodity be, because more
time would be required in its production. The labour, however, that forms the substance of value, is
homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform labour-power. The total labour-power of
society, which is embodied in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that society,
counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labour-power, composed though it be of innumerable
individual units. Each of these units is the same as any other, so far as it has the character of the average
labour-power of society, and takes effect as such; that is, so far as it requires for producing a commodity,
no more time than is needed on an average, no more than is socially necessary. The labour-time socially
necessary is that required to produce an article under the normal conditions of production, and with the
average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time. The introduction of power-looms into England
probably reduced by one-half the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth. The
hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, continued to require the same time as before; but for all that, the
product of one hour of their labour represented after the change only half an hour's social labour, and
consequently fell to one-half its former value.

We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any article is the amount of labour
socially necessary, or the labour-time socially necessary for its production. \9]_ Each individual
commodity, in this connexion, is to be considered as an average sample of its class. flQl Commodities,
therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied, or which can be produced in the same time,
have the same value. The value of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the labour-time
necessary for the production of the one is to that necessary for the production of the other. "As values, all
commodities are only definite masses of congealed labour-time." fill

The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the labour-time required for its production
also remained constant. But the latter changes with every variation in the productiveness of labour. This
productiveness is determined by various circumstances, amongst others, by the average amount of skill
of the workmen, the state of science, and the degree of its practical application, the social organisation of
production, the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and by physical conditions. For
example, the same amount of labour in favourable seasons is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in
unfavourable, only in four. The same labour extracts from rich mines more metal than from poor mines.
Diamonds are of very rare occurrence on the earth's surface, and hence their discovery costs, on an
average, a great deal of labour- time. Consequently much labour is represented in a small compass. Jacob
doubts whether gold has ever been paid for at its full value. This applies still more to diamonds.
According to Eschwege, the total produce of the Brazilian diamond mines for the eighty years, ending in
1823, had not realised the price of one and-a-half years' average produce of the sugar and coffee

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (4 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

plantations of the same country, although the diamonds cost much more labour, and therefore represented
more value. With richer mines, the same quantity of labour would embody itself in more diamonds, and
their value would fall. If we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting carbon into
diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks. In general, the greater the productiveness of labour,
the less is the labour-time required for the production of an article, the less is the amount of labour
crystallised in that article, and the less is its value; and vice versa, the less the productiveness of labour,
the greater is the labour-time required for the production of an article, and the greater is its value. The
value of a commodity, therefore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the productiveness, of
the labour incorporated in it.

A thing can be a use-value, without having value. This is the case whenever its utility to man is not due
to labour. Such are air, virgin soil, natural meadows, &c. A thing can be useful, and the product of
human labour, without being a commodity. Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the produce of his
own labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not commodities. In order to produce the latter, he must not
only produce use-values, but use-values for others, social use-values. (And not only for others, without
more. The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson.
But neither the quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason of the fact that they had
been produced for others. To become a commodity a product must be transferred to another, whom it
will serve as a use-value, by means of an exchange.) |T21 Lastly nothing can have value, without being
an object of utility. If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour does not count as
labour, and therefore creates no value.



SECTION 2

THE TWO-FOLD CHARACTER OF

THE LABOUR EMBODIED IN COMMODITIES



At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two things-use- value and
exchange- value. Later on, we saw also that labour, too, possesses the same two-fold nature; for, so far as
it finds expression in value, it does not possess the same characteristics that belong to it as a creator of
use-values. I was the first to point out and to examine critically this two-fold nature of the labour
contained in commodities. As this point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of Political
Economy turns, we must go more into detail.

Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of linen, and let the former be double the value
of the latter, so that, if 10 yards of linen = W, the coat = 2W.

The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. Its existence is the result of a special sort of
productive activity, the nature of which is determined by its aim, mode of operation, subject, means, and
result. The labour, whose utility is thus represented by the value in use of its product, or which manifests
itself by making its product a use-value, we call useful labour In this connexion we consider only its



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (5 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

useful effect.

As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use- values, so also are the two forms of labour
that produce them, tailoring and weaving. Were these two objects not qualitatively different, not
produced respectively by labour of different quality, they could not stand to each other in the relation of
commodities. Coats are not exchanged for coats, one use-value is not exchanged for another of the same
kind.

To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as many different kinds of useful labour,
classified according to the order, genus, species, and variety to which they belong in the social division
of labour. This division of labour is a necessary condition for the production of commodities, but it does
not follow, conversely, that the production of commodities is a necessary condition for the division of
labour. In the primitive Indian community there is social division of labour, without production of
commodities. Or, to take an example nearer home, in every factory the labour is divided according to a
system, but this division is not brought about by the operatives mutually exchanging their individual
products. Only such products can become commodities with regard to each other, as result from different
kinds of labour, each kind being carried on independently and for the account of private individuals.

To resume, then: In the use-value of each commodity there is contained useful labour, i.e., productive
activity of a definite kind and exercised with a definite aim. Use-values cannot confront each other as
commodities, unless the useful labour embodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them. In a
community, the produce of which in general takes the form of commodities, i.e., in a community of
commodity producers, this qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are carried on
independently of individual producers, each on their own account, develops into a complex system, a
social division of labour.

Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer, in either case it operates as a
use- value. Nor is the relation between the coat and the labour that produced it altered by the circumstance
that tailoring may have become a special trade, an independent branch of the social division of labour.
Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the human race made clothes for thousands of years,
without a single man becoming a tailor. But coats and linen, like every other element of material wealth
that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, must invariably owe their existence to a special productive
activity, exercised with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates particular nature-given materials to
particular human wants. So far therefore as labour is a creator of use-value, is useful labour, it is a
necessary condition, independent of all forms of society, for the existence of the human race; it is an
eternal nature-imposed necessity, without which there can be no material exchanges between man and
Nature, and therefore no life.

The use-values, coat, linen, &c, i.e., the bodies of commodities, are combinations of two elements —
matter and labour. If we take away the useful labour expended upon them, a material substratum is
always left, which is furnished by Nature without the help of man. The latter can work only as Nature
does, that is by changing the form of matter, f 131 Nay more, in this work of changing the form he is
constantly helped by natural forces. We see, then, that labour is not the only source of material wealth, of
use-values produced by labour. As William Petty puts it, labour is its father and the earth its mother.

Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use-value to the value of commodities.

By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the linen. But this is a mere quantitative



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (6 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

difference, which for the present does not concern us. We bear in mind, however, that if the value of the
coat is double that of 10 yds. of linen, 20 yds. of linen must have the same value as one coat. So far as
they are values, the coat and the linen are things of a like substance, objective expressions of essentially
identical labour. But tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour. There are,
however, states of society in which one and the same man does tailoring and weaving alternately, in
which case these two forms of labour are mere modifications of the labour of the same individual, and no
special and fixed functions of different persons, just as the coat which our tailor makes one day, and the
trousers which he makes another day, imply only a variation in the labour of one and the same individual.
Moreover, we see at a glance that, in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour is, in
accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form of tailoring, at another in the form
of weaving. This change may possibly not take place without friction, but take place it must.

Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, viz., the useful character of the labour, is
nothing but the expenditure of human labour-power. Tailoring and weaving, though qualitatively
different productive activities, are each a productive expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles,
and in this sense are human labour. They are but two different modes of expending human labour-power.
Of course, this labour-power, which remains the same under all its modifications, must have attained a
certain pitch of development before it can be expended in a multiplicity of modes. But the value of a
commodity represents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of human labour in general. And just
as in society, a general or a banker plays a great part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby
part, |141 so here with mere human labour. It is the expenditure of simple labour-power, i.e., of the
labour-power which, on an average, apart from any special development, exists in the organism of every
ordinary individual. Simple average labour, it is true, varies in character in different countries and at
different times, but in a particular society it is given. Skilled labour counts only as simple labour
intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, a given quantity of skilled being considered equal to a
greater quantity of simple labour. Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made. A
commodity may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating it to the product of
simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity of the latter labour alone. |T51 The different
proportions in which different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled labour as their standard, are
established by a social process that goes on behind the backs of the producers, and, consequently, appear
to be fixed by custom. For simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be
unskilled, simple labour; by this we do no more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction.

Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, we abstract from their different use-values, so
it is with the labour represented by those values: we disregard the difference between its useful forms,
weaving and tailoring. As the use-values, coat and linen, are combinations of special productive activities
with cloth and yarn, while the values, coat and linen, are, on the other hand, mere homogeneous
congelations of undifferentiated labour, so the labour embodied in these latter values does not count by
virtue of its productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only as being expenditure of human labour-power.
Tailoring and weaving are necessary factors in the creation of the use- values, coat and linen, precisely
because these two kinds of labour are of different qualities; but only in so far as abstraction is made from
their special qualities, only in so far as both possess the same quality of being human labour, do tailoring
and weaving form the substance of the values of the same articles.

Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values of definite magnitude, and according to our
assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen. Whence this difference in their



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (7 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

values? It is owing to the fact that the linen contains only half as much labour as the coat, and
consequently, that in the production of the latter, labour-power must have been expended during twice
the time necessary for the production of the former.

While, therefore, with reference to use-value, the labour contained in a commodity counts only
qualitatively, with reference to value it counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced to human
labour pure and simple. In the former case, it is a question of How and What, in the latter of How much?
How long a time? Since the magnitude of the value of a commodity represents only the quantity of
labour embodied in it, it follows that all commodities, when taken in certain proportions, must be equal
in value.

If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful labour required for the production of a coat
remains unchanged, the sum of the values of the coats produced increases with their number. If one coat
represents x days' labour, two coats represent 2x days' labour, and so on. But assume that the duration of
the labour necessary for he production of a coat becomes doubled or halved. In the first case one coat is
worth as much as two coats were before; in the second case, two coats are only worth as much as one
was before, although in both cases one coat renders the same service as before, and the useful labour
embodied in it remains of the same quality. But the quantity of labour spent on its production has altered.

An increase in the quantity of use-values is an increase of material wealth. With two coats two men can
be clothed, with one coat only one man. Nevertheless, an increased quantity of material wealth may
correspond to a simultaneous fall in the magnitude of its value. This antagonistic movement has its origin
in the two-fold character of labour. Productive power has reference, of course, only to labour of some
useful concrete form, the efficacy of any special productive activity during a given time being dependent
on its productiveness. Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more or less abundant source of products, in
proportion to the rise or fall of its productiveness. On the other hand, no change in this productiveness
affects the labour represented by value. Since productive power is an attribute of the concrete useful
forms of labour, of course it can no longer have any bearing on that labour, so soon as we make
abstraction from those concrete useful forms. However then productive power may vary, the same
labour, exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal amounts of value. But it will yield,
during equal periods of time, different quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power rise,
fewer, if it fall. The same change in productive power, which increases the fruitfulness of labour, and, in
consequence, the quantity of use-values produced by that labour, will diminish the total value of this
increased quantity of use-values, provided such change shorten the total labour-time necessary for their
production; and vice versa.

On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an expenditure of human labour-power, and in
its character of identical abstract human labour, it creates and forms the value of commodities. On the
other hand, all labour is the expenditure of human labour-power in a special form and with a definite aim,
and in this, its character of concrete useful labour, it produces use-values. f!61



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (8 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

SECTION 3

THE FORM OF VALUE OR EXCHANGE-VALUE



Commodities come into the world in the shape of use-values, articles, or goods, such as iron, linen, corn,
&c. This is their plain, homely, bodily form. They are, however, commodities, only because they are
something two-fold, both objects of utility, and, at the same time, depositories of value. They manifest
themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form of commodities, only in so far as they have two
forms, a physical or natural form, and a value-form.

The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect from Dame Quickly, that we don't know
"where to have it." The value of commodities is the very opposite of the coarse materiality of their
substance, not an atom of matter enters into its composition. Turn and examine a single commodity, by
itself, as we will, yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it seems impossible to grasp it. If, however
we bear in mind that the value of commodities has a purely social reality, and that they acquire this
reality only in so far as they are expressions or embodiments of one identical social substance, viz.,
human labour, it follows as a matter of course, that value can only manifest itself in the social relation of
commodity to commodity. In fact we started from exchange-value, or the exchange relation of
commodities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it. We must now return to this form
under which value first appeared to us.

Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a value-form common to them all,
and presenting a marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use- values. I mean their
money-form. Here, however, a task is set us, the performance of which has never yet even been
attempted by bourgeois economy, the task of tracing the genesis of this money-form, of developing the
expression of value implied in the value-relation of commodities, from its simplest, almost imperceptible
outline, to the dazzling money-form. By doing this we shall, at the same time, solve the riddle presented
by money.

The simplest value-relation is evidently that of one commodity to some one other commodity of a
different kind. Hence the relation between the values of two commodities supplies us with the simplest
expression of the value of a single commodity.



A. Elementary or Accidental Form Of Value

x commodity A = y commodity B, or
x commodity A is worth y commodity B.

20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or

20 Yards of linen are worth 1 coat.



1. The two poles of the expression of value. Relative form and Equivalent form



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (9 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this elementary form. Its analysis, therefore, is our
real difficulty.

Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example the linen and the coat), evidently play two
different parts. The linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the material in which that
value is expressed. The former plays an active, the latter a passive, part. The value of the linen is
represented as relative value, or appears in relative form. The coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in
equivalent form.

The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately connected, mutually dependent and
inseparable elements of the expression of value; but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive,
antagonistic extremes — i.e., poles of the same expression. They are allotted respectively to the two
different commodities brought into relation by that expression. It is not possible to express the value of
linen in linen. 20 yards of linen = 20 yards of linen is no expression of value. On the contrary, such an
equation merely says that 20 yards of linen are nothing else than 20 yards of linen, a definite quantity of
the use-value linen. The value of the linen can therefore be expressed only relatively — i.e., in some
other commodity. The relative form of the value of the linen pre-supposes, therefore, the presence of
some other commodity — here the coat — under the form of an equivalent. On the other hand, the
commodity that figures as the equivalent cannot at the same time assume the relative form. That second
commodity is not the one whose value is expressed. Its function is merely to serve as the material in
which the value of the first commodity is expressed.

No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat, implies the
opposite relation. 1 coat = 20 yards of linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. But, in that case, I must
reverse the equation, in order to express the value of the coat relatively; and. so soon as I do that the linen
becomes the equivalent instead of the coat. A single commodity cannot, therefore, simultaneously
assume, in the same expression of value, both forms. The very polarity of these forms makes them
mutually exclusive.

Whether, then, a commodity assumes the relative form, or the opposite equivalent form, depends entirely
upon its accidental position in the expression of value — that is, upon whether it is the commodity whose
value is being expressed or the commodity in which value is being expressed.



2. The Relative Form of value

(a.) The nature and import of this form

In order to discover how the elementary expression of the value of a commodity lies hidden in the
value-relation of two commodities, we must, in the first place, consider the latter entirely apart from its
quantitative aspect. The usual mode of procedure is generally the reverse, and in the value-relation
nothing is seen but the proportion between definite quantities of two different sorts of commodities that
are considered equal to each other. It is apt to be forgotten that the magnitudes of different things can be
compared quantitatively, only when those magnitudes are expressed in terms of the same unit. It is only
as expressions of such a unit that they are of the same denomination, and therefore commensurable. |T71

Whether 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 20 coats or = x coats-that is, whether a given quantity of linen is
worth few or many coats, every such statement implies that the linen and coats, as magnitudes of value,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (10 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

are expressions of the same unit, things of the same kind. Linen = coat is the basis of the equation.

But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus assumed, do not play the same part. It is only
the value of the linen that is expressed. And how? By its reference to the coat as its equivalent, as
something that can be exchanged for it. In this relation the coat is the mode of existence of value, is value
embodied, for only as such is it the same as the linen. On the other hand, the linen's own value comes to
the front, receives independent expression, for it is only as being value that it is comparable with the coat
as a thing of equal value, or exchangeable with the coat. To borrow an illustration from chemistry,
butyric acid is a different substance from propyl formate. Yet both are made up of the same chemical
substances, carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and oxygen (O), and that, too, in like proportions — namely,
C 4 H 8 2 . If now we equate butyric acid to propyl formate, then, in the first place, propyl formate would

be, in this relation, merely a form of existence of C4H802; and in the second place, we should be stating
that butyric acid also consists of C4H802. Therefore, by thus equating the two substances, expression
would be given to their chemical composition, while their different physical forms would be neglected.

If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations of human labour, we reduce them by our
analysis, it is true, to the abstraction, value; but we ascribe to this value no form apart from their bodily
form. It is otherwise in the value-relation of one commodity to another. Here, the one stands forth in its
character of value by reason of its relation to the other.

By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate the labour embodied in the former to that in the
latter. Now, it is true that the tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete labour of a different sort from
the weaving which makes the linen. But the act of equating it to the weaving, reduces the tailoring to that
which is really equal in the two kinds of labour, to their common character of human labour. In this
roundabout way, then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so far as it weaves value, has nothing to
distinguish it from tailoring, and, consequently, is abstract human labour. It is the expression of
equivalence between different sorts of commodities that alone brings into relief the specific character of
value-creating labour, and this it does by actually reducing the different varieties of labour embodied in
the different kinds of commodities to their common quality of human labour in the abstract. fl81

There is, however, something else required beyond the expression of the specific character of the labour
of which the value of the linen consists. Human labour-power in motion, or human labour, creates value,
but is not itself value. It becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form of some
object. In order to express the value of the linen as a congelation of human labour, that value must be
expressed as having objective existence, as being a something materially different from the linen itself,
and yet a something common to the linen and all other commodities. The problem is already solved.

When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation of value, the coat ranks qualitatively as the
equal of the linen, as something of the same kind, because it is value. In this position it is a thing in
which we see nothing but value, or whose palpable bodily form represents value. Yet the coat itself, the
body of the commodity, coat, is a mere use-value. A coat as such no more tells us it is value, than does
the first piece of linen we take hold of. This shows that when placed in value-relation to the linen, the
coat signifies more than when out of that relation, just as many a man strutting about in a gorgeous
uniform counts for more than when in mufti.

In the production of the coat, human labour-power, in the shape of tailoring, must have been actually
expended. Human labour is therefore accumulated in it. In this aspect the coat is a depository of value,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (11 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

but though worn to a thread, it does not let this fact show through. And as equivalent of the linen in the
value equation, it exists under this aspect alone, counts therefore as embodied value, as a body that is
value. A, for instance, cannot be "your majesty" to B, unless at the same time majesty in B's eyes
assumes the bodily form of A, and, what is more, with every new father of the people, changes its
features, hair, and many other things besides.

Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equivalent of the linen, the coat officiates as the
form of value. The value of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the commodity coat,
the value of one by the use-value of the other. As a use-value, the linen is something palpably different
from the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and now has the appearance of a coat. Thus the linen
acquires a value-form different from its physical form. The fact that it is value, is made manifest by its
equality with the coat, just as the sheep's nature of a Christian is shown in his resemblance to the Lamb
of God.

We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commodities has already told us, is told us by the linen
itself, so soon as it comes into communication with another commodity, the coat. Only it betrays its
thoughts in that language with which alone it is familiar, the language of commodities. In order to tell us
that its own value is created by labour in its abstract character of human labour, it says that the coat, in so
far as it is worth as much as the linen, and therefore is value, consists of the same labour as the linen. In
order to inform us that its sublime reality as value is not the same as its buckram body, it says that value
has the appearance of a coat, and consequently that so far as the linen is value, it and the coat are as like
as two peas. We may here remark, that the language of commodities has, besides Hebrew, many other
more or less correct dialects. The German "Wertsein," to be worth, for instance, expresses in a less
striking manner than the Romance verbs "valere," "valer," "valoir," that the equating of commodity B to
commodity A, is commodity A's own mode of expressing its value. Paris vaut bien une messe.

By means, therefore, of the value-relation expressed in our equation, the bodily form of commodity B
becomes the value-form of commodity A, or the body of commodity B acts as a mirror to the value of
commodity A. f!91 By putting itself in relation with commodity B, as value in propria persona, as the
matter of which human labour is made up, the commodity A converts the value in use, B, into the
substance in which to express its, A's, own value. The value of A, thus expressed in the use- value of B,
has taken the form of relative value.



(b.) Quantitative determination of Relative value

Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a useful object of given quantity, as 15
bushels of corn, or 100 lbs. of coffee. And a given quantity of any commodity contains a definite
quantity of human labour. The value-form must therefore not only express value generally, but also value
in definite quantity. Therefore, in the value-relation of commodity A to commodity B, of the linen to the
coat, not only is the latter, as value in general, made the equal in quality of the linen, but a definite
quantity of coat (1 coat) is made the equivalent of a definite quantity (20 yards) of linen.

The equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth one coat, implies that the same
quantity of value-substance (congealed labour) is embodied in both; that the two commodities have each
cost the same amount of labour of the same quantity of labour-time. But the labour-time necessary for the
production of 20 yards of linen or 1 coat varies with every change in the productiveness of weaving or



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (12 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

tailoring. We have now to consider the influence of such changes on the quantitative aspect of the
relative expression of value.

I. Let the value of the linen vary, [201 that of the coat remaining constant. If, say in consequence of the
exhaustion of flax-growing soil, the labour-time necessary for the production of the linen be doubled, the
value of the linen will also be doubled. Instead of the equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, we should
have 20 yards of linen = 2 coats, since 1 coat would now contain only half the labour-time embodied in
20 yards of linen. If, on the other hand, in consequence, say, of improved looms, this labour-time be
reduced by one-half, the value of the linen would fall by one-half. Consequently, we should have 20
yards of linen = 1/2 coat. The relative value of commodity A, i.e., its value expressed in commodity B,
rises and falls directly as the value of A, the value of B being supposed constant.

II. Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the value of the coat varies. If, under these
circumstances, in consequence, for instance, of a poor crop of wool, the labour-time necessary for the
production of a coat becomes doubled, we have instead of 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, 20 yards of linen =
1/2 coat. If, on the other hand, the value of the coat sinks by one-half, then 20 yards of linen = 2 coats.
Hence, if the value of commodity A remain constant, its relative value expressed in commodity B rises
and falls inversely as the value of B.

If we compare the different cases in I. and II., we see that the same change of magnitude in relative value
may arise from totally opposite causes. Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, becomes 20 yards
of linen = 2 coats, either, because the value of the linen has doubled, or because the value of the coat has
fallen by one-half; and it becomes 20 yards of linen = 1/2 coat, either, because the value of the linen has
fallen by one-half, or because the value of the coat has doubled.

III. Let the quantities of labour-time respectively necessary for the production of the linen and the coat
vary simultaneously in the same direction and in the same proportion. In this case 20 yards of linen
continue equal to 1 coat, however much their values may have altered. Their change of value is seen as
soon as they are compared with a third commodity, whose value has remained constant. If the values of
all commodities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, their relative values would
remain unaltered. Their real change of value would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of
commodities produced in a given time.

IV. The labour-time respectively necessary for the production of the linen and the coat, and therefore the
value of these commodities may simultaneously vary in the same direction, but at unequal rates or in
opposite directions, or in other ways. The effect of all these possible different variations, on the relative
value of a commodity, may be deduced from the results of I., II. , and III.

Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither unequivocally nor exhaustively reflected in their
relative expression, that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude of relative value. The relative value
of a commodity may vary, although its value remains constant. Its relative value may remain constant,
although its value varies; and finally, simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that of its
relative expression by no means necessarily correspond in amount. f211



3. The Equivalent form of value

We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing its value in the use- value of a commodity

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (13 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

differing in kind (the coat), at the same time impresses upon the latter a specific form of value, namely
that of the equivalent. The commodity linen manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that the
coat, without having assumed a value-form different from its bodily form, is equated to the linen. The
fact that the latter therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly exchangeable with
it. Therefore, when we say that a commodity is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is
directly exchangeable with other commodities.

When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent of another, such as linen, and coats
consequently acquire the characteristic property of being directly exchangeable with linen, we are far
from knowing in what proportion the two are exchangeable. The value of the linen being given in
magnitude, that proportion depends on the value of the coat. Whether the coat serves as the equivalent
and the linen as relative value, or the linen as the equivalent and the coat as relative value, the magnitude
of the coat's value is determined, independently of its value-form, by the labour-time necessary for its
production. But whenever the coat assumes in the equation of value, the position of equivalent, its value
acquires no quantitative expression; on the contrary, the commodity coat now figures only as a definite
quantity of some article.

For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what? 2 coats. Because the commodity coat here plays the
part of equivalent, because the use-value coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an embodiment of
value, therefore a definite number of coats suffices to express the definite quantity of value in the linen.
Two coats may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, but they can never express
the quantity of their own value. A superficial observation of this fact, namely, that in the equation of
value, the equivalent figures exclusively as a simple quantity of some article, of some use-value, has
misled Bailey, as also many others, both before and after him, into seeing, in the expression of value,
merely a quantitative relation. The truth being, that when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative
determination of its value is expressed.

The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form of the equivalent, is this: use-value becomes
the form of manifestation, the phenomenal form of its opposite, value.

The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value-form. But, mark well, that this quid pro quo exists
in the case of any commodity B, only when some other commodity A enters into a value-relation with it,
and then only within the limits of this relation. Since no commodity can stand in the relation of
equivalent to itself, and thus turn its own bodily shape into the expression of its own value, every
commodity is compelled to choose some other commodity for its equivalent, and to accept the use-value,
that is to say, the bodily shape of that other commodity as the form of its own value.

One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material substances, as use-values, will serve to
illustrate this point. A sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: but we can neither see
nor touch this weight. We then take various pieces of iron, whose weight has been determined
beforehand. The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifestation of weight, than is the sugar-loaf.
Nevertheless, in order to express the sugar-loaf as so much weight, we put it into a weight-relation with
the iron. In this relation, the iron officiates as a body representing nothing but weight. A certain quantity
of iron therefore serves as the measure of the weight of the sugar, and represents, in relation to the
sugar-loaf, weight embodied, the form of manifestation of weight. This part is played by the iron only
within this relation, into which the sugar or any other body, whose weight has to be determined, enters
with the iron. Were they not both heavy, they could not enter into this relation, and the one could



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (14 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

therefore not serve as the expression of the weight of the other. When we throw both into the scales, we
see in reality, that as weight they are both the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper
proportions, they have the same weight. Just as the substance iron, as a measure of weight, represents in
relation to the sugar-loaf weight alone, so, in our expression of value, the material object, coat, in relation
to the linen, represents value alone.

Here, however, the analogy ceases. The iron, in the expression of the weight of the sugar-loaf, represents
a natural property common to both bodies, namely their weight; but the coat, in the expression of value
of the linen, represents a non-natural property of both, something purely social, namely, their value.

Since the relative form of value of a commodity — the linen, for example — expresses the value of that
commodity, as being something wholly different from its substance and properties, as being, for instance,
coat-like, we see that this expression itself indicates that some social relation lies at the bottom of it. With
the equivalent form it is just the contrary. The very essence of this form is that the material commodity
itself — the coat — just as it is, expresses value, and is endowed with the form of value by Nature itself.
Of course this holds good only so long as the value-relation exists, in which the coat stands in the
position of equivalent to the linen. f22] Since, however, the properties of a thing are not the result of its
relations to other things, but only manifest themselves in such relations, the coat seems to be endowed
with its equivalent form, its property of being directly exchangeable, just as much by Nature as it is
endowed with the property of being heavy, or the capacity to keep us warm. Hence the enigmatical
character of the equivalent form which escapes the notice of the bourgeois political economist, until this
form, completely developed, confronts him in the shape of money. He then seeks to explain away the
mystical character of gold and silver, by substituting for them less dazzling commodities, and by reciting,
with ever renewed satisfaction, the catalogue of all possible commodities which at one time or another
have played the part of equivalent. He has not the least suspicion that the most simple expression of
value, such as 20 yds. of linen = 1 coat, already propounds the riddle of the equivalent form for our
solution.

The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, figures as the materialisation of human labour
in the abstract, and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful concrete labour. This
concrete labour becomes, therefore, the medium for expressing abstract human labour. If on the one hand
the coat ranks as nothing but the embodiment of abstract human labour, so, on the other hand, the
tailoring which is actually embodied in it, counts as nothing but the form under which that abstract labour
is realised. In the expression of value of the linen, the utility of the tailoring consists, not in making
clothes, but in making an object, which we at once recognise to be Value, and therefore to be a
congelation of labour, but of labour indistinguishable from that realised in the value of the linen. In order
to act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must reflect nothing besides its own abstract
quality of being human labour generally.

In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour-power is expended. Both, therefore, possess the general
property of being human labour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in the production of value,
have to be considered under this aspect alone. There is nothing mysterious in this. But in the expression
of value there is a complete turn of the tables. For instance, how is the fact to be expressed that weaving
creates the value of the linen, not by virtue of being weaving, as such, but by reason of its general
property of being human labour? Simply by opposing to weaving that other particular form of concrete
labour (in this instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of the product of weaving. Just as the
coat in its bodily form became a direct expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (15 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human labour generally.

Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that concrete labour becomes the form under
which its opposite, abstract human labour, manifests itself.

But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks as, and is directly identified with,
undifferentiated human labour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and therefore with
that embodied in the linen. Consequently, although, like all other commodity producing labour, it is the
labour of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour directly social in its character. This
is the reason why it results in a product directly exchangeable with other commodities. We have then a
third peculiarity of the equivalent form, namely, that the labour of private individuals takes the form of
its opposite, labour directly social in its form.

The two latter peculiarities of the equivalent form will become more intelligible if we go back to the
great thinker who was the first to analyse so many forms, whether of thought, society, or Nature, and
amongst them also the form of value. I mean Aristotle.

In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money-form of commodities is only the further
development of the simple form of value- i.e., of the expression of the value of one commodity in some
other commodity taken at random; for he says:

5 beds = 1 house
(clinai petite anti oiciaV)

is not to be distinguished from

5 beds = so much money.

(clinai pente anti . . . dson ai pente clinai)

He further sees that the value-relation which gives rise to this expression makes it necessary that the
house should qualitatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such an equalisation, these two
clearly different things could not be compared with each other as commensurable quantities. "Exchange,"
he says, "cannot take place without equality, and equality not without commensurability". (out isothV mh
oushV snmmetriaV). Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further analysis of the form of
value. "It is, however, in reality, impossible (th men oun alhqeia adunaton), that such unlike things can
be commensurable" — i.e., qualitatively equal. Such an equalisation can only be something foreign to
their real nature, consequently only "a makeshift for practical purposes."

Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to his further analysis; it was the absence of any
concept of value. What is that equal something, that common substance, which admits of the value of the
beds being expressed by a house? Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle. And why not?
Compared with the beds, the house does represent something equal to them, in so far as it represents
what is really equal, both in the beds and the house. And that is — human labour.

There was, however, an important fact which prevented Aristotle from seeing that, to attribute value to
commodities, is merely a mode of expressing all labour as equal human labour, and consequently as
labour of equal quality. Greek society was founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural basis,
the inequality of men and of their labour-powers. The secret of the expression of value, namely, that all
kinds of labour are equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in general, cannot



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (16 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

be deciphered, until the notion of human equality has already acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice.
This, however, is possible only in a society in which the great mass of the produce of labour takes the
form of commodities, in which, consequently, the dominant relation between man and man, is that of
owners of commodities. The brilliancy of Aristotle's genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in
the expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality. The peculiar conditions of the society
in which he lived, alone prevented him from discovering what, "in truth," was at the bottom of this
equality.



4. The Elementary Form of value considered as a whole

The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained in the equation, expressing its value-relation
to another commodity of a different kind, or in its exchange-relation to the-same. The value of
commodity A, is qualitatively expressed, by the fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it.
Its value is quantitatively expressed by the fact, that a definite quantity of B is exchangeable with a
definite quantity of A. In other words, the value of a commodity obtains independent and definite
expression, by taking the form of exchange- value. When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in
common parlance, that a commodity is both a use-value and an exchange-value, we were, accurately
speaking, wrong. A commodity is a use-value or object of utility, and a value. It manifests itself as this
two-fold thing, that it is, as soon as its value assumes an independent form — viz., the form of
exchange- value. It never assumes this form when isolated, but only when placed in a value or exchange
relation with another commodity of a different kind. When once we know this, such a mode of
expression does no harm; it simply serves as an abbreviation.

Our analysis has shown, that the form or expression of the value of a commodity originates in the nature
of value, and not that value and its magnitude originate in the mode of their expression as
exchange- value. This, however, is the delusion as well of the mercantilists and their recent revivers,
Ferrier, Ganilh, f231 and others, as also of their antipodes, the modern bagmen of Free-trade, such as
Bastiat. The mercantilists lay special stress on the qualitative aspect of the expression of value, and
consequently on the equivalent form of commodities, which attains its full perfection in money. The
modern hawkers of Free-trade, who must get rid of their article at any price, on the other hand, lay most
stress on the quantitative aspect of the relative form of value. For them there consequently exists neither
value, nor magnitude of value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the exchange relation of
commodities, that is, in the daily list of prices current. Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up
the confused ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a successful cross between the
superstitious mercantilists, and the enlightened Free-trade bagmen.

A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms of B, contained in the equation expressing
the value-relation of A to B, has shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form of A figures only as
a use- value, the bodily form of B only as the form or aspect of value. The opposition or contrast existing
internally in each commodity between use- value and value, is, therefore, made evident externally by two
commodities being placed in such relation to each other, that the commodity whose value it is sought to
express, figures directly as a mere use- value, while the commodity in which that value is to be expressed,
figures directly as mere exchange- value. Hence the elementary form of value of a commodity is the
elementary form in which the contrast contained in that commodity, between use-value and value,
becomes apparent.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (17 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use-value; but it is only at a definite historical epoch
in a society's development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., at the epoch when the labour
spent on the production of a useful article becomes expressed as one of the objective qualities of that
article, i.e., as its value. It therefore follows that the elementary value-form is also the primitive form
under which a product of labour appears historically as a commodity, and that the gradual transformation
of such products into commodities, proceeds pari passu with the development of the value-form.

We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary form of value: it is a mere germ, which
must undergo a series of metamorphoses before it can ripen into the price-form.

The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any other commodity B, merely distinguishes
the value from the use-value of A, and therefore places A merely in a relation of exchange with a single
different commodity, B; but it is still far from expressing A's qualitative equality, and quantitative
proportionality, to all commodities. To the elementary relative value-form of a commodity, there
corresponds the single equivalent form of one other commodity. Thus, in the relative expression of value
of the linen, the coat assumes the form of equivalent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation
to a single commodity, the linen.

Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy transition into a more complete form. It is
true that by means of the elementary form, the value of a commodity A, becomes expressed in terms of
one, and only one, other commodity. But that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn, or
anything else. Therefore, according as A is placed in relation with one or the other, we get for one and
the same commodity, different elementary expressions of value. f241 The number of such possible
expressions is limited only by the number of the different kinds of commodities distinct from it. The
isolated expression of A's value, is therefore convertible into a series, prolonged to any length, of the
different elementary expressions of that value.



B. Total or Expanded Form of value

z Com. A = u Com. B or

= v Com. C or

= w Com. D or

= Com. E or

= &c. or



(20 yards of linen = 1 coat or

= 10 lbs. tea or

= 40 lbs. coffee or

= quarter corn or

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (18 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One



= 2 ounces gold or
= 1/2 ton iron or
= &c.) or



1. The Expanded Relative form of value

The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is now expressed in terms of numberless other
elements of the world of commodities. Every other commodity now becomes a mirror of the linen's
value. f25l It is thus, that for the first time, this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of
undifferentiated human labour. For the labour that creates it, now stands expressly revealed, as labour
that ranks equally with every other sort of human labour, no matter what its form, whether tailoring,
ploughing, mining, &c, and no matter, therefore, whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or gold. The
linen, by virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a social relation, no longer with only one other
kind of commodity, but with the whole world of commodities. As a commodity, it is a citizen of that
world. At the same time, the interminable series of value equations implies, that as regards the value of a
commodity, it is a matter of indifference under what particular form, or kind, of use- value it appears.

In the first form, 20 yds. of linen = 1 coat, it might, for ought that otherwise appears, be pure accident,
that these two commodities are exchangeable in definite quantities. In the second form, on the contrary,
we perceive at once the background that determines, and is essentially different from, this accidental
appearance. The value of the linen remains unaltered in magnitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or
iron, or in numberless different commodities, the property of as many different owners. The accidental
relation between two individual commodity-owners disappears. It becomes plain, that it is not the
exchange of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their value; but, on the contrary, that it is the
magnitude of their value which controls their exchange proportions.



2. The particular Equivalent form

Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &c, figures in the expression of value of the linen, as an
equivalent, and, consequently, as a thing that is value. The bodily form of each of these commodities
figures now as a particular equivalent form, one out of many. In the same way the manifold concrete
useful kinds of labour, embodied in these different commodities, rank now as so many different forms of
the realisation, or manifestation, of undifferentiated human labour.



3. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value

In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete because the series representing it is
interminable. The chain of which each equation of value is a link, is liable at any moment to be
lengthened by each new kind of commodity that comes into existence and furnishes the material for a
fresh expression of value. In the second place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and independent
expressions of value. And lastly, if, as must be the case, the relative value of each commodity in turn,
becomes expressed in this expanded form, we get for each of them a relative value-form, different in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (19 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

every case, and consisting of an interminable series of expressions of value. The defects of the expanded
relative value-form are reflected in the corresponding equivalent form. Since the bodily form of each
single commodity is one particular equivalent form amongst numberless others, we have, on the whole,
nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, each excluding the others. In the same way, also, the special,
concrete, useful kind of labour embodied in each particular equivalent, is presented only as a particular
kind of labour, and therefore not as an exhaustive representative of human labour generally. The latter,
indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its manifold, particular, concrete forms. But, in that
case, its expression in an infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity.

The expanded relative value-form is, however, nothing but the sum of the elementary relative
expressions or equations of the first kind, such as:

20 yards of linen = 1 coat

20 yards of linen = 10 lbs. of tea, etc.

Each of these implies the corresponding inverted equation,

1 coat = 20 yards of linen

10 lbs. of tea = 20 yards of linen, etc.

In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other commodities, and thus expresses its value in a
series of other commodities, it necessarily follows, that the various owners of the latter exchange them
for the linen, and consequently express the value of their various commodities in one and the same third
commodity, the linen. If then, we reverse the series, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 10 lbs. of tea, etc.,
that is to say, if we give expression to the converse relation already implied in the series, we get,

C. The General Form of Value

1 coat

10 lbs. of tea

40 lbs. of coffee

1 quarter of corn = 20 yards of linen

2 ounces of gold
1/2 a ton of iron

x Commodity A., etc.



1 . The altered character of the form of value



All commodities now express their value (1) in an elementary form, because in a single commodity; (2)
with unity, because in one and the same commodity. This form of value is elementary and the same for
all, therefore general.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (20 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

The forms A and B were fit only to express the value of a commodity as something distinct from its
use-value or material form.

The first- form, A, furnishes such equations as the following:

1 coat = 20 yards of linen,

10 lbs. of tea = 1/2 a ton of iron.

The value of the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron. But to be equated to linen, and again to
iron, is to be as different as are linen and iron. This forms it is plain, occurs practically only in the first
beginning, when the products of labour are converted into commodities by accidental and occasional
exchanges.

The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner than the first, the value of a commodity
from its use-value, for the value of the coat is there placed in contrast under all possible shapes with the
bodily form of the coat; it is equated to linen, to iron, to tea, in short, to everything else, only not to itself,
the coat. On the other hand, any general expression of value common to all is directly excluded; for, in
the equation of value of each commodity, all other commodities now appear only under the form of
equivalents. The expanded form of value comes into actual existence for the first time so soon as a
particular product of labour, such as cattle, is no longer exceptionally, but habitually, exchanged for
various other commodities.

The third and lastly developed form expresses the values of the whole world of commodities in terms of
a single commodity set apart for the purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents to us their values by
means of their equality with linen. The value of every commodity is now, by being equated to linen, not
only differentiated from its own use-value, but from all other use-values generally, and is, by that very
fact, expressed as that which is common to all commodities. By this form, commodities are, for the first
time, effectively brought into relation with one another as values, or made to appear as exchange-values.

The two earlier forms either express the value of each commodity in terms of a single commodity of a
different kind, or in a series of many such commodities. In both cases, it is, so to say, the special business
of each single commodity to find an expression for its value, and this it does without the help of the
others. These others, with respect to the former, play the passive parts of equivalents. The general form
of value, C, results from the joint action of the whole world of commodities, and from that alone. A
commodity can acquire a general expression of its value only by all other commodities, simultaneously
with it, expressing their values in the same equivalent; and every new commodity must follow suit. It
thus becomes evident that since the existence of commodities as values is purely social, this social
existence can be expressed by the totality of their social relations alone, and consequently that the form
of their value must be a socially recognised form.

All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only as qualitatively equal as values generally,
but also as values whose magnitudes are capable of comparison. By expressing the magnitudes of their
values in one and the same material, the linen, those magnitudes are also compared with each other For
instance, 10 lbs. of tea = 20 yards of linen, and 40 lbs. of coffee = 20 yards of linen. Therefore, 10 lbs of
tea = 40 lbs. of coffee. In other words, there is contained in 1 lb. of coffee only one-fourth as much
substance of value — labour — as is contained in 1 lb. of tea.

The general form of relative value, embracing the whole world of commodities, converts the single
commodity that is excluded from the rest, and made to play the part of equivalent — here the linen —

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (21 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

into the universal equivalent. The bodily form of the linen is now the form assumed in common by the
values of all commodities; it therefore becomes directly exchangeable with all and every of them. The
substance linen becomes the visible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of every kind of human labour.
Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individuals producing a particular article, linen, acquires
in consequence a social character, the character of equality with all other kinds of labour. The
innumerable equations of which the general form of value is composed, equate in turn the labour
embodied in the linen to that embodied in every other commodity, and they thus convert weaving into the
general form of manifestation of undifferentiated human labour. In this manner the labour realised in the
values of commodities is presented not only under its negative aspect, under which abstraction is made
from every concrete form and useful property of actual work, but its own positive nature is made to
reveal itself expressly. The general value-form is the reduction of all kinds of actual labour to their
common character of being human labour generally, of being the expenditure of human labour-power.

The general value-form, which represents all products of labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated
human labour, shows by its very structure that it is the social resume of the world of commodities. That
form consequently makes it indisputably evident that in the world of commodities the character
possessed by all labour of being human labour constitutes its specific social character.



2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and of the Equivalent Form

The degree of development of the relative form of value corresponds to that of the equivalent form. But
we must bear in mind that the development of the latter is only the expression and result of the
development of the former.

The primary or isolated relative form of value of one commodity converts some other commodity into an
isolated equivalent. The expanded form of relative value, which is the expression of the value of one
commodity in terms of all other commodities, endows those other commodities with the character of
particular equivalents differing in kind. And lastly, a particular kind of commodity acquires the character
of universal equivalent, because all other commodities make it the material in which they uniformly
express their value.

The antagonism between the relative form of value and the equivalent form, the two poles of the
value-form, is developed concurrently with that form itself.

The first form, 20 yds. of linen = one coat, already contains this antagonism, without as yet fixing it.
According as we read this equation forwards or backwards, the parts played by the linen and the coat are
different. In the one case the relative value of the linen is expressed in the coat, in the other case the
relative value of the coat is expressed in the linen. In this first form of value, therefore, it is difficult to
grasp the polar contrast.

Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can completely expand its relative value, and
that it acquires this expanded form only because, and in so far as, all other commodities are, with respect
to it, equivalents. Here we cannot reverse the equation, as we can the equation 20 yds. of linen = 1 coat,
without altering its general character, and converting it from the expanded form of value into the general
form of value.

Finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a general social relative form of value, because,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (22 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

and in so far as, thereby all commodities, with the exception of one, are excluded from the equivalent
form. A single commodity, the linen, appears therefore to have acquired the character of direct
exchangeability with every other commodity because, and in so far as, this character is denied to every
other commodity. f261

The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on the other hand, excluded from the relative
value-form. If the linen, or any other commodity serving as universal equivalent, were, at the same time,
to share in the relative form of value, it would have to serve as its own equivalent. We should then have
20 yds. of linen = 20 yds. of linen; this tautology expresses neither value, nor magnitude of value. In
order to express the relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather reverse the form C. This
equivalent has no relative form of value in common with other commodities, but its value is relatively
expressed by a never ending series of other commodities.

Thus, the expanded form of relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the specific form of relative
value for the equivalent commodity.



3. Transition from the General Form of Value to the Money-Form

The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. It can, therefore, be assumed by any
commodity. On the other hand, if a commodity be found to have assumed the universal equivalent form
(form C), this is only because and in so far as it has been excluded from the rest of all other commodities
as their equivalent, and that by their own act. And from the moment that this exclusion becomes finally
restricted to one particular commodity, from that moment only, the general form of relative value of the
world of commodities obtains real consistence and general social validity.

The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equivalent form is thus socially identified, now
becomes the money-commodity, or serves as money. It becomes the special social function of that
commodity, and consequently its social monopoly, to play within the world of commodities the part of
the universal equivalent. Amongst the commodities which, in form B, figure as particular equivalents of
the linen, and, in form C, express in common their relative values in linen, this foremost place has been
attained by one in particular- namely, gold. If, then, in form C we replace the linen by gold, we get,



D. The Money-Form

20 yards of linen

1 coat

10 lbs. of tea

40 lbs. of coffee

1 quarter of corn = 2 ounces of gold

1/2 a ton of iron

x commodity A., etc.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (23 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One



In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to form C, the changes are fundamental. On the
other hand, there is no difference between forms C and D, except that, in the latter, gold has assumed the
equivalent form in the place of linen. Gold is in form D, what linen was in form C — the universal
equivalent. The progress consists in this alone, that the character of direct and universal exchangeability
— in other words, that the universal equivalent form — has now, by social custom, become finally
identified with the substance, gold.

Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities only because it was previously, with
reference to them, a simple commodity. Like all other commodities, it was also capable of serving as an
equivalent, either as simple equivalent in isolated exchanges, or as particular equivalent by the side of
others. Gradually it began to serve, within varying limits, as universal equivalent. So soon as it
monopolises this position in the expression of value for the world of commodities, it becomes the money
commodity, and then, and not till then, does form D become distinct from form C, and the general form
of value become changed into the money-form.

The elementary expression of the relative value of a single commodity, such as linen, in terms of the
commodity, such as gold, that plays the part of money, is the price-form of that commodity. The
price-form of the linen is therefore

20 yards of linen = 2 ounces of gold, or,

if 2 ounces of gold when coined are £2, 20 yards of linen = £2.

The difficulty in forming a concept of the money-form, consists in clearly comprehending the universal
equivalent form, and as a necessary corollary, the general form of value, form C. The latter is deducible
from form B, the expanded form of value, the essential component element of which, we saw, is form A,
20 yards of linen = 1 coat or x commodity A = y commodity B. The simple commodity-form is therefore
the germ of the money-form.



SECTION 4

THE FETISHISM OF COMMODITIES
AND THE SECRET THEREOF



A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. Its analysis shows that it
is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties. So far as
it is a value in use, there is nothing mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the point of view
that by its properties it is capable of satisfying human wants, or from the point that those properties are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (24 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

the product of human labour. It is as clear as noon-day, that man, by his industry, changes the forms of
the materials furnished by Nature, in such a way as to make them useful to him. The form of wood, for
instance, is altered, by making a table out of it. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common,
every-day thing, wood. But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into something
transcendent. It not only stands with its feet on the ground, but, in relation to all other commodities, it
stands on its head, and evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than
"table-turning" ever was.

The mystical character of commodities does not originate, therefore, in their use-value. Just as little does
it proceed from the nature of the determining factors of value. For, in the first place, however varied the
useful kinds of labour, or productive activities, may be, it is a physiological fact, that they are functions
of the human organism, and that each such function, whatever may be its nature or form, is essentially
the expenditure of human brain, nerves, muscles, &c. Secondly, with regard to that which forms the
ground-work for the quantitative determination of value, namely, the duration of that expenditure, or the
quantity of labour, it is quite clear that there is a palpable difference between its quantity and quality. In
all states of society, the labour-time that it costs to produce the means of subsistence, must necessarily be
an object of interest to mankind, though not of equal interest in different stages of development. [271 And
lastly, from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their labour assumes a social form.

Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of
commodities? Clearly from this form itself. The equality of all sorts of human labour is expressed
objectively by their products all being equally values; the measure of the expenditure of labour-power by
the duration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value of the products of labour; and
finally the mutual relations of the producers, within which the social character of their labour affirms
itself, take the form of a social relation between the products.

A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men's labour
appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour; because the relation of
the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not
between themselves, but between the products of their labour. This is the reason why the products of
labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and
imperceptible by the senses. In the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as the
subjective excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of something outside the eye itself. But,
in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an actual passage of light from one thing to another, from the
external object to the eye. There is a physical relation between physical things. But it is different with
commodities. There, the existence of the things qua commodities, and the value-relation between the
products of labour which stamps them as commodities, have absolutely no connexion with their physical
properties and with the material relations arising therefrom. There it is a definite social relation between
men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, to
find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world. In that
world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering
into relation both with one another and the human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the
products of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour, so soon
as they are produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of
commodities.

This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (25 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

social character of the labour that produces them.

As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only because they are products of the labour of
private individuals or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently of each other. The
sum total of the labour of all these private individuals forms the aggregate labour of society. Since the
producers do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange their products, the specific
social character of each producer's labour does not show itself except in the act of exchange. In other
words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the labour of society, only by means of the
relations which the act of exchange establishes directly between the products, and indirectly, through
them, between the producers. To the latter, therefore, the relations connecting the labour of one
individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct social relations between individuals at work, but as
what they really are, material relations between persons and social relations between things. It is only by
being exchanged that the products of labour acquire, as values, one uniform social status, distinct from
their varied forms of existence as objects of utility. This division of a product into a useful thing and a
value becomes practically important, only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful
articles are produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and their character as values has therefore to be
taken into account, beforehand, during production. From this moment the labour of the individual
producer acquires socially a two-fold character. On the one hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of
labour, satisfy a definite social want, and thus hold its place as part and parcel of the collective labour of
all, as a branch of a social division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously. On the other hand, it can
satisfy the manifold wants of the individual producer himself, only in so far as the mutual
exchangeability of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social fact, and therefore the private
useful labour of each producer ranks on an equality with that of all others. The equalisation of the most
different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstraction from their inequalities, or of reducing
them to their common denominator, viz. expenditure of human labour-power or human labour in the
abstract. The two-fold social character of the labour of the individual appears to him, when reflected in
his brain, only under those forms which are impressed upon that labour in every-day practice by the
exchange of products. In this way, the character that his own labour possesses of being socially useful
takes the form of the condition, that the product must be not only useful, but useful for others, and the
social character that his particular labour has of being the equal of all other particular kinds of labour,
takes the form that all the physically different articles that are the products of labour, have one common
quality, viz., that of having value.

Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into relation with each other as values, it is not because
we see in these articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. Quite the contrary:
whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate,
as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon them. We are not aware of this,
nevertheless we do it. \2S] Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is. It is
value, rather, that converts every product into a social hieroglyphic. Later on, we try to decipher the
hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an object of utility as a
value, is just as much a social product as language. The recent scientific discovery, that the products of
labour, so far as they are values, are but material expressions of the human labour spent in their
production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the history of the development of the human race, but, by no
means, dissipates the mist through which the social character of labour appears to us to be an objective
character of the products themselves. The fact, that in the particular form of production with which we
are dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the specific social character of private labour carried on



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (26 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

independently, consists in the equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue of its being human labour,
which character, therefore, assumes in the product the form of value — this fact appears to the producers,
notwithstanding the discovery above referred to, to be just as real and final, as the fact, that, after the
discovery by science of the component gases of air, the atmosphere itself remained unaltered.

What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they make an exchange, is the question, how
much of some other product they get for their own? in what proportions the products are exchangeable?
When these proportions have, by custom, attained a certain stability, they appear to result from the nature
of the products, so that, for instance, one ton of iron and two ounces of gold appear as naturally to be of
equal value as a pound of gold and a pound of iron in spite of their different physical and chemical
qualities appear to be of equal weight. The character of having value, when once impressed upon
products, obtains fixity only by reason of their acting and re-acting upon each other as quantities of
value. These quantities vary continually, independently of the will, foresight and action of the producers.
To them, their own social action takes the form of the action of objects, which rule the producers instead
of being ruled by them. It requires a fully developed production of commodities before, from
accumulated experience alone, the scientific conviction springs up, that all the different kinds of private
labour, which are carried on independently of each other, and yet as spontaneously developed branches
of the social division of labour, are continually being reduced to the quantitative proportions in which
society requires them. And why? Because, in the midst of all the accidental and ever fluctuating
exchange-relations between the products, the labour-time socially necessary for their production forcibly
asserts itself like an over-riding law of Nature. The law of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls
about our ears. f291 The determination of the magnitude of value by labour- time is therefore a secret,
hidden under the apparent fluctuations in the relative values of commodities. Its discovery, while
removing all appearance of mere accidentality from the determination of the magnitude of the values of
products, yet in no way alters the mode in which that determination takes place.

Man's reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, also, his scientific analysis of those
forms, take a course directly opposite to that of their actual historical development. He begins, post
festum, with the results of the process of development ready to hand before him. The characters that
stamp products as commodities, and whose establishment is a necessary preliminary to the circulation of
commodities, have already acquired the stability of natural, self-understood forms of social life, before
man seeks to decipher, not their historical character, for in his eyes they are immutable, but their
meaning. Consequently it was the analysis of the prices of commodities that alone led to the
determination of the magnitude of value, and it was the common expression of all commodities in money
that alone led to the establishment of their characters as values. It is, however, just this ultimate
money-form of the world of commodities that actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the social
character of private labour, and the social relations between the individual producers. When I state that
coats or boots stand in a relation to linen, because it is the universal incarnation of abstract human labour,
the absurdity of the statement is self-evident. Nevertheless, when the producers of coats and boots
compare those articles with linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver, as the universal
equivalent, they express the relation between their own private labour and the collective labour of society
in the same absurd form.

The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like forms. They are forms of thought expressing
with social validity the conditions and relations of a definite, historically determined mode of production,
viz., the production of commodities. The whole mystery of commodities, all the magic and necromancy
that surrounds the products of labour as long as they take the form of commodities, vanishes therefore, so

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (27 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

soon as we come to other forms of production.

Since Robinson Crusoe's experiences are a favourite theme with political economists, f301 let us take a
look at him on his island. Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to satisfy, and must
therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing
and hunting. Of his prayers and the like we take no account, since they are a source of pleasure to him,
and he looks upon them as so much recreation. In spite of the variety of his work, he knows that his
labour, whatever its form, is but the activity of one and the same Robinson, and consequently, that it
consists of nothing but different modes of human labour. Necessity itself compels him to apportion his
time accurately between his different kinds of work. Whether one kind occupies a greater space in his
general activity than another, depends on the difficulties, greater or less as the case may be, to be
overcome in attaining the useful effect aimed at. This our friend Robinson soon learns by experience, and
having rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the wreck, commences, like a true-born Briton, to
keep a set of books. His stock-book contains a list of the objects of utility that belong to him, of the
operations necessary for their production; and lastly, of the labour-time that definite quantities of those
objects have, on an average, cost him. All the relations between Robinson and the objects that form this
wealth of his own creation, are here so simple and clear as to be intelligible without exertion, even to Mr.
Sedley Taylor. And yet those relations contain all that is essential to the determination of value.

Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson's island bathed in light to the European middle ages
shrouded in darkness. Here, instead of the independent man, we find everyone dependent, serfs and lords,
vassals and suzerains, laymen and clergy. Personal dependence here characterises the social relations of
production just as much as it does the other spheres of life organised on the basis of that production. But
for the very reason that personal dependence forms the ground-work of society, there is no necessity for
labour and its products to assume a fantastic form different from their reality. They take the shape, in the
transactions of society, of services in kind and payments in kind. Here the particular and natural form of
labour, and not, as in a society based on production of commodities, its general abstract form is the
immediate social form of labour. Compulsory labour is just as properly measured by time, as
commodity-producing labour; but every serf knows that what he expends in the service of his lord, is a
definite quantity of his own personal labour-power. The tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter
of fact than his blessing. No matter, then, what we may think of the parts played by the different classes
of people themselves in this society, the social relations between individuals in the performance of their
labour, appear at all events as their own mutual personal relations, and are not disguised under the shape
of social relations between the products of labour.

For an example of labour in common or directly associated labour, we have no occasion to go back to
that spontaneously developed form which we find on the threshold of the history of all civilised races.
f3 11 We have one close at hand in the patriarchal industries of a peasant family, that produces corn,
cattle, yarn, linen, and clothing for home use. These different articles are, as regards the family, so many
products of its labour, but as between themselves, they are not commodities. The different kinds of
labour, such as tillage, cattle tending, spinning, weaving and making clothes, which result in the various
products, are in themselves, and such as they are, direct social functions, because functions of the family,
which, just as much as a society based on the production of commodities, possesses a spontaneously
developed system of division of labour. The distribution of the work within the family, and the regulation
of the labour-time of the several members, depend as well upon differences of age and sex as upon
natural conditions varying with the seasons. The labour-power of each individual, by its very nature,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (28 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

operates in this case merely as a definite portion of the whole labour-power of the family, and therefore,
the measure of the expenditure of individual labour-power by its duration, appears here by its very nature
as a social character of their labour.

Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a community of free individuals, carrying on their
work with the means of production in common, in which the labour-power of all the different individuals
is consciously applied as the combined labour-power of the community. All the characteristics of
Robinson's labour are here repeated, but with this difference, that they are social, instead of individual.
Everything produced by him was exclusively the result of his own personal labour, and therefore simply
an object of use for himself. The total product of our community is a social product. One portion serves
as fresh means of production and remains social. But another portion is consumed by the members as
means of subsistence. A distribution of this portion amongst them is consequently necessary. The mode
of this distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the community, and the degree of
historical development attained by the producers. We will assume, but merely for the sake of a parallel
with the production of commodities, that the share of each individual producer in the means of
subsistence is determined by his labour-time. Labour-time would, in that case, play a double part. Its
apportionment in accordance with a definite social plan maintains the proper proportion between the
different kinds of work to be done and the various wants of the community. On the other hand, it also
serves as a measure of the portion of the common labour borne by each individual, and of his share in the
part of the total product destined for individual consumption. The social relations of the individual
producers, with regard both to their labour and to its products, are in this case perfectly simple and
intelligible, and that with regard not only to production but also to distribution.

The religious world is but the reflex of the real world. And for a society based upon the production of
commodities, in which the producers in general enter into social relations with one another by treating
their products as commodities and values, whereby they reduce their individual private labour to the
standard of homogeneous human labour-for such a society, Christianity with its cultus of abstract man,
more especially in its bourgeois developments, Protestantism, Deism, &c, is the most fitting form of
religion. In the ancient Asiatic and other ancient modes of production, we find that the conversion of
products into commodities, and therefore the conversion of men into producers of commodities, holds a
subordinate place, which, however, increases in importance as the primitive communities approach
nearer and nearer to their dissolution. Trading nations, properly so called, exist in the ancient world only
in its interstices, like the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews in the pores of Polish society.
Those ancient social organisms of production are, as compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple
and transparent. But they are founded either on the immature development of man individually, who has
not yet severed the umbilical cord that unites him with his fellowmen in a primitive tribal community, or
upon direct relations of subjection. They can arise and exist only when the development of the productive
power of labour has not risen beyond a low stage, and when, therefore, the social relations within the
sphere of material life, between man and man, and between man and Nature, are correspondingly narrow.
This narrowness is reflected in the ancient worship of Nature, and in the other elements of the popular
religions. The religious reflex of the real world can, in any case, only then finally vanish, when the
practical relations of every-day life offer to man none but perfectly intelligible and reasonable relations
with regard to his fellowmen and to Nature.

The life-process of society, which is based on the process of material production, does not strip off its
mystical veil until it is treated as production by freely associated men, and is consciously regulated by
them in accordance with a settled plan. This, however, demands for society a certain material

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (29 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

ground-work or set of conditions of existence which in their turn are the spontaneous product of a long
and painful process of development.

Political Economy has indeed analysed, however incompletely, f321 value and its magnitude, and has
discovered what lies beneath these forms. But it has never once asked the question why labour is
represented by the value of its product and labour-time by the magnitude of that value. f331 These
formulae, which bear it stamped upon them in unmistakable letters that they belong to a state of society,
in which the process of production has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by him, such
formulae appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a self-evident necessity imposed by Nature as
productive labour itself. Hence forms of social production that preceded the bourgeois form, are treated
by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as the Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian religions.
[341

To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism inherent in commodities, or by the
objective appearance of the social characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, by the dull
and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature in the formation of exchange-value. Since
exchange- value is a definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour bestowed upon an object,
Nature has no more to do with it, than it has in fixing the course of exchange.

The mode of production in which the product takes the form of a commodity, or is produced directly for
exchange, is the most general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. It therefore makes its
appearance at an early date in history, though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner as
now-a-days. Hence its Fetish character is comparatively easy to be seen through. But when we come to
more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity vanishes. Whence arose the illusions of the
monetary system? To it gold and silver, when serving as money, did not represent a social relation
between producers, but were natural objects with strange social properties. And modern economy, which
looks down with such disdain on the monetary system, does not its superstition come out as clear as
noon-day, whenever it treats of capital? How long is it since economy discarded the physiocratic illusion,
that rents grow out of the soil and not out of society?

But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet another example relating to the
commodity-form. Could commodities themselves speak, they would say: Our use-value may be a thing
that interests men. It is no part of us as objects. What, however, does belong to us as objects, is our value.
Our natural intercourse as commodities proves it. In the eyes of each other we are nothing but
exchange- values. Now listen how those commodities speak through the mouth of the economist. "Value"
— (i.e., exchange-value) "is a property of things, riches" — (i.e., use-value) "of man. Value, in this
sense, necessarily implies exchanges, riches do not." f351 "Riches" (use-value) "are the attribute of men,
value is the attribute of commodities. A man or a community is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable... A
pearl or a diamond is valuable" as a pearl or a diamond. f361 So far no chemist has ever discovered
exchange- value either in a pearl or a diamond. The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who
by-the-by lay special claim to critical acumen, find however that the use-value of objects belongs to them
independently of their material properties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a part of them as
objects. What confirms them in this view, is the peculiar circumstance that the use-value of objects is
realised without exchange, by means of a direct relation between the objects and man, while, on the other
hand, their value is realised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social process. Who fails here to call
to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who informs neighbour Seacoal, that, "To be a well-favoured man is



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (30 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by Nature." [371



Footnotes

T 1 1 Karl Marx, " Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie ." Berlin, 1859, p. 3.

[21 "Desire implies want, it is the appetite of the mind, and as natural as hunger to the body.... The
greatest number (of things) have their value from supplying the wants of the mind." Nicholas Barbon: "A
Discourse Concerning Coining the New Money Lighter. In Answer to Mr. Locke's Considerations, &c ",
London, 1696, pp. 2, 3. [off-site link]

[31 "Things have an intrinsick vertue" (this is Barbon's special term for value in use) "which in all places
have the same vertue; as the loadstone to attract iron" ( I.e., p. 6) . The property which the magnet
possesses of attracting iron, became of use only after by means of that property the polarity of the magnet
had been discovered.

[41 "The natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to supply the necessities, or serve the
conveniencies of human life." (John Locke, " Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering
of Interest, 1691L [off-site link]," in Works Edit. Lond., 1777, Vol. II., p. 28.) In English writers of the
17th century we frequently find "worth" in the sense of value in use, and "value" in the sense of
exchange- value. This is quite in accordance with the spirit of a language that likes to use a Teutonic word
for the actual thing, and a Romance word for its reflexion.

[5] In bourgeois societies the economic fictio juris prevails, that every one, as a buyer, possesses an
encyclopedic knowledge of commodities.

[6] "La valeur consiste dans le rapport d'echange qui se trouve entre telle chose et telle autre entre telle
mesure d'une production et telle mesure d'une autre." (Le Trosne: "De l'lnteret Social." Physiocrates , Ed.
Daire. Paris, 1846. P. 889.)

[71 "Nothing can have an intrinsick value." ( N. Barbon, t. c, p. 6 ); or as Butler says — "The value of a
thing Is just as much as it will bring."

[81 N. Barbon, I.e., p. 53 and 7 .

[91 "The value of them (the necessaries of life), when they are exchanged the one for another, is regulated
by the quantity of labour necessarily required, and commonly taken in producing them." ("Some
Thoughts on the Interest of Money in General, and Particularly in the Publick Funds, &." Lond., p. 36)
This remarkable anonymous work written in the last century, bears no date. It is clear, however, from
internal evidence that it appeared in the reign of George II, about 1739 or 1740.

[101 "Toutes les productions d'un meme genre ne forment proprement qu'une masse, dont le prix se
determine en general et sans egard aux circonstances particulieres." (Le Trosne, I.e., p. 893.)

[Ill K.Marx. I.e., p.6.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (31 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

[121 I am inserting the parenthesis because its omission has often given rise to the misunderstanding that
every product that is consumed by some one other than its producer is considered in Marx a commodity.
[Engels, 4th German Edition]

f 131 Tutti i fenomeni dell'universo, sieno essi prodotti della mano dell'uomo, ovvero delle universali
leggi della fisica, non ci danno idea di attuale creazione, ma unicamente di una modificazione della
materia. Accostare e separare sono gli unici elementi che l'ingegno umano ritrova analizzando l'idea della
riproduzione: e tanto e riproduzione di valore (value in use, although Verri in this passage of his
controversy with the Physiocrats is not himself quite certain of the kind of value he is speaking of) e di
ricchezze se la terra, I'aria e I'acqua ne' campi si trasmutino in grano, come se colla mano dell'uomo il
glutine di un insetto si trasmuti in velluto ovvero alcuni pezzetti di metalio si organizzino a formare una
ripetizione."-Pietro Verri, "Meditazioni sulla Economia Politica" [first printed in 1773] in Custodi's
edition of the Italian Economists, Parte Moderna, t. XV., p. 22.

[14] Comp. Hegel, " Philosophic des Rechts ." Berlin, 1840. P. 250

fl51 The reader must note that we are not speaking here of the wages or value that the labourer gets for a
given labour-time, but of the value of the commodity in which that labour-time is materialised. Wages is
a category that, as yet, has no existence at the present stage of our investigation.

fl61 In order to prove that labour alone is that all-sufficient and real measure, by which at all times the
value of all commodities can be estimated and compared, Adam Smith says, "Equal quantities of labour
must at all times and in all places have the same value for the labourer. In his normal state of health,
strength, and activity, and with the average degree of skill that he may possess, he must always give up
the same portion of his rest his freedom, and his happiness." ( "Wealth of Nations," b. I. ch. V. ) On the
one hand Adam Smith here (but not everywhere) confuses the determination of value by means of the
quantity of labour expended in the production of commodities, with the determination of the values of
commodities by means of the value of labour, and seeks in consequence to prove that equal quantities of
labour have always the same value. On the other hand he has a presentiment, that labour, so far as it
manifests itself in the value of commodities, counts only as expenditure of labour-power, but he treats
this expenditure as the mere sacrifice of rest, freedom, and happiness, not as at the same time the normal
activity of living beings. But then, he has the modern wage-labourer in his eye. Much more aptly, the
anonymous predecessor of Adam Smith, quoted above in Note 1, p. 39 [note 9 etext]. says "one man has
employed himself a week in providing this necessary of life ... and he that gives him some other in
exchange cannot make a better estimate of what is a proper equivalent, than by computing what cost him
just as much labour and time which in effect is no more than exchanging one man's labour in one thing
for a time certain, for another man's labour in another thing for the same time." (I.e., p. 39.) [The English
language has the advantage of possessing different words for the two aspects of labour here considered.
The labour which creates Use- Value, and counts qualitatively, is Work, as distinguished from Labour,
that which creates Value and counts quantitatively, is Labour as distinguished from Work - Engels]

[171 The few economists, amongst whom is S. Bailey, who have occupied themselves with the analysis
of the form of value, have been unable to arrive at any result, first, because they confuse the form of
value with value itself; and second, because, under the coarse influence of the practical bourgeois, they
exclusively give their attention to the quantitative aspect of the question. "The command of quantity ...
constitutes value." ("Money and its Vicissitudes." London, 1837, p. 11. By S. Bailey.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (32 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

f 181 The celebrated Franklin, one of the first economists, after Wm. Petty, who saw through the nature of
value, says: "Trade in general being nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all
things is ... most justly measured by labour." ("The works of B. Franklin, &c," edited by Sparks. Boston,
1836, Vol. II., p. 267.) Franklin is unconscious that by estimating the value of everything in labour, he
makes abstraction from any difference in the sorts of labour exchanged, and thus reduces them all to
equal human labour. But although ignorant of this, yet he says it. He speaks first of "the one labour," then
of "the other labour," and finally of "labour," without further qualification, as the substance of the value
of everything.

f 191 In a sort of way, it is with man as with commodities. Since he comes into the world neither with a
looking glass in his hand, nor as a Fichtian philosopher, to whom "I am I" is sufficient, man first sees and
recognises himself in other men. Peter only establishes his own identity as a man by first comparing
himself with Paul as being of like kind. And thereby Paul, just as he stands in his Pauline personality,
becomes to Peter the type of the genus homo.

f2Q1 Value is here, as occasionally in the preceding pages, used in sense of value determined as to
quantity, or of magnitude of value.

f211 This incongruity between the magnitude of value and its relative expression has, with customary
ingenuity, been exploited by vulgar economists. For example -"Once admit that A falls, because B, with
which it is exchanged, rises, while no less labour is bestowed in the meantime on A, and your general
principle of value falls to the ground.... If he [Ricardo] allowed that when A rises in value relatively to B,
B falls in value relatively to A, he cut away the ground on which he rested his grand proposition, that the
value of a commodity is ever determined by the labour embodied in it, for if a change in the cost of A
alters not only its own value in relation to B, for which it is exchanged, but also the value of B relatively
to that of A, though no change has taken place in the quantity of labour to produce B, then not only the
doctrine falls to the ground which asserts that the quantity of labour bestowed on an article regulates its
value, but also that which affirms the cost of an article to regulate its value' (J. Broadhurst: "Political
Economy," London, 1842, pp. 11 and 14.) Mr. Broadhurst might just as well say: consider the fractions
10/20, 10/50, 10/100, &c, the number 10 remains unchanged, and yet its proportional magnitude, its
magnitude relatively to the numbers 20, 50, 100 &c, continually diminishes. Therefore the great
principle that the magnitude of a whole number, such as 10, is "regulated" by the number of times unity
is contained in it, falls to the ground. [The author explains in section 4 of this chapter, pp. 80- 81, note 2
(note 33 etext), what he understands by "Vulgar Economy." - Engels]

f221 Such expressions of relations in general, called by Hegel reflex-categories , form a very curious
class. For instance, one man is king only because other men stand in the relation of subjects to him.
They, on the contrary, imagine that they are subjects because he is king.

f231 F. L. A. Ferrier, sous-inspecteur des douanes, "Du gouvernement considere dans ses rapports avec le
commerce," Paris, 1805; and Charles Ganilh, "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique, — 2nd ed., Paris,
1821.

f241 In Homer, for instance, the value of an article is expressed in a series of different things II. Vll.

472-475.

f251 For this reason, we can speak of the coat- value of the linen when its value is expressed in coats, or



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (33 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

of its corn- value when expressed in corn, and so on. Every such expression tells us, that what appears in
the use-values, cost, corn, &c, is the value of the linen. "The value of any commodity denoting its
relation in exchange, we may speak of it as ... corn-value, cloth- value, according to the commodity with
which it is compared; and hence there are a thousand different kinds of value, as many kinds of value as
there are commodities in existence, and all are equally real and equally nominal." ("A Critical
Dissertation on the Nature, Measures and Causes of Value: chiefly in reference to the writings of Mr.
Ricardo and his followers." By the author of "Essays on the Formation, &c, of Opinions. ' London, 1825,
p. 39.) S. Bailey, the author of this anonymous work, a work which in its day created much stir in
England, fancied that, by thus pointing out the various relative expressions of one and the same value, he
had proved the impossibility of any determination of the concept of value. However narrow his own
views may have been, yet, that he laid his finger on some serious defects in the Ricardian Theory, is
proved by the animosity with which he was attacked by Ricardo's followers. See the Westminster Review
for example.

f261 It is by no means self-evident that this character of direct and universal exchangeability is, so to
speak, a polar one, and as intimately connected with its opposite pole, the absence of direct
exchangeability, as the positive pole of the magnet is with its negative counterpart. It may therefore be
imagined that all commodities can simultaneously have this character impressed upon them, just as it can
be imagined that all Catholics can be popes together. It is, of course, highly desirable in the eyes of the
petit bourgeois, for whom the production of commodities is the nee plus ultra of human freedom and
individual independence, that the inconveniences resulting from this character of commodities not being
directly exchangeable, should be removed. Proudhon's socialism is a working out of this Philistine
Utopia, a form of socialism which, as I have elsewhere shown, does not possess even the merit of
originality. Long before his time, the task was attempted with much better success by Gray, Bray, and
others. But, for all that, wisdom of this kind flourishes even now in certain circles under the name of
"science." Never has any school played more tricks with the word science, than that of Proudhon, for "wo
Begriffe fehlen, Da stellt zur rechten Zeit ein Wort sich ein." [See Proudhon's " Philosophy of Poverty "
— off- site link)

\27] Among the ancient Germans the unit for measuring land was what could be harvested in a day, and
was called Tagwerk, Tagwanne (jurnale, or terra jurnalis, or diornalis), Mannsmaad, &c. (See G. L. von
Maurer, "Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, &c. Verfassung," Munchen, 1854, p. 129 sq.)

\2S] When, therefore, Galiani says: Value is a relation between persons — "La Ricchezza e una ragione
tra due persone," — he ought to have added: a relation between persons expressed as a relation between
things. (Galiani: Delia Moneta [off-site link], p. 221, V. III. of Custodi's collection of "Scrittori Classici
Italiani di Economia Politica." Parte Moderna, Milano 1803.)

f291 What are we to think of a law that asserts itself only by periodical revolutions? It is just nothing but
a law of Nature, founded on the want of knowledge of those whose action is the subject of it." (Friedrich
Engels: "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," in the "Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbucher,"
edited by Arnold Ruge and Karl Marx. Paris. 1844.)

POI Even Ricardo has his stories a la Robinson. "He makes the primitive hunter and the primitive fisher
straightway, as owners of commodities, exchange fish and game in the proportion in which labour-time
is incorporated in these exchange-values. On this occasion he commits the anachronism of making these
men apply to the calculation, so far as their implements have to be taken into account, the annuity tables

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (34 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

in current use on the London Exchange in the year 1817. The parallelograms of Mr. Owen' appear to be
the only form of society, besides the bourgeois form, with which he was acquainted." (Karl Marx: " Zur
Kritik, &c ." pp. 38, 39)

f3 11 'A ridiculous presumption has latterly got abroad that common property in its primitive form is
specifically a Slavonian, or even exclusively Russian form. It is the primitive form that we can prove to
have existed amongst Romans, Teutons, and Celts, and even to this day we find numerous examples,
ruins though they be, in India. A more exhaustive study of Asiatic, and especially of Indian forms of
common property, would show how from the different forms of primitive common property, different
forms of its dissolution have been developed. Thus, for instance, the various original types of Roman and
Teutonic private property are deducible from different forms of Indian common property." (Karl Marx,
" Zur Kritik, &c ," p. 10.)

f321 The insufficiency of Ricardo's analysis of the magnitude of value, and his analysis is by far the best,
will appear from the 3rd and 4th books of this work. As regards value in general, it is the weak point of
the classical school of Political Economy that it nowhere expressly and with full consciousness,
distinguishes between labour, as it appears in the value of a product, and the same labour, as it appears in
the use-value of that product. Of course the distinction is practically made, since this school treats labour,
at one time under its quantitative aspect, at another under its qualitative aspect. But it has not the least
idea, that when the difference between various kinds of labour is treated as purely quantitative, their
qualitative unity or equality, and therefore their reduction to abstract human labour, is implied. For
instance, Ricardo declares that he agrees with Destutt de Tracy in this proposition: "As it is certain that
our physical and moral faculties are alone our original riches, the employment of those faculties, labour
of some kind, is our only original treasure, and it is always from this employment that all those things are
created which we call riches.... It is certain, too, that all those things only represent the labour which has
created them, and if they have a value, or even two distinct values, they can only derive them from that
(the value) of the labour from which they emanate." (Ricardo, " The Principles of Pol. Econ. ," [off-site
link] 3 Ed. Lond. 1821, p. 334.) We would here only point out, that Ricardo puts his own more profound
interpretation upon the words of Destutt. What the latter really says is, that on the one hand all things
which constitute wealth represent the labour that creates them, but that on the other hand, they acquire
their "two different values" (use-value and exchange-value) from "the value of labour." He thus falls into
the commonplace error of the vulgar economists, who assume the value of one commodity (in this case
labour) in order to determine the values of the rest. But Ricardo reads him as if he had said, that labour
(not the value of labour) is embodied both in use-value and exchange- value. Nevertheless, Ricardo
himself pays so little attention to the two-fold character of the labour which has a two-fold embodiment,
that he devotes the whole of his chapter on "Value and Riches, Their Distinctive Properties," to a
laborious examination of the trivialities of a J.B. Say. And at the finish he is quite astonished to find that
Destutt on the one hand agrees with him as to labour being the source of value, and on the other hand
with J. B. Say as to the notion of value.

f331 It is one of the chief failings of classical economy that it has never succeeded, by means of its
analysis of commodities, and, in particular, of their value, in discovering that form under which value
becomes exchange- value. Even Adam Smith and Ricardo , the best representatives of the school, treat the
form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connexion with the inherent nature of
commodities. The reason for this is not solely because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis
of the magnitude of value. It lies deeper. The value-form of the product of labour is not only the most

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (35 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:14]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

abstract, but is also the most universal form, taken by the product in bourgeois production and stamps
that production as a particular species of social production, and thereby gives it its special historical
character. If then we treat this mode of production as one eternally fixed by Nature for every state of
society, we necessarily overlook that which is the differentia specifica of the value-form, and
consequently of the commodity-form, and of its further developments, money-form, capital-form, &c.
We consequently find that economists, who are thoroughly agreed as to labour-time being the measure of
the magnitude of value, have the most strange and contradictory ideas of money, the perfected form of
the general equivalent. This is seen in a striking manner when they treat of banking, where the
commonplace definitions of money will no longer hold water. This led to the rise of a restored mercantile
system (Ganilh, &c), which sees in value nothing but a social form, or rather the unsubstantial ghost of
that form. Once for all I may here state, that by classical Political Economy, I understand that economy
which, since the time of W. Petty , has investigated the real relations of production in bourgeois society in
contradistinction to vulgar economy, which deals with appearances only, ruminates without ceasing on
the materials long since provided by scientific economy, and there seeks plausible explanations of the
most obtrusive phenomena, for bourgeois daily use, but for the rest, confines itself to systematising in a
pedantic way, and proclaiming for everlasting truths, the trite ideas held by the self-complacent
bourgeoisie with regard to their own world, to them the best of all possible worlds.

f341 "Les economistes ont une singuliere maniere de proceder. II n'y a pour eux que deux sortes
d'institutions, celles de l'art et celles de la nature. Les institutions de la feodalite sont des institutions
artificielles celles de la bourgeoisie sont des institutions naturelles. lis ressemblent en ceci aux
theologiens, qui eux aussi etablissent deux sortes de religions. Toute religion qui n'est pas la leur, est une
invention des hommes tandis que leur propre religion est une emanation de Dieu -Ainsi il y a eu de
l'histoire, mais il n'y en a plus." (Karl Marx. Misere de la Philosophie. Reponse a la Philosophic de la
Misere par M. Proudhon , 1847, p. 113.) Truly comical is M. Bastiat, who imagines that the ancient
Greeks and Romans lived by plunder alone. But when people plunder for centuries, there must always be
something at hand for them to seize; the objects of plunder must be continually reproduced. It would thus
appear that even Greeks and Romans had some process of production, consequently, an economy, which
just as much constituted the material basis of their world, as bourgeois economy constitutes that of our
modern world. Or perhaps Bastiat means, that a mode of production based on slavery is based on a
system of plunder. In that case he treads on dangerous ground. If a giant thinker like Aristotle erred in his
appreciation of slave labour, why should a dwarf economist like Bastiat be right in his appreciation of
wage-labour? I seize this opportunity of shortly answering an objection taken by a German paper in
America, to my work, "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oekonomie, 1859." In the estimation of that paper, my view
that each special mode of production and the social relations corresponding to it, in short, that the
economic structure of society, is the real basis on which the juridical and political superstructure is raised
and to which definite social forms of thought correspond; that the mode of production determines the
character of the social, political, and intellectual life generally, all this is very true for our own times, in
which material interests preponderate, but not for the middle ages, in which Catholicism, nor for Athens
and Rome, where politics, reigned supreme. In the first place it strikes one as an odd thing for any one to
suppose that these well-worn phrases about the middle ages and the ancient world are unknown to
anyone else. This much, however, is clear, that the middle ages could not live on Catholicism, nor the
ancient world on politics. On the contrary, it is the mode in which they gained a livelihood that explains
why here politics, and there Catholicism, played the chief part. For the rest, it requires but a slight
acquaintance with the history of the Roman republic, for example, to be aware that its secret history is



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (36 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:15]



Capital Vol. I - Chapter One

the history of its landed property. On the other hand, Don Quixote long ago paid the penalty for wrongly
imagining that knight errantry was compatible with all economic forms of society.

f351 "Observations on certain verbal disputes in Pol. Econ., particularly relating to value and to demand
and supply" Lond., 1821, p. 16.

£361 S. Bailey, I.e., p. 165.

\37] The author of "Observations" and S. Bailey accuse Ricardo of converting exchange-value from
something relative into something absolute. The opposite is the fact. He has explained the apparent
relation between objects, such as diamonds and pearls, in which relation they appear as exchange-values,
and disclosed the true relation hidden behind the appearances, namely, their relation to each other as
mere expressions of human labour. If the followers of Ricardo answer Bailey somewhat rudely, and by
no means convincingly, the reason is to be sought in this, that they were unable to find in Ricardo's own
works any key to the hidden relations existing between value and its form, exchange- value.



Transcribed by Bert Schultz (1993)

Html Markup by Brian Basgen & Andy Blunden (1999)

Next: Chapter Two: Exchange
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm (37 of 37) [23/08/2000 16:15:15]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Parti:

Commodities and Money



CHAPTER TWO:
EXCHANGE



It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make exchanges of their own account. We must,
therefore, have recourse to their guardians, who are also their owners Commodities are things, and
therefore without power of resistance against man. If they are wanting in docility he can use force; in
other words, he can take possession of them. JJJ In order that these objects may enter into relation with
each other as commodities, their guardians must place themselves in relation to one another, as persons
whose will resides in those object, and must behave in such a way that each does not appropriate the
commodity of the other, and part with his own, except by means of an act done by mutual consent. They
must therefore, mutually recognise in each other the rights of private proprietors. This juridical relation,
which thus expresses itself in a contract, whether such contract be part of a developed legal system or
not, is a relation between two wills, and is but the reflex of the real economic relation between the two. It
is this economic relation that determines the subject-matter comprised in each such juridical act. \2\

The persons exist for one another merely as representatives of, and, therefore, as owners of,
commodities. In the course of our investigation we shall find, in general, that the characters who appear
on the economic stage are but the personifications of the economic relations that exist between them.

What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the fact, that it looks upon every other
commodity as but the form of appearance of its own value. A born leveller and a cynic, it is always ready
to exchange not only soul, but body, with any and every other commodity, be the same more repulsive
than Maritornes herself. The owner makes up for this lack in the commodity of a sense of the concrete,
by his own five and more senses. His commodity possesses for himself no immediate use- value.
Otherwise, he would not bring it to the market. It has use- value for others; but for himself its only direct
use-value is that of being a depository of exchange-value, and, consequently, a means of exchange. f31
Therefore, he makes up his mind to part with it for commodities whose value in use is of service to him.
All commodities are non-use-values for their owners, and use- values for their non-owners. Consequently,
they must all change hands. But this change of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter
puts them in relation with each other as values, and realises them as values. Hence commodities must be
realised as values before they can be realised as use-values.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (1 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

On the other hand, they must show that they are use- values before they can be realised as values. For the
labour spent upon them counts effectively, only in so far as it is spent in a form that is useful for others.
Whether that labour is useful for others, and its product consequently capable of satisfying the wants of
others, can be proved only by the act of exchange.

Every owner of a commodity wishes to part with it in exchange only for those commodities whose
use-value satisfies some want of his. Looked at in this way, exchange is for him simply a private
transaction. On the other hand, he desires to realise the value of his commodity, to convert it into any
other suitable commodity of equal value, irrespective of whether his own commodity has or has not any
use-value for the owner of the other. From this point of view, exchange is for him a social transaction of
a general character. But one and the same set of transactions cannot be simultaneously for all owners of
commodities both exclusively private and exclusively social and general.

Let us look at the matter a little closer. To the owner of a commodity, every other commodity is, in
regard to his own, a particular equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is the universal
equivalent for all the others. But since this applies to every owner, there is, in fact, no commodity acting
as universal equivalent, and the relative value of commodities possesses no general form under which
they can be equated as values and have the magnitude of their values compared. So far, therefore, they do
not confront each other as commodities, but only as products or use-values. In their difficulties our
commodity owners think like Faust: "Im Anfang war die That." They therefore acted and transacted
before they thought. Instinctively they conform to the laws imposed by the nature of commodities. They
cannot bring their commodities into relation as values, and therefore as commodities, except by
comparing them with some one other commodity as the universal equivalent. That we saw from the
analysis of a commodity. But a particular commodity cannot become the universal equivalent except by a
social act. The social action therefore of all other commodities, sets apart the particular commodity in
which they all represent their values. Thereby the bodily form of this commodity becomes the form of
the socially recognised universal equivalent. To be the universal equivalent, becomes, by this social
process, the specific function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. Thus it becomes — money. "Illi
unum consilium habent et virtutem et potestatem suam bestiae tradunt. Et ne quis possit emere aut
vendere, nisi qui habet characterem aut nomen bestiae aut numerum nominis ejus." (Apocalypse.)

Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course of the exchanges, whereby different products of
labour are practically equated to one another and thus by practice converted into commodities. The
historical progress and extension of exchanges develops the contrast, latent in commodities, between
use-value and value. The necessity for giving an external expression to this contrast for the purposes of
commercial intercourse, urges on the establishment of an independent form of value, and finds no rest
until it is once for all satisfied by the differentiation of commodities into commodities and money. At the
same rate, then, as the conversion of products into commodities is being accomplished, so also is the
conversion of one special commodity into money. \4]

The direct barter of products attains the elementary form of the relative expression of value in one
respect, but not in another. That form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B. The form of direct barter is x
use-value A = y use-value B.£52 The articles A and B in this case are not as yet commodities, but become
so only by the act of barter. The first step made by an object of utility towards acquiring exchange-value
is when it forms a non-use- value for its owner, and that happens when it forms a superfluous portion of
some article required for his immediate wants. Objects in themselves are external to man, and
consequently alienable by him. In order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is only necessary for

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (2 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each other as private owners of those alienable objects, and by
implication as independent individuals. But such a state of reciprocal independence has no existence in a
primitive society based on property in common, whether such a society takes the form of a patriarchal
family, an ancient Indian community, or a Peruvian Inca State. The exchange of commodities, therefore,
first begins on the boundaries of such communities, at their points of contact with other similar
communities, or with members of the latter. So soon, however, as products once become commodities in
the external relations of a community, they also, by reaction, become so in its internal intercourse. The
proportions in which they are exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance. What makes them
exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to alienate them. Meantime the need for foreign objects
of utility gradually establishes itself. The constant repetition of exchange makes it a normal social act. In
the course of time, therefore, some portion at least of the products of labour must be produced with a
special view to exchange. From that moment the distinction becomes firmly established between the
utility of an object for the purposes of consumption, and its utility for the purposes of exchange. Its
use-value becomes distinguished from its exchange-value. On the other hand, the quantitative proportion
in which the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on their production itself. Custom stamps
them as values with definite magnitudes.

In the direct barter of products, each commodity is directly a means of exchange to its owner, and to all
other persons an equivalent, but that only in so far as it has use-value for them. At this stage, therefore,
the articles exchanged do not acquire a value-form independent of their own use-value, or of the
individual needs of the exchangers. The necessity for a value-form grows with the increasing number and
variety of the commodities exchanged. The problem and the means of solution arise simultaneously.
Commodity-owners never equate their own commodities to those of others, and exchange them on a
large scale, without different kinds of commodities belonging to different owners being exchangeable
for, and equated as values to, one and the same special article. Such last-mentioned article, by becoming
the equivalent of various other commodities, acquires at once, though within narrow limits, the character
of a general social equivalent. This character comes and goes with the momentary social acts that called
it into life. In turns and transiently it attaches itself first to this and then to that commodity. But with the
development of exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular sorts of commodities, and
becomes crystallised by assuming the money-form. The particular kind of commodity to which it sticks
is at first a matter of accident. Nevertheless there are two circumstances whose influence is decisive. The
money-form attaches itself either to the most important articles of exchange from outside, and these in
fact are primitive and natural forms in which the exchange-value of home products finds expression; or
else it attaches itself to the object of utility that forms, like cattle, the chief portion of indigenous
alienable wealth. Nomad races are the first to develop the money-form, because all their worldly goods
consist of moveable objects and are therefore directly alienable; and because their mode of life, by
continually bringing them into contact with foreign communities, solicits the exchange of products. Man
has often made man himself, under the form of slaves, serve as the primitive material of money, but has
never used land for that purpose. Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois society already well
developed. It dates from the last third of the 17th century, and the first attempt to put it in practice on a
national scale was made a century afterwards, during the French bourgeois revolution.

In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the value of commodities more and more expands
into an embodiment of human labour in the abstract, in the same proportion the character of money
attaches itself to commodities that are by Nature fitted to perform the social function of a universal
equivalent. Those commodities are the precious metals.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (3 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

The truth of the proposition that, "although gold and silver are not by Nature money, money is by Nature
gold and silver, "[6] is shown by the fitness of the physical properties of these metals for the functions of
money .JT[ Up to this point, however, we are acquainted only with one function of money, namely, to
serve as the form of manifestation of the value of commodities, or as the material in which the
magnitudes of their values are socially expressed. An adequate form of manifestation of value, a fit
embodiment of abstract, undifferentiated, and therefore equal human labour, that material alone can be
whose every sample exhibits the same uniform qualities. On the other hand, since the difference between
the magnitudes of value is purely quantitative, the money commodity must be susceptible of merely
quantitative differences, must therefore be divisible at will, and equally capable of being reunited. Gold
and silver possess these properties by Nature.

The use-value of the money-commodity becomes two-fold. In addition to its special use-value as a
commodity (gold, for instance, serving to stop teeth, to form the raw material of articles of luxury, &c),
it acquires a formal use- value, originating in its specific social function.

Since all commodities are merely particular equivalents of money, the latter being their universal
equivalent, they, with regard to the latter as the universal commodity, play the parts of particular
commodities. [8]

We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown upon one single commodity, of the value
relations between all the rest. That money is a commodity £9] is therefore a new discovery only for those
who, when they analyse it, start from its fully developed shape. The act of exchange gives to the
commodity converted into money, not its value, but its specific value-form. By confounding these two
distinct things some writers have been led to hold that the value of gold and silver is imaginary, f 101 The
fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced by mere symbols of itself, gave rise to that other
mistaken notion, that it is itself a mere symbol. Nevertheless under this error lurked a presentiment that
the money-form of an object is not an inseparable part of that object, but is simply the form under which
certain social relations manifest themselves. In this sense every commodity is a symbol, since, in so far
as it is value, it is only the material envelope of the human labour spent upon it.JJJJ But if it be declared
that the social characters assumed by objects, or the material forms assumed by the social qualities of
labour under the regime of a definite mode of production, are mere symbols, it is in the same breath also
declared that these characteristics are arbitrary fictions sanctioned by the so-called universal consent of
mankind. This suited the mode of explanation in favour during the 18th century. Unable to account for
the origin of the puzzling forms assumed by social relations between man and man, people sought to
denude them of their strange appearance by ascribing to them a conventional origin.

It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form of a commodity does not imply the
determination of the magnitude of its value. Therefore, although we may be aware that gold is money,
and consequently directly exchangeable for all other commodities, yet that fact by no means tells how
much 10 lbs., for instance, of gold is worth. Money, like every other commodity, cannot express the
magnitude of its value except relatively in other commodities. This value is determined by the
labour-time required for its production, and is expressed by the quantity of any other commodity that
costs the same amount of labour-time. |T21 Such quantitative determination of its relative value takes
place at the source of its production by means of barter. When it steps into circulation as money, its value
is already given. In the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown that money is a
commodity, but this step marks only the infancy of the analysis. The difficulty lies, not in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (4 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

comprehending that money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what means a
commodity becomes money, f 131

We have already seen, from the most elementary expression of value, x commodity A = y commodity B,
that the object in which the magnitude of the value of another object is represented, appears to have the
equivalent form independently of this relation, as a social property given to it by Nature. We followed up
this false appearance to its final establishment, which is complete so soon as the universal equivalent
form becomes identified with the bodily form of a particular commodity, and thus crystallised into the
money-form. What appears to happen is, not that gold becomes money, in consequence of all other
commodities expressing their values in it, but, on the contrary, that all other commodities universally
express their values in gold, because it is money. The intermediate steps of the process vanish in the
result and leave no trace behind. Commodities find their own value already completely represented,
without any initiative on their part, in another commodity existing in company with them. These objects,
gold and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of the earth, are forthwith the direct incarnation of all
human labour. Hence the magic of money. In the form of society now under consideration, the behaviour
of men in the social process of production is purely atomic. Hence their relations to each other in
production assume a material character independent of their control and conscious individual action.
These facts manifest themselves at first by products as a general rule taking the form of commodities. We
have seen how the progressive development of a society of commodity-producers stamps one privileged
commodity with the character of money. Hence the riddle presented by money is but the riddle presented
by commodities; only it now strikes us in its most glaring form.



Footnotes

T 1 1 In the 12th century, so renowned for its piety, they included amongst commodities some very delicate
things. Thus a French poet of the period enumerates amongst the goods to be found in the market of
Landit, not only clothing shoes, leather, agricultural implements, &c, but also "femmes folles de leur
corps."

\2] Proudhon begins by taking his ideal of Justice, of "justice eternelle," from the juridical relations that
correspond to the production of commodities: thereby, it may be noted, he proves, to the consolation of
all good citizens, that the production of commodities is a form of production as everlasting as justice.
Then he turns round and seeks to reform the actual production of commodities, and the actual legal
system corresponding thereto, in accordance with this ideal. What opinion should we have of a chemist,
who, instead of studying the actual laws of the molecular changes in the composition and decomposition
of matter, and on that foundation solving definite problems, claimed to regulate the composition and
decomposition of matter by means of the "eternal ideas," of "naturalite" and "affinite"? Do we really
know any more about "usury," when we say it contradicts "justice eternelle," equite eternelle "mutualite
eternelle," and other verites eternelle than the fathers of the church did when they said it was
incompatible with '-grace eternelle," "foi eternelle," and "la volonte eternelle de Dieu"?

\3] "For two-fold is the use of every object.... The one is peculiar to the object as such, the other is not, as
a sandal which may be worn, and is also exchangeable. Both are uses of the sandal, for even he who
exchanges the sandal for the money or food he is in want of, makes use of the sandal as a sandal. But not



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (5 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

in its natural way. For it has not been made for the sake of being exchanged." (Aristoteles, "De Rep." 1. i.
c. 9.)

\4] From this we may form an estimate of the shrewdness of the petit-bourgeois socialism, which, while
perpetuating the production of commodities, aims at abolishing the "antagonism" between money and
commodities, and consequently, since money exists only by virtue of this antagonism, at abolishing
money itself. We might just as well try to retain Catholicism without the Pope. For more on this point see
my work, "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oekon.", p. 61, sq.

[51 So long as, instead of two distinct use-values being exchanged, a chaotic mass of articles are offered
as the equivalent of a single article, which is often the case with savages, even the direct barter of
products is in its first infancy.

[61 Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 135. "I metalli ... naturalmente moneta." (Galiani, "Delia moneta" in Custodi's
Collection: Parte Moderna t. iii.)

[7} For further details on this subject see in my work cited above, the chapter on "The precious metals."

[81 "II danaro e la merce universale "(Verri, 1. c, p. 16).

[9J "Silver and gold themselves (which we may call by the general name of bullion) are ... commodities
... rising and falling in ... value ... Bullion, then, may be reckoned to be of higher value where the smaller
weight will purchase the greater quantity of the product or manufacture of the countrey," &c. ("A
Discourse of the General Notions of Money, Trade, and Exchanges, as They Stand in Relation each to
other." By a Merchant. Lond., 1695, p. 7.) "Silver and gold, coined or uncoined, though they are used for
a measure of all other things, are no less a commodity than wine, oil, tobacco, cloth, or stuffs." ("A
Discourse concerning Trade, and that in particular of the East Indies," &c. London, 1689, p. 2.) "The
stock and riches of the kingdom cannot properly be confined to money, nor ought gold and silver to be
excluded from being merchandise." ("The East-India Trade a Most Profitable Trade." London, 1677, p.
4.)

f 101 "L'oro e l'argento hanno valore come metalli anteriore all'esser moneta." (Galiani, 1. c.) Locke says,
"The universal consent of mankind gave to silver, on account of its qualities which made it suitable for
money, an imaginary value." Law, on the other hand. "How could different nations give an imaginary
value to any single thing... or how could this imaginary value have maintained itself?" But the following
shows how little he himself understood about the matter: "Silver was exchanged in proportion to the
value in use it possessed, consequently in proportion to its real value. By its adoption as money it
received an additional value (une valeur additionnelle)". (Jean Law: "Considerations sur le numeraire et
le commerce" in E. Daire's Edit, of "Economistes Financiers du XVIII siecle," p. 470.)

fill "L' Argent en (des denrees) est le signe." (V. de Forbonnais: "Elements du Commerce, Nouv. Edit.
Leyde, 1766," t. II., p. 143.) "Comme signe il est attire par les denrees." (1. c, p. 155.) "L'argent est un
signe d'une chose et la represente." (Montesquieu: "Esprit des Lois," (Oeuvres, Lond. 1767, t. II, p. 2.)
"L'argent n'est pas simple signe, car il est lui-meme richesse, il ne represente pas les valeurs, il les
equivaut." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 910.) "The notion of value contemplates the valuable article as a mere
symbol- the article counts not for what it is, but for what it is worth." (Hegel, 1. c, p. 100.) Lawyers
started long before economists the idea that money is a mere symbol, and that the value of the precious
metals is purely imaginary. This they did in the sycophantic service of the crowned heads, supporting the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (6 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Two

right of the latter to debase the coinage, during the whole of the middle ages, by the traditions of the
Roman Empire and the conceptions of money to be found in the Pandects. "Qu'aucun puisse ni doive
faire doute," says an apt scholar of theirs Philip of Valois, in a decree of 1346, "que a nous et a notre
majeste royale n'appartiennent seulement ... le mestier, le fait, l'etat, la provision et toute l'ordonnance des
monnaies, de donner tel cours, et pour tel prix comme il nous plait et bon nous semble." It was a maxim
of the Roman Law that the value of money was fixed by decree of the emperor. It was expressly
forbidden to treat money as a commodity. "Pecunias vero nulli emere fas erit, nam in usu publico
constitutas oportet non esse mercem." Some good work on this question has been done by G. F. Pagnini:
"Saggio sopra il giusto pregio delle cose, 1751"; Custodi "Parte Moderna," t. II. In the second part of his
work Pagnini directs his polemics especially against the lawyers.

fl21 "If a man can bring to London an ounce of Silver out of the Earth in Peru, in the same time that he
can produce a bushel of Corn, then the one is the natural price of the other; now, if by reason of new or
more easier mines a man can procure two ounces of silver as easily as he formerly did one, the corn will
be as cheap at ten shillings the bushel as it was before at five shillings, caeteris paribus." William Petty.
"A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions." Lond., 1667, p. 32.

f 131 The learned Professor Roscher, after first informing us that "the false definitions of money may be
divided into two main groups: those which make it more, and those which make it less, than a
commodity," gives us a long and very mixed catalogue of works on the nature of money, from which it
appears that he has not the remotest idea of the real history of the theory; and then he moralises thus:
"For the rest, it is not to be denied that most of the later economists do not bear sufficiently in mind the
peculiarities-that distinguish money from other commodities" (it is then, after all, either more or less than
a commodity!)... 'So far, the semi-mercantilist reaction of Ganilh is not altogether without foundation."
(Wilhelm Roscher: "Die Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie," 3rd Edn. 1858, pp. 207-210.) More! less!
not sufficiently! so far! not altogether! What clearness and precision of ideas and language! And such
eclectic professorial twaddle is modestly baptised by Mr. Roscher, "the anatomico-physiological method"
of Political Economy! One discovery however, he must have credit for, namely, that money is "a pleasant
commodity."

Transcribed by Bert Shultz

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Three: Money, or the Circulation of Commodities
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch02.htm (7 of 7) [23/08/2000 16:15:19]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Parti:

Commodities and Money



CHAPTER THREE:

MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES



Contents

Section 1 — The Measure of Values
Section 2 — The Medium of Circulation

A. The Metamorphosis of Commodities

B. The Currency of Money

C. Coin and Symbols of Value

Section 3 — Money

A. Hoarding

B. Means of Payment

C. Universal Money

SECTION 1

THE MEASURE OF VALUES



Throughout this work, I assume, for the sake of simplicity, gold as the money-commodity.

The first chief function of money is to supply commodities with the material for the expression of their
values, or to represent their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, qualitatively equal, and
quantitatively comparable. It thus serves as a universal measure of value. And only by virtue of this
function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excellence, become money.

It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. Just the contrary. It is because all
commodities, as values, are realised human labour, and therefore commensurable, that their values can be

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (1 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

measured by one and the same special commodity, and the latter be converted into the common measure
of their values, i.e., into money. Money as a measure of value, is the phenomenal form that must of
necessity be assumed by that measure of value which is immanent in commodities, labour-time. [JJ

The expression of the value of a commodity in gold — x commodity A = y money-commodity — is its
money-form or price. A single equation, such as 1 ton of iron = 2 ounces of gold, now suffices to express
the value of the iron in a socially valid manner. There is no longer any need for this equation to figure as
a link in the chain of equations that express the values of all other commodities, because the equivalent
commodity, gold, now has the character of money. The general form of relative value has resumed its
original shape of simple or isolated relative value. On the other hand, the expanded expression of relative
value, the endless series of equations, has now become the form peculiar to the relative value of the
money-commodity. The series itself, too, is now given, and has social recognition in the prices of actual
commodities. We have only to read the quotations of a price-list backwards, to find the magnitude of the
value of money expressed in all sorts of commodities. But money itself has no price. In order to put it on
an equal footing with all other commodities in this respect, we should be obliged to equate it to itself as
its own equivalent.

The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form of value generally, a form quite distinct from
their palpable bodily form; it is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form. Although invisible, the value of
iron, linen and corn has actual existence in these very articles: it is ideally made perceptible by their
equality with gold, a relation that, so to say, exists only in their own heads. Their owner must, therefore,
lend them his tongue, or hang a ticket on them, before their prices can be communicated to the outside
world. [2J Since the expression of the value of commodities in gold is a merely ideal act, we may use for
this purpose imaginary or ideal money. Every trader knows, that he is far from having turned his goods
into money, when he has expressed their value in a price or in imaginary money, and that it does not
require the least bit of real gold, to estimate in that metal millions of pounds' worth of goods. When,
therefore, money serves as a measure of value; it is employed only as imaginary or ideal money. This
circumstance has given rise to the wildest theories. [3] But, although the money that performs the
functions of a measure of value is only ideal money, price depends entirely upon the actual substance that
is money. The value, or in other words, the quantity of human labour contained in a ton of iron, is
expressed in imagination by such a quantity of the money-commodity as contains the same amount of
labour as the iron. According, therefore, as the measure of value is gold, silver, or copper, the value of
the ton of iron will be expressed by very different prices, or will be represented by very different
quantities of those metals respectively.

If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and silver, are simultaneously measures of value,
all commodities have two prices — one a gold-price, the other a silver-price. These exist quietly side by
side, so long as the ratio of The value of silver to that of gold remains unchanged, say, at 15:1. Every
change in their ratio disturbs the ratio which exists between the gold-prices and the silver-prices of
commodities, and thus proves, by facts, that a double standard of value is inconsistent with the functions
of a standard. \4]

Commodities with definite prices present themselves under the form; a commodity A = x gold; b
commodity B = z gold; c commodity C = y gold, &c, where a, b, c, represent definite quantities of the
commodities A, B, C and x, z, y, definite quantities of gold. The values of these commodities are,
therefore, changed in imagination into so many different quantities of gold. Hence, in spite of the
confusing variety of the commodities themselves, their values become magnitudes of the same

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (2 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

denomination, gold-magnitudes. They are now capable of being compared with each other and measured,
and the want becomes technically felt of comparing them with some fixed quantity of gold as a unit
measure. This unit, by subsequent division into aliquot parts, becomes itself the standard or scale. Before
they become money, gold, silver, and copper already possess such standard measures in their standards
of weight, so that, for example, a pound weight, while serving as the unit, is, on the one hand, divisible
into ounces, and, on the other, may be combined to make up hundredweights. £51 It is owing to this that,
in all metallic currencies, the names given to the standards of money or of price were originally taken
from the pre-existing names of the standards of weight.

As measure of Value, and as standard of price, money has two entirely distinct functions to perform. It is
the measure of value inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation of human labour; it is the
standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight of metal. As the measure of value it serves to convert
the values of all the manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quantities of gold; as the standard
of price it measures those quantities of gold. The measure of values measures commodities considered as
values; the standard of price measures, on the contrary, quantities of gold by a unit quantity of gold, not
the value of one quantity of gold by the weight of another. In order to make gold a standard of price, a
certain weight must be fixed upon as the unit. In this case, as in all cases of measuring quantities of the
same denomination, the establishment of an unvarying unit of measure is all-important. Hence, the less
the unit is subject to variation, so much the better does the standard of price fulfil its office. But only in
so far as it is itself a product of labour, and, therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a
measure of value. £6]

It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value of gold does not, in any way, affect its
function as a standard of price. No matter how this value varies, the proportions between the values of
different quantities of the metal remain constant. However great the fall in its value, 12 ounces of gold
still have 12 times the value of 1 ounce; and in prices, the only thing considered is the relation between
different quantities of gold. Since, on the other hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can
alter its weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its aliquot parts. Thus gold always renders
the same service as an invariable standard of price, however much its value may vary.

In the second place, a change in the value of gold does not interfere with its functions as a measure of
value. The change affects all commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, caeteris paribus, leaves their
relative values inter se, unaltered, although those values are now expressed in higher or lower
gold-prices.

Just as when we estimate the value of any commodity by a definite quantity of the use-value of some
other commodity, so in estimating the value of the former in gold, we assume nothing more than that the
production of a given quantity of gold costs, at the given period, a given amount of labour. As regards the
fluctuations of prices generally, they are subject to the laws of elementary relative value investigated in a
former chapter.

A general rise in the prices of commodities can result only, either from a rise in their values — the value
of money remaining constant — or from a fall in the value of money, the values of commodities
remaining constant. On the other hand, a general fall in prices can result only, either from a fall in the
values of commodities — the value of money remaining constant — or from a rise in the value of money,
the values of commodities remaining constant. It therefore by no means follows, that a rise in the value
of money necessarily implies a proportional fall in the prices of commodities; or that a fall in the value of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (3 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

money implies a proportional rise in prices. Such change of price holds good only in the case of
commodities whose value remains constant. With those, for example, whose value rises, simultaneously
with, and proportionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in price. And if their value rise either
slower or faster than that of money, the fall or rise in their prices will be determined by the difference
between the change in their value and that of money; and so on.

Let us now go back to the consideration of the price-form.

By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current moneynames of the various weights of the
precious metal figuring as money, and the actual weights which those names originally represented. This
discrepancy is the result of historical causes, among which the chief are: — (1) The importation of
foreign money into an imperfectly developed community. This happened in Rome in its early days,
where gold and silver coins circulated at first as foreign commodities. The names of these foreign coins
never coincide with those of the indigenous weights. (2) As wealth increases, the less precious metal is
thrust out by the more precious from its place as a measure of value, copper by silver, silver by gold,
however much this order of sequence may be in contradiction with poetical chronology. [7] The word
pound, for instance, was the money-name given to an actual pound weight of silver. When gold replaced
silver as a measure of value, the same name was applied according to the ratio between the values of
silver and gold, to perhaps l-15th of a pound of gold. The word pound, as a money-name, thus becomes
differentiated from the same word as a weight-name. [8] (3) The debasing of money carried on for
centuries by kings and princes to such an extent that, of the original weights of the coins, nothing in fact
remained but the names. \9]

These historical causes convert the separation of the money-name from the weight-name into an
established habit with the community. Since the standard of money is on the one hand purely
conventional, and must on the other hand find general acceptance, it is in the end regulated by law. A
given weight of one of the precious metals, an ounce of gold, for instance, becomes officially divided
into aliquot parts, with legally bestowed names, such as pound, dollar, &c. These aliquot parts, which
thenceforth serve as units of money, are then subdivided into other aliquot parts with legal names, such
as shilling, penny, &c. flOl But, both before and after these divisions are made, a definite weight of
metal is the standard of metallic money. The sole alteration consists in the subdivision and denomination.

The prices, or quantities of gold, into which the values of commodities are ideally changed, are therefore
now expressed in the names of coins, or in the legally valid names of the subdivisions of the gold
standard. Hence, instead of saying: A quarter of wheat is worth an ounce of gold; we say, it is worth £3
17s. 10 l/2d. In this way commodities express by their prices how much they are worth, and money
serves as money of account whenever it is a question of fixing the value of an article in its money-form.

mi

The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities of that thing. I know nothing of a man, by
knowing that his name is Jacob. In the same way with regard to money, every trace of a value-relation
disappears in the names pound, dollar, franc, ducat, &c. The confusion caused by attributing a hidden
meaning to these cabalistic signs is all the greater, because these money-names express both the values of
commodities, and, at the same time, aliquot parts of the weight of the metal that is the standard of money.
fl21 On the other hand, it is absolutely necessary that value, in order that it may be distinguished from
the varied bodily forms of commodities, should assume this material and unmeaning, but, at the same
time, purely social form. |T31

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (4 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commodity. Hence the expression of the equivalence
of a commodity with the sum of money constituting its price, is a tautology, £14] just as in general the
expression of the relative value of a commodity is a statement of the equivalence of two commodities.
But although price, being the exponent of the magnitude of a commodity's value, is the exponent of its
exchange-ratio with money, it does not follow that the exponent of this exchange-ratio is necessarily the
exponent of the magnitude of the commodity's value. Suppose two equal quantities of socially necessary
labour to be respectively represented by 1 quarter of wheat and £2 (nearly 1/2 oz. of gold), £2 is the
expression in money of the magnitude of the value of the quarter of wheat, or is its price. If now
circumstances allow of this price being raised to £3, or compel it to be reduced to £1, then although £1
and £3 may be too small or too great properly to express the magnitude of the wheat's value; nevertheless
they are its prices, for they are, in the first place, the form under which its value appears, i.e., money; and
in the second place, the exponents of its exchange-ratio with money. If the conditions of production, in
other words, if the productive power of labour remain constant, the same amount of social labour-time
must, both before and after the change in price, be expended in the reproduction of a quarter of wheat.
This circumstance depends, neither on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that of the owners of other
commodities.

Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, it expresses the connexion that necessarily
exists between a certain article and the portion of the total labour-time of society required to produce it.
As soon as magnitude of value is converted into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape of a
more or less accidental exchange-ratio between a single commodity and another, the money-commodity.
But this exchange-ratio may express either the real magnitude of that commodity's value, or the quantity
of gold deviating from that value, for which, according to circumstances, it may be parted with. The
possibility, therefore, of quantitative incongruity between price and magnitude of value, or the deviation
of the former from the latter, is inherent in the price-form itself. This is no defect, but, on the contrary,
admirably adapts the price-form to a mode of production whose inherent laws impose themselves only as
the mean of apparently lawless irregularities that compensate one another.

The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the possibility of a quantitative incongruity
between magnitude of value and price, i.e., between the former and its expression in money, but it may
also conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so much so, that, although money is nothing but the value-form
of commodities, price ceases altogether to express value. Objects that in themselves are no commodities,
such as conscience, honour, &c, are capable of being offered for sale by their holders, and of thus
acquiring, through their price, the form of commodities. Hence an object may have a price without
having value. The price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathematics. On the other
hand, the imaginary price-form may sometimes conceal either a direct or indirect real value-relation; for
instance, the price of uncultivated land, which is without value, because no human labour has been
incorporated in it.

Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of a commodity (e.g., a ton of iron), by stating
that a given quantity of the equivalent (e.g., an ounce of gold), is directly exchangeable for iron. But it by
no means states the converse, that iron is directly exchangeable for gold. In order, therefore, that a
commodity may in practice act effectively as exchange-value, it must quit its bodily shape, must
transform itself from mere imaginary into real gold, although to the commodity such transubstantiation
may be more difficult than to the Hegelian "concept," the transition from "necessity" to "freedom," or to
a lobster the casting of his shell, or to Saint Jerome the putting off of the old Adam. |T51 Though a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (5 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

commodity may, side by side with its actual form (iron, for instance), take in our imagination the form of
gold, yet it cannot at one and the same time actually be both iron and gold. To fix its price, it suffices to
equate it to gold in imagination. But to enable it to render to its owner the service of a universal
equivalent, it must be actually replaced by gold. If the owner of the iron were to go to the owner of some
other commodity offered for exchange, and were to refer him to the price of the iron as proof that it was
already money, he would get the same answer as St. Peter gave in heaven to Dante, when the latter
recited the creed —

"Assad bene e trascorsa

D'esta moneta gia la lega e'l peso,

Ma dimmi se tu Thai nella tua borsa."

A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchangeable for money, and also that it must be so
exchanged. On the other hand, gold serves as an ideal measure of value, only because it has already, in
the process of exchange, established itself as the money-commodity. Under the ideal measure of values
there lurks the hard cash.



SECTION 2

THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION



A. The Metamorphosis of Commodities

We saw in a former chapter that the exchange of commodities implies contradictory and mutually
exclusive conditions. The differentiation of commodities into commodities and money does not sweep
away these inconsistencies, but develops a modus vivendi, a form in which they can exist side by side.
This is generally the way in which real contradictions are reconciled. For instance, it is a contradiction to
depict one body as constantly falling towards another, and as, at the same time, constantly flying away
from it. The ellipse is a form of motion which, while allowing this contradiction to go on, at the same
time reconciles it.

In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are transferred from hands in which they are
non-use-values, to hands in which they become use-values, it is a social circulation of matter. The
product of one form of useful labour replaces that of another. When once a commodity has found a
resting-place, where it can serve as a use-value, it falls out of the sphere of exchange into that of
consumption. But the former sphere alone interests us at present. We have, therefore, now to consider
exchange from a formal point of view; to investigate the change of form or metamorphosis of
commodities which effectuates the social circulation of matter.

The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very imperfect. The cause of this imperfection is,
apart from indistinct notions of value itself, that every change of form in a commodity results from the
exchange of two commodities, an ordinary one and the money-commodity. If we keep in view the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (6 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

material fact alone that a commodity has been exchanged for gold, we overlook the very thing that we
ought to observe — namely, what has happened to the form of the commodity. We overlook the facts
that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and that when other commodities express their prices
in gold, this gold is but the money-form of those commodities themselves.

Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange just as they are. The process then
differentiates them into commodities and money, and thus produces an external opposition corresponding
to the internal opposition inherent in them, as being at once use-values and values. Commodities as
use-values now stand opposed to money as exchange-value. On the other hand, both opposing sides are
commodities, unities of use-value and value. But this unity of differences manifests itself at two opposite
poles, and at each pole in an opposite way. Being poles they are as necessarily opposite as they are
connected. On the one side of the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in reality a
use-value. Its value is expressed only ideally in its price, by which it is equated to its opponent, the gold,
as to the real embodiment of its value. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic reality, ranks as the
embodiment of value, as money. Gold, as gold, is exchange-value itself. As to its use- value, that has only
an ideal existence, represented by the series of expressions of relative value in which it stands face to
face with all other commodities, the sum of whose uses makes up the sum of the various uses of gold.
These antagonistic forms of commodities are the real forms in which the process of their exchange
moves and takes place.

Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, our old friend the weaver of linen — to the
scene of action, the market. His 20 yards of linen has a definite price, £2. He exchanges it for the £2, and
then, like a man of the good old stamp that he is, he parts with the £2 for a family Bible of the same
price. The linen, which in his eyes is a mere commodity, a depository of value, he alienates in exchange
for gold, which is the linen's value-form, and this form he again parts with for another commodity, the
Bible, which is destined to enter his house as an object of utility and of edification to its inmates. The
exchange becomes an accomplished fact by two metamorphoses of opposite yet supplementary character
— the conversion of the commodity into money, and the re-conversion of the money into a commodity.
fl61 The two phases of this metamorphosis are both of them distinct transactions of the weaver —
selling, or the exchange of the commodity for money; buying, or the exchange of the money for a
commodity; and, the unity of the two acts, selling in order to buy.

The result of the whole transaction, as regards the weaver, is this, that instead of being in possession of
the linen, he now has the Bible; instead of his original commodity, he now possesses another of the same
value but of different utility. In like manner he procures his other means of subsistence and means of
production. From his point of view, the whole process effectuates nothing more than the exchange of the
product of his labour for the product of some one else's, nothing more than an exchange of products.

The exchange of commodities is therefore accompanied by the following changes in their form.

Commodity — Money — Commodity.
C M C.

The result of the whole process is, so far as concerns the objects themselves, C — C, the exchange of one
commodity for another, the circulation of materialised social labour. When this result is attained, the
process is at an end.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (7 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

C — M. First metamorphosis, or sale

The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, into the body of the gold, is, as I have
elsewhere called it, the salto mortale of the commodity. If it falls short, then, although the commodity
itself is not harmed, its owner decidedly is. The social division of labour causes his labour to be as
one-sided as his wants are many-sided. This is precisely the reason why the product of his labour serves
him solely as exchange- value. But it cannot acquire the properties of a socially recognised universal
equivalent, except by being converted into money. That money, however, is in some one else's pocket. In
order to entice the money out of that pocket, our friend's commodity must, above all things, be a
use-value to the owner of the money. For this, it is necessary that the labour expended upon it, be of a
kind that is socially useful, of a kind that constitutes a branch of the social division of labour. But
division of labour is a system of production which has grown up spontaneously and continues to grow
behind the backs of the producers. The commodity to be exchanged may possibly be the product of some
new kind of labour, that pretends to satisfy newly arisen requirements, or even to give rise itself to new
requirements. A particular operation, though yesterday, perhaps, forming one out of the many operations
conducted by one producer in creating a given commodity, may to-day separate itself from this
connexion, may establish itself as an independent branch of labour and send its incomplete product to
market as an independent commodity. The circumstances may or may not be ripe for such a separation.
To-day the product satisfies a social want. Tomorrow the article may, either altogether or partially, be
superseded by some other appropriate product. Moreover, although our weaver's labour may be a
recognised branch of the social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means sufficient to guarantee the
utility of his 20 yards of linen. If the community's want of linen, and such a want has a limit like every
other want, should already be saturated by the products of rival weavers, our friend's product is
superfluous, redundant, and consequently useless. Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth,
our friend does not frequent the market for the purpose of making presents. But suppose his product turn
out a real use-value, and thereby attracts money? The question arises, how much will it attract? No doubt
the answer is already anticipated in the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of its value.
We leave out of consideration here any accidental miscalculation of value by our friend, a mistake that is
soon rectified in the market. We suppose him to have spent on his product only that amount of
labour-time that is on an average socially necessary. The price then, is merely the moneyname of the
quantity of social labour realised in his commodity. But without the leave, and behind the back, of our
weaver, the old-fashioned mode of weaving undergoes a change. The labour-time that yesterday was
without doubt socially necessary to the production of a yard of linen, ceases to be so to-day, a fact which
the owner of the money is only too eager to prove from the prices quoted by our friend's competitors.
Unluckily for him, weavers are not few and far between. Lastly, suppose that every piece of linen in the
market contains no more labour-time than is socially necessary. In spite of this, all these pieces taken as a
whole, may have had superfluous labour-time spent upon them. If the market cannot stomach the whole
quantity at the normal price of 2 shillings a yard, this proves that too great a portion of the total labour of
the community has been expended in the form of weaving. The effect is the same as if each individual
weaver had expended more labour-time upon his particular product than is socially necessary. Here we
may say, with the German proverb: caught together, hung together. All the linen in the market counts but
as one article of commerce, of which each piece is only an aliquot part. And as a matter of fact, the value
also of each single yard is but the materialised form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of
homogeneous human labour. |T71

We see then, commodities are in love with money, but "the course of true love never did run smooth. "

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (8 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

The quantitative division of labour is brought about in exactly the same spontaneous and accidental
manner as its qualitative division. The owners of commodities therefore find out, that the same division
of labour that turns them into independent private producers, also frees the social process of production
and the relations of the individual producers to each other within that process, from all dependence on the
will of those producers, and that the seeming mutual independence of the individuals is supplemented by
a system of general and mutual dependence through or by means of the products.

The division of labour converts the product of labour into a commodity, and thereby makes necessary its
further conversion into money. At the same time it also makes the accomplishment of this
transubstantiation quite accidental. Here, however, we are only concerned with the phenomenon in its
integrity, and we therefore assume its progress to be normal. Moreover, if the conversion take place at
all, that is, if the commodity be not absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis does take place although the
price realised may be abnormally above or below the value.

The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer has his gold replaced by a commodity. The fact
which here stares us in the face is, that a commodity and gold, 20 yards of linen and £2, have changed
hands and places, in other words, that they have been exchanged. But for what is the commodity
exchanged? For the shape assumed by its own value, for the universal equivalent. And for what is the
gold exchanged? For a particular form of its own use-value. Why does gold take the form of money face
to face with the linen? Because the linen's price of £2, its denomination in money, has already equated
the linen to gold in its character of money. A commodity strips off its original commodity-form on being
alienated, i.e., on the instant its use-value actually attracts the gold, that before existed only ideally in its
price. The realisation of a commodity's price, or of its ideal value-form, is therefore at the same time the
realisation of the ideal use-value of money; the conversion of a commodity into money, is the
simultaneous conversion of money into a commodity. The apparently single process is in reality a double
one. From the pole of the commodity-owner it is a sale, from the opposite pole of the money-owner, it is
a purchase. In other words, a sale is a purchase, C — M is also M — C. |181

Up to this point we have considered men in only one economic capacity, that of owners of commodities,
a capacity in which they appropriate the produce of the labour of others, by alienating that of their own
labour. Hence, for one commodity-owner to meet with another who has money, it is necessary, either,
that the product of the labour of the latter person, the buyer, should be in itself money, should be gold,
the material of which money consists, or that his product should already have changed its skin and have
stripped off its original form of a useful object. In order that it may play the part of money, gold must of
course enter the market at some point or other. This point is to be found at the source of production of the
metal, at which place gold is bartered, as the immediate product of labour, for some other product of
equal value. From that moment it always represents the realised price of some commodity. [191 Apart
from its exchange for other commodities at the source of its production, gold, in whose-so-ever hands it
may be, is the transformed shape of some commodity alienated by its owner; it is the product of a sale or
of the first metamorphosis C — M. [201 Gold, as we saw, became ideal money, or a measure of values, in
consequence of all commodities measuring their values by it, and thus contrasting it ideally with their
natural shape as useful objects, and making it the shape of their value. It became real money, by the
general alienation of commodities, by actually changing places with their natural forms as useful objects,
and thus becoming in reality the embodiment of their values. When they assume this money-shape,
commodities strip off every trace of their natural use-value, and of the particular kind of labour to which
they owe their creation, in order to transform themselves into the uniform, socially recognised



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (9 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

incarnation of homogeneous human labour. We cannot tell from the mere look of a piece of money, for
what particular commodity it has been exchanged. Under their money-form all commodities look alike.
Hence, money may be dirt, although dirt is not money. We will assume that the two gold pieces, in
consideration of which our weaver has parted with his linen, are the metamorphosed shape of a quarter of
wheat. The sale of the linen, C — M, is at the same time its purchase, M — C. But the sale is the first act
of a process that ends with a transaction of an opposite nature, namely, the purchase of a Bible; the
purchase of the linen, on the other hand, ends a movement that began with a transaction of an opposite
nature, namely, with the sale of the wheat. C — M (linen — money), which is the first phase of
C — M' — C (linen — money — Bible), is also M — C (money — linen), the last phase of another
movement C — M — C (wheat — money — linen). The first metamorphosis of one commodity, its
transformation from a commodity into money, is therefore also invariably the second metamorphosis of
some other commodity, the retransformation of the latter from money into a commodity. f211

M — C, or purchase.

The second and concluding metamorphosis of a commodity

Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other commodities, the result of their general
alienation, for this reason it is alienable itself without restriction or condition. It reads all prices
backwards, and thus, so to say, depicts itself in the bodies of all other commodities, which offer to it the
material for the realisation of its own use-value. At the same time the prices, wooing glances cast at
money by commodities, define the limits of its convertibility, by pointing to its quantity. Since every
commodity, on becoming money, disappears as a commodity, it is impossible to tell from the money
itself, how it got into the hands of its possessor, or what article has been changed into it. Non olet, from
whatever source it may come. Representing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents on the other
a commodity to be bought. \22\

M — C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C — M, a sale; the concluding metamorphosis of one
commodity is the first metamorphosis of another. With regard to our weaver, the life of his commodity
ends with the Bible, into which he has reconverted his £2. But suppose the seller of the Bible turns the £2
set free by the weaver into brandy M — C, the concluding phase of C — M — C

(linen — money — Bible), is also C — M, the first phase of C — M — C (Bible — money — brandy). The
producer of a particular commodity has that one article alone to offer; this he sells very often in large
quantities, but his many and various wants compel him to split up the price realised, the sum of money
set free, into numerous purchases. Hence a sale leads to many purchases of various articles. The
concluding metamorphosis of a commodity thus constitutes an aggregation of first metamorphoses of
various other commodities.

If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a commodity, as a whole, it appears in the first
place, that it is made up of two opposite and complementary movements, C — M and M — C. These two
antithetical transmutations of a commodity are brought about by two antithetical social acts on the part of
the owner, and these acts in their turn stamp the character of the economic parts played by him. As the
person who makes a sale, he is a seller; as the person who makes a purchase, he is a buyer. But just as,
upon every such transmutation of a commodity, its two forms, commodity-form and money-form, exist
simultaneously but at opposite poles, so every seller has a buyer opposed to him, and every buyer a
seller. While one particular commodity is going through its two transmutations in succession, from a
commodity into money and from money into another commodity, the owner of the commodity changes
in succession his part from that of seller to that of buyer. These characters of seller and buyer are

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (10 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to the various persons engaged in the circulation
of commodities.

The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest form, implies four extremes, and three
dramatic personae. First, a commodity comes face to face with money; the latter is the form taken by the
value of the former, and exists in all its hard reality, in the pocket of the buyer. A commodity-owner is
thus brought into contact with a possessor of money. So soon, now, as the commodity has been changed
into money, the money becomes its transient equivalent-form, the use-value of which equivalent-form is
to be found in the bodies of other commodities. Money, the final term of the first transmutation, is at the
same time the starting-point for the second. The person who is a seller in the first transaction thus
becomes a buyer in the second, in which a third commodity-owner appears on the scene as a seller. f231

The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the metamorphosis of a commodity constitute
together a circular movement, a circuit: commodity-form, stripping off of this form, and return to the
commodity-form. No doubt, the commodity appears here under two different aspects. At the
starting-point it is not a use-value to its owner; at the finishing point it is. So, too, the money appears in
the first phase as a solid crystal of value, a crystal into which the commodity eagerly solidifies, and in the
second, dissolves into the mere transient equivalent-form destined to be replaced by a use-value.

The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the same time two inverse partial metamorphoses
of two other commodities. One and the same commodity, the linen, opens the series of its own
metamorphoses, and completes the metamorphosis of another (the wheat). In the first phase or sale, the
linen plays these two parts in its own person. But, then, changed into gold, it completes its own second
and final metamorphosis, and helps at the same time to accomplish the first metamorphosis of a third
commodity. Hence the circuit made by one commodity in the course of its metamorphoses is inextricably
mixed up with the circuits of other commodities. The total of all the different circuits constitutes the
circulation of commodities.

The circulation of commodities differs from the direct exchange of products (barter), not only in form,
but in substance. Only consider the course of events. The weaver has, as a matter of fact, exchanged his
linen for a Bible, his own commodity for that of some one else. But this is true only so far as he himself
is concerned. The seller of the Bible, who prefers something to warm his inside, no more thought of
exchanging his Bible for linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been exchanged for his linen. B's
commodity replaces that of A, but A and B do not mutually exchange those commodities. It may, of
course, happen that A and B make simultaneous purchases, the one from the other; but such exceptional
transactions are by no means the necessary result of the general conditions of the circulation of
commodities. We see here, on the one hand, how the exchange of commodities breaks through all local
and personal bounds inseparable from direct barter, and develops the circulation of the products of social
labour; and on the other hand, how it develops a whole network of social relations spontaneous in their
growth and entirely beyond the control of the actors. It is only because the farmer has sold his wheat that
the weaver is enabled to sell his linen, only because the weaver has sold his linen that our Hotspur is
enabled to sell his Bible, and only because the latter has sold the water of everlasting life that the distiller
is enabled to sell his eau-de-vie, and so on.

The process of circulation, therefore, does not, like direct barter of products, become extinguished upon
the use-values changing places and hands. The money does not vanish on dropping out of the circuit of
the metamorphosis of a given commodity. It is constantly being precipitated into new places in the arena



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (11 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

of circulation vacated by other commodities. In the complete metamorphosis of the linen, for example,
linen — money — Bible, the linen first falls out of circulation, and money steps into its place. Then the
Bible falls out of circulation, and again money takes its place. When one commodity replaces another,
the money-commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person. f241 Circulation sweats money
from every pore.

Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a
sale, therefore the circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of sales and purchases.
If this means that the number of actual sales is equal to the number of purchases, it is mere tautology. But
its real purport is to prove that every seller brings his buyer to market with him. Nothing of the kind. The
sale and the purchase constitute one identical act, an exchange between a commodity-owner and an
owner of money, between two persons as opposed to each other as the two poles of a magnet. They form
two distinct acts, of polar and opposite characters, when performed by one single person. Hence the
identity of sale and purchase implies that the commodity is useless, if, on being thrown into the
alchemistical retort of circulation, it does not come out again in the shape of money; if, in other words, it
cannot be sold by its owner, and therefore be bought by the owner of the money. That identity further
implies that the exchange, if it do take place, constitutes a period of rest, an interval, long or short, in the
life of the commodity. Since the first metamorphosis of a commodity is at once a sale and a purchase, it
is also an independent process in itself. The purchaser has the commodity, the seller has the money, i.e., a
commodity ready to go into circulation at any time. No one can sell unless some one else purchases. But
no one is forthwith bound to purchase, because he has just sold. Circulation bursts through all restrictions
as to time, place, and individuals, imposed by direct barter, and this it effects by splitting up, into the
antithesis of a sale and a purchase, the direct identity that in barter does exist between the alienation of
one's own and the acquisition of some other man's product. To say that these two independent and
antithetical acts have an intrinsic unity, are essentially one, is the same as to say that this intrinsic
oneness expresses itself in an external antithesis. If the interval in time between the two complementary
phases of the complete metamorphosis of a commodity become too great, if the split between the sale
and the purchase become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between them, their oneness, asserts
itself by producing — a crisis. The antithesis, use-value and value; the contradictions that private labour
is bound to manifest itself as direct social labour, that a particularised concrete kind of labour has to pass
for abstract human labour; the contradiction between the personification of objects and the representation
of persons by things; all these antitheses and contradictions, which are immanent in commodities, assert
themselves, and develop their modes of motion, in the antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a
commodity. These modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than the possibility, of crises. The
conversion of this mere possibility into a reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, from our
present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet no existence. f251



B. The currency [26] of money

The change of form, C — M — C, by which the circulation of the material products of labour is brought
about, requires that a given value in the shape of a commodity shall begin the process, and shall, also in
the shape of a commodity, end it. The movement of the commodity is therefore a circuit. On the other
hand, the form of this movement precludes a circuit from being made by the money. The result is not the
return of the money, but its continued removal further and further away from its starting-point. So long



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (12 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

as the seller sticks fast to his money, which is the transformed shape of his commodity, that commodity
is still in the first phase of its metamorphosis, and has completed only half its course. But so soon as he
completes the process, so soon as he supplements his sale by a purchase, the money again leaves the
hands of its possessor. It is true that if the weaver, after buying the Bible, sell more linen, money comes
back into his hands. But this return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen; that
circulation resulted in the money getting into the hands of the seller of the Bible. The return of money
into the hands of the weaver is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of the process of
circulation with a fresh commodity, which renewed process ends with the same result as its predecessor
did. Hence the movement directly imparted to money by the circulation of commodities takes the form of
a constant motion away from its starting-point, of a course from the hands of one commodity-owner into
those of another. This course constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie).

The currency of money is the constant and monotonous repetition of the same process. The commodity is
always in the hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase, always in the hands of the buyer.
And money serves as a means of purchase by realising the price of the commodity. This realisation
transfers the commodity from the seller to the buyer and removes the money from the hands of the buyer
into those of the seller, where it again goes through the same process with another commodity. That this
one-sided character of the money's motion arises out of the two-sided character of the commodity's
motion, is a circumstance that is veiled over. The very nature of the circulation of commodities begets
the opposite appearance. The first metamorphosis of a commodity is visibly, not only the money's
movement, but also that of the commodity itself; in the second metamorphosis, on the contrary, the
movement appears to us as the movement of the money alone. In the first phase of its circulation the
commodity changes place with the money. Thereupon the commodity, under its aspect of a useful object,
falls out of circulation into consumption. \27] In its stead we have its value-shape — the money. It then
goes through the second phase of its circulation, not under its own natural shape, but under the shape of
money. The continuity of the movement is therefore kept up by the money alone, and the same
movement that as regards the commodity consists of two processes of an antithetical character, is, when
considered as the movement of the money, always one and the same process, a continued change of
places with ever fresh commodities. Hence the result brought about by the circulation of-commodities,
namely, the replacing of one commodity by another, takes the appearance of having been effected not by
means of the change of form of the commodities but rather by the money acting as a medium of
circulation, by an action that circulates commodities, to all appearance motionless in themselves, and
transfers them from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which they are use-values; and
that in a direction constantly opposed to the direction of the money. The latter is continually withdrawing
commodities from circulation and stepping into their places, and in thus way continually moving further
and further from its starting-point Hence although the movement of the money is merely the expression
of the circulation of commodities, yet the contrary appears to be the actual fact, and the circulation of
commodities seems to be the result of the movement of the money. f281

Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because in it the values of commodities have
independent reality. Hence its movement, as the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely the movement
of commodities while changing their forms. This fact must therefore make itself plainly visible in the
currency of money. Thus the linen for instance, first of all changes its commodity-form into its
moneyform. The second term of its first metamorphosis, C — M, the money form, then becomes the first
term of its final metamorphosis, M — C, its re-conversion into the Bible. But each of these two changes
of form is accomplished by an exchange between commodity and money, by their reciprocal



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (13 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

displacement. The same pieces of 'coin come into the seller's hand as the alienated form of the commodity
and leave it as the absolutely alienable form of the commodity. They are displaced twice. The first
metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into the weaver's pocket, the second draws them out of it.
The two inverse changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected in the displacement, twice
repeated, but in opposite directions, of the same pieces of coin.

If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is gone through, if there are only sales or only
purchases, then a given piece of money changes its place only once. Its second change of place always
expresses the second metamorphosis of the commodity, its re-conversion from money. The frequent
repetition of the displacement of the same coins reflects not only the series of metamorphoses that a
single commodity has gone through, but also the intertwining of the innumerable metamorphoses in the
world of commodities in general. It is a matter of course, that all this is applicable to the simple
circulation of commodities alone, the only form that we are now considering.

Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and undergoes its first change of form, does so
only to fall out of circulation again and to be replaced by other commodities. Money, on the contrary, as
the medium of circulation, keeps continually within the sphere of circulation, and moves about in it. The
question therefore arises, how much money this sphere constantly absorbs?

In a given country there take place every day at the same time, but in different localities, numerous
one-sided metamorphoses of commodities, or, in other words, numerous sales and numerous purchases.
The commodities are equated beforehand in imagination, by their prices, to definite quantities of money.
And since, in the form of circulation now under consideration, money and commodities always come
bodily face to face, one at the positive pole of purchase, the other at the negative pole of sale, it is clear
that the amount of the means of circulation required, is determined beforehand by the sum of the prices
of all these commodities. As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents the quantity or sum of gold
ideally expressed beforehand by the sum of the prices of the commodities. The equality of these two
sums is therefore self-evident. We know, however, that, the values of commodities remaining constant,
their prices vary with the value of gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, and falling
in proportion as it rises. Now if, in consequence of such a rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the
prices of commodities fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency must fall or rise to the same extent.
The change in the quantity of the circulating medium is, in this case, it is true, caused by the money
itself, yet not in virtue of its function as a medium of circulation, but of its function as a measure of
value. First, the price of the commodities varies inversely as the value of the money, and then the
quantity of the medium of circulation varies directly as the price of the commodities. Exactly the same
thing would happen if, for instance, instead of the value of gold falling, gold were replaced by silver as
the measure of value, or if, instead of the value of silver rising, gold were to thrust silver out from being
the measure of value. In the one case, more silver would be current than gold was before; in the other
case, less gold would be current than silver was before. In each case the value of the material of money, i.
e., the value of the commodity that serves as the measure of value, would have undergone a change, and
therefore so, too, would the prices of commodities which express their values in money, and so, too,
would the quantity of money current whose function it is to realise those prices. We have already seen,
that the sphere of circulation has an opening through which gold (or the material of money generally)
enters into it as a commodity with a given value. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a
measure of value, when it expresses prices, its value is already determined. If now its value fall, this fact
is first evidenced by a change in the prices of those commodities that are directly bartered for the
precious metals at the sources of their production. The greater part of all other commodities, especially in

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (14 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

the imperfectly developed stages of civil society, will continue for a long time to be estimated by the
former antiquated and illusory value of the measure of value. Nevertheless, one commodity infects
another through their common value-relation, so that their prices, expressed in gold or in silver, gradually
settle down into the proportions determined by their comparative values, until finally the values of all
commodities are estimated in terms of the new value of the metal that constitutes money. This process is
accompanied by the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, an increase caused by their
streaming in to replace the articles directly bartered for them at their sources of production. In proportion
therefore as commodities in general acquire their true prices, in proportion as their values become
estimated according to the fallen value of the precious metal, in the same proportion the quantity of that
metal necessary for realising those new prices is provided beforehand. A one-sided observation of the
results that followed upon the discovery of fresh supplies of gold and silver, led some economists in the
17th, and particularly in the 18th century, to the false conclusion, that the prices of commodities had
gone up in consequence of the increased quantity of gold and silver serving as means of circulation.
Hence momentarily whenever we estimate the price of a commodity. On this supposition then, the
quantity of the medium of circulation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to be realised. If
now we further suppose the price of each commodity to be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends
on the mass of commodities in circulation. It requires but little racking of brains to comprehend that if
one quarter of wheat costs £2, 100 quarters will cost £200, 200 quarters £400, and so on, that
consequently the quantity of money that changes place with the wheat, when sold, must increase with the
quantity of that wheat.

If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of circulating money varies with the
fluctuations in the prices of those commodities. It increases and diminishes because the sum of the prices
increases or diminishes in consequence of the change of price. To produce this effect, it is by no means
requisite that the prices of all commodities should rise or fall simultaneously. A rise or a fall in the prices
of a number of leading articles, is sufficient in the one case to increase, in the other to diminish, the sum
of the prices of all commodities, and, therefore, to put more or less money in circulation. Whether the
change in the price correspond to an actual change of value in the commodities, or whether it be the
result of mere fluctuations in market-prices, the effect on the quantity of the medium of circulation
remains the same. Suppose the following articles to be sold or partially metamorphosed simultaneously
in different localities: say, one quarter of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of brandy. If
the price of each article be £2, and the sum of the prices to be realised be consequently £8, it follows that
£8 in money must go into circulation. If, on the other hand, these same articles are links in the following
chain of metamorphoses: 1 quarter of wheat — £2 — 20 yards of linen — £2 — 1 Bible — £2 — 4
gallons of brandy — £2, a chain that is already well known to us, in that case the £2 cause the different
commodities to circulate one after the other, and after realising their prices successively, and therefore
the sum of those prices, £8, they come to rest at last in the pocket of the distiller. The £2 thus make four
moves. This repeated change of place of the same pieces of money corresponds to the double change in
form of the commodities, to their motion in opposite directions through two stages of circulation, and to
the interlacing of the metamorphoses of different commodities. f291 These antithetic and complementary
phases, of which the process of metamorphosis consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but
successively. Time is therefore required for the completion of the series. Hence the velocity of the
currency of money is measured by the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a given time.
Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day. The sum of the prices to be realised in the day is £8,
the number of moves of the two pieces of money is four, and the quantity of money circulating is £2.
Hence, for a given interval of time during the process of circulation, we have the following relation: the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (15 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

quantity of money functioning as the circulating medium is equal to the sum of the prices of the
commodities divided by the number of moves made by coins of the same denomination. This law holds
generally.

The total circulation of commodities in a given country during a given period is made up on the one hand
of numerous isolated and simultaneous partial metamorphoses, sales which are at the same time
purchases, in which each coin changes its place only once, or makes only one move; on the other hand,
of numerous distinct series of metamorphoses partly running side by side, and partly coalescing with
each other, in each of which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number being greater or less
according to circumstances. The total number of moves made by all the circulating coins of one
denomination being given, we can arrive at the average number of moves made by a single coin of that
denomination, or at the average velocity of the currency of money. The quantity of money thrown into
the circulation at the beginning of each day is of course determined by the sum of the prices of all the
commodities circulating simultaneously side by side. But once in circulation, coins are, so to say, made
responsible for one another. If the one increase its velocity, the other either retards its own, or altogether
falls out of circulation; for the circulation can absorb only such a quantity of gold as when multiplied by
the mean number of moves made by one single coin or element, is equal to the sum of the prices to be
realised. Hence if the number of moves made by the separate pieces increase, the total number of those
pieces in circulation diminishes. If the number of the moves diminish, the total number of pieces
increases. Since the quantity of money capable of being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given
mean velocity of currency, all that is necessary in order to abstract a given number of sovereigns from
the circulation is to throw the same number of one-pound notes into it, a trick well known to all bankers.

Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but a reflex of the circulation of commodities, or
of the antithetical metamorphoses they undergo, so, too, the velocity of that currency reflects the rapidity
with which commodities change their forms, the continued interlacing of one series of metamorphoses
with another, the hurried social interchange of matter, the rapid disappearance of commodities from the
sphere of circulation, and the equally rapid substitution of fresh ones in their places. Hence, in the
velocity of the currency we have the fluent unity of the antithetical and complementary phases, the unity
of the conversion of the useful aspect of commodities into their value-aspect, and their re-conversion
from the latter aspect to the former, or the unity of the two processes of sale and purchase. On the other
hand, the retardation of the currency reflects the separation of these two processes into isolated
antithetical phases, reflects the stagnation in the change of form, and therefore, in the social interchange
of matter. The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue to the origin of this stagnation; it merely puts in
evidence the phenomenon itself. The general public, who, simultaneously with the retardation of the
currency, see money appear and disappear less frequently at the periphery of circulation, naturally
attribute this retardation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium. [301

The total quantity of money functioning during a given period as the circulating medium, is determined,
on the one hand, by the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities, and on the other hand, by the
rapidity with which the antithetical phases of the metamorphoses follow one another. On this rapidity
depends what proportion of the sum of the prices can, on the average, be realised by each single coin. But
the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the quantity, as well as on the prices, of
the commodities. These three factors, however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities, and
velocity of money-currency, are all variable. Hence, the sum of the prices to be realisedj and
consequently the quantity of the circulating medium depending on that sum, will vary with the numerous
variations of these three factors in combination. Of these variations we shall consider those alone that

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (16 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

have been the most important in the history of prices.

While prices remain constant, She quantity of the circulating medium may increase owing to the number
of circulating commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreasing, or to a combination of
the two. On the other hand the quantity of the circulating medium may decrease with a decreasing
number of commodities, or with an increasing rapidity of their circulation.

With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the circulating medium will remain
constant, provided the number of commodities in circulation decrease proportionally to the increase in
their prices, or provided the velocity of currency increase at the same rate as prices rise, the number of
commodities in circulation remaining constant. The quantity of the circulating medium may decrease,
owing to the number of commodities decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity of currency rise.

With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the circulating medium will remain
constant, provided the number of commodities increase proportionally to their fall in price, or provided
the velocity of currency decrease in the same proportion. The quantity of the circulating medium will
increase, provided the number of commodities increase quicker, or the rapidity of circulation decrease
quicker, than the prices fall.

The variations of the different factors may mutually compensate each other, so that notwithstanding their
continued instability, the sum of the prices to be realised and the quantity of money in circulation remain
constant; consequently, we find, especially if we take long periods into consideration, that the deviations
from the average level, of the quantity of money current in any country, are much smaller than we should
at first sight expect, apart of course from excessive perturbations periodically arising from industrial and
commercial crises, or less frequently, from fluctuations in the value of money.

The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is determined by the sum of the prices of the
commodities circulating, and the average increasing more rapidly, than prices velocity of currency f311
may also be stated as follows: given the sum of the values of commodities, and the average rapidity of
their metamorphoses, the quantity of precious metal current as money depends on the value of that
precious metal. The erroneous opinion that it is, on the contrary, prices that are determined by the
quantity of the circulating medium, and that the latter depends on the quantity of the precious metals in a
country; f321 this opinion was based by those who first held it, on the absurd hypothesis that
commodities are without a price, and money without a value, when they first enter into circulation, and
that, once in the circulation, an aliquot part of the medley of commodities is exchanged for an aliquot
part of the heap of precious metals. f331



C. Coin and symbols of value

That money takes the shape of coin, springs from its function as the circulating medium. The weight of
gold represented in imagination by the prices or money-names of commodities, must confront those
commodities, within the circulation, in the shape of coins or pieces of gold of a given denomination.
Coining, like the establishment of a standard of prices, is the business of the State. The different national
uniforms worn at home by gold and silver as coins, and doffed again in the market of the world, indicate
the separation between the internal or national spheres of the circulation of commodities, and their
universal sphere.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (17 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is one of shape, and gold can at any time pass
from one form to the other. f341 But no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it immediately finds itself
on the high-road to the melting pot. During their currency, coins wear away, some more, others less.
Name and substance, nominal weight and real weight, begin their process of separation. Coins of the
same denomination become different in value, because they are different in weight. The weight of gold
fixed upon as the standard of prices, deviates from the weight that serves as the circulating medium, and
the latter thereby ceases any longer to be a real equivalent of the commodities whose prices it realises.
The history of coinage during the middle ages and down into the 18th century, records the ever renewed
confusion arising from this cause. The natural tendency of circulation to convert coins into a mere
semblance of what they profess to be, into a symbol of the weight of metal they are officially supposed to
contain, is recognised by modern legislation, which fixes the loss of weight sufficient to demonetise a
gold coin, or to make it no longer legal tender.

The fact that the currency of coins itself effects a separation between their nominal and their real weight,
creating a distinction between them as mere pieces of metal on the one hand, and as coins with a definite
function on the other — this fact implies the latent possibility of replacing metallic coins by tokens of
some other material, by symbols serving the same purposes as coins. The practical difficulties in the way
of coining extremely minute quantities of gold or silver, and the circumstance that at first the less
precious metal is used as a measure of value instead of the-more precious, copper instead of silver, silver
instead of gold, and that the less precious circulates as money until dethroned by the more precious — all
these facts explain the parts historically played by silver and copper tokens as substitutes for gold coins.
Silver and copper tokens take the place of gold in those regions of the circulation where coins pass from
hand to hand most rapidly, and are subject to the maximum amount of wear and tear. This occurs where
sales and purchases on a very small scale are continually happening. In order to prevent these satellites
from establishing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive enactments determine the extent
to which they must be compulsorily received as payment instead of gold. The particular tracks pursued
by the different species of coin in currency, run naturally into each other. The tokens keep company with
gold, to pay fractional parts of the smallest gold coin; gold is, on the one hand, constantly pouring into
retail circulation, and on the other hand is as constantly being thrown out again by being changed into
tokens. f351

The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbitrarily fixed by law. When in currency, they
wear away even more rapidly than gold coins. Hence their functions are totally independent of their
weight, and consequently of all value. The function of gold as coin becomes completely independent of
the metallic value of that gold. Therefore things that are relatively without value, such as paper notes, can
serve as coins in its place. This purely symbolic character is to a certain extent masked in metal tokens.
In paper money it stands out plainly. In fact, ce n'est que le premier pas qui codte.

We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by the State and having compulsory circulation.
It has its immediate origin in the metallic currency. Money based upon credit implies on the other hand
conditions, which, from our standpoint of the simple circulation of commodities, are as yet totally
unknown to us. But we may affirm this much, that just as true paper money takes its rise in the function
of money as the circulating medium, so money based upon credit takes root spontaneously in the
function of money as the means of payment. f361

The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their various denominations, say £1, £5, &c, are



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (18 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

printed. In so far as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their movement is subject to
the laws that regulate the currency of money itself. A law peculiar to the circulation of paper money can
spring up only from the proportion in which that paper money represents gold. Such a law exists; stated
simply, it is as follows: the issue of paper money must not exceed in amount the gold (or silver as the
case may be) which would actually circulate if not replaced by symbols. Now the quantity of gold which
the circulation can absorb, constantly-fluctuates about a given level. Still, the mass of the circulating
medium in a given country never sinks below a certain minimum easily ascertained by actual experience.
The fact that this minimum mass continually undergoes changes in its constituent parts, or that the pieces
of gold of which it consists are being constantly replaced by fresh ones, causes of course no change
either in its amount or in the continuity of its circulation. It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols.
If, on the other hand, all the conduits of circulation were to-day filled with paper money to the full extent
of their capacity for absorbing money, they might to-morrow be overflowing in consequence of a
fluctuation in the circulation of commodities. There would no longer be any standard. If the paper money
exceed its proper limit, which is the amount in gold coins of the like denomination that can actually be
current, it would, apart from the danger of falling into general disrepute, represent only that quantity of
gold, which, in accordance with the laws of the circulation of commodities, is required, and is alone
capable of being represented by paper. If the quantity of paper money issued be double what it ought to
be, then, as a matter of fact, £1 would be the money-name not of 1/4 of an ounce, but of 1/8 of an ounce
of gold. The effect would be the same as if an alteration had taken place in the function of gold as a
standard of prices. Those values that were previously expressed by the price of £1 would now be
expressed by the price of £2.

Paper money is a token representing gold or money. The relation between it and the values of
commodities is this, that the latter are ideally expressed in the same quantities of gold that are
symbolically represented by the paper. Only in so far as paper money represents gold, which like all
other commodities has value, is it a symbol of value. \31]

Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being replaced by tokens that have no value? But, as
we have already seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so &r as it functions exclusively as coin,
or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else. Now, money has other functions besides this one, and
the isolated function of serving as the mere circulating medium is not necessarily the only one attached to
gold coin, although this is the case with those abraded coins that continue to circulate. Each piece of
money is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only so long as it actually circulates. But this is just the
case with that minimum mass of gold, which is capable of being replaced by paper money. That mass
remains constantly within the sphere of circulation, continually functions as a circulating medium, and
exists exclusively for that purpose. Its movement therefore represents nothing but the continued
alternation of the inverse phases of the metamorphosis C — M — C, phases in which commodities
confront their value-forms, only to disappear again immediately. The independent existence of the
exchange- value of a commodity is here a transient apparition, by means of which the commodity is
immediately replaced by another commodity. Hence, in this process which continually makes money
pass from hand to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money suffices. Its functional existence
absorbs, so to say, its material existence. Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of
commodities, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore capable of being replaced by a token.
\3S] One thing is, however, requisite; this token must have an objective social validity of its own, and
this the paper symbol acquires by its forced currency. This compulsory action of the State can take effect
only within that inner sphere of circulation which is coterminous with the territories of the community,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (19 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

but it is also only within that sphere that money completely responds to its function of being the
circulating medium, or becomes coin.



SECTION 3

MONEY



The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, either in its own person or by a representative,
as the medium of circulation, is money. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. It functions as money, on the
one hand, when it has to be present in its own golden person. It is then the money-commodity, neither
merely ideal, as in its function of a measure of value, nor capable of being represented, as in its function
of circulating medium. On the other hand, it also functions as money, when by virtue of its function,
whether that function be performed in person or by representative, it congeals into the sole form of value,
the only adequate form of existence of exchange- value, in opposition to use-value, represented by all
other commodities.



A. Hoarding

The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical metamorphoses of commodities, or the never
ceasing alternation of sale and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of money, or in the function
that money performs of a perpetuum mobile of circulation. But so soon as the series of metamorphoses is
interrupted, so soon as sales are not supplemented by subsequent purchases, money ceases to be
mobilised; it is transformed, as Boisguillebert says, from "meuble" into "immouble", from movable into
immovable, from coin into money.

With the very earliest development of the circulation of commodities, there is also developed the
necessity, and the passionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis. This product is
the transformed shape of the commodity, or its gold-chrysalis. f391 Commodities are thus sold not for the
purpose of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity-form by their money-form. From being
the mere means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this change of form becomes the end and
aim. The changed form of the commodity is thus prevented from functioning as its unconditionally
alienable form, or as its merely transient money-form. The money becomes petrified into a hoard, and the
seller becomes a hoarder of money.

In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is the surplus use-values alone that are converted
into money. Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions for superfluity or wealth. This
naive form of hoarding becomes perpetuated in those communities in which the traditional mode of
production is carried on for the supply of a fixed and limited circle of home wants. It is thus with the
people of Asia, and particularly of the East Indies. Vanderlint, who fancies that the prices of
commodities in a country are determined by the quantity of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (20 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

why Indian commodities are so cheap. Answer: Because the Hindus bury their money. From 1602 to
1734, he remarks, they buried 150 millions of pounds sterling of silver, which originally came from
America to Europe. [401 In the 10 years from 1856 to 1866, England exported to India and China
(120,000,000 in silver, which had been received in exchange for Australian gold. Most of the silver
exported to China makes its way to India.

As the production of commodities further develops, every producer of commodities is compelled, to
make sure of the nexus rerum or the social pledge. f411 His wants are constantly making themselves felt,
and necessitate the continual purchase of other people's commodities, while the production and sale of
his own goods require time, and depend upon circumstances. In order then to be able to buy without
selling, he must have sold previously without buying. This operation, conducted on a general scale,
appears to imply a contradiction. But the precious metals at the sources of their production are directly
exchanged for other commodities. And here we have sales (by the owners of commodities) without
purchases (by the owners of gold or silver). f421 And subsequent sales, by other producers, unfollowed
by purchases, merely bring about the distribution of the newly produced precious metals among all the
owners of commodities. In this way, all along the line of exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied
extent are accumulated. With the possibility of holding and storing up exchange-value in the shape of a
particular commodity, arises also the greed for gold. Along with the extension of circulation, increases
the power of money, that absolutely social form of wealth ever ready for use. "Gold is a wonderful thing!
Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. By means of gold one can even get souls into Paradise."
(Columbus in his letter from Jamaica, 1503.) Since gold does not disclose what has been transformed
into it, everything, commodity or not, is convertible into gold. Everything becomes saleable and buyable.
The circulation becomes the great social retort into which everything is thrown, to come out again as a
gold-crystal. Not even are the bones of saints, and still less are more delicate res sacrosanctae, extra
commercium hominum able to withstand this alchemy. f431 Just as every qualitative difference between
commodities is extinguished in money, so money, on its side, like the radical leveller that it is, does away
with all distinctions. f43al But money itself is a commodity, an external object, capable of becoming the
private property of any individual. Thus social power becomes the private power of private persons. The
ancients therefore denounced money as subversive of the economic and moral order of things. f43bl
Modern society, which, soon after its birth, pulled Plutus by the hair of his head from the bowels of the
earth, f441 greets gold as its Holy Grail, as the glittering incarnation of the very principle of its own life.

A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a particular want, and is a particular element of
material wealth. But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its attraction for all other elements
of material wealth, and therefore measures the social wealth of its owner. To a barbarian owner of
commodities, and even to a West-European peasant, value is the same as value-form, and therefore, to
him the increase in his hoard of gold and silver is an increase in value. It is true that the value of money
varies, at one time in consequence of a variation in its own value, at another, in consequence of a change
in the values of commodities. But this, on the one hand, does not prevent 200 ounces of gold from still
containing more value than 100 ounces, nor, on the other hand, does it hinder the actual metallic form of
this article from continuing to be the universal equivalent form of all other commodities, and the
immediate social incarnation of all human labour. The desire after hoarding is in its very nature
unsatiable. In its qualitative aspect, or formally considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, i.e., it is
the universal representative of material wealth, because it is directly convertible into any other
commodity. But, at the same time, every actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, as a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (21 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

means of purchasing, has only a limited efficacy. This antagonism between the quantitative limits of
money and its qualitative boundlessness, continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his Sisyphus-like
labour of accumulating. It is with him as it is with a conqueror who sees in every new country annexed,
only a new boundary.

In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it must be prevented from
circulating, or from transforming itself into a means of enjoyment. The hoarder, therefore, makes a
sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. On
the other hand, he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of
commodities. The more he produces, the more he is able to sell. Hard work, saving, and avarice are,
therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy. f451

By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its aesthetic form in the possession of gold and
silver articles. This grows with the wealth of civil society. "Soyons riches ou paraissons riches"
(Diderot).

In this way there is created, on the one hand, a constantly extending market for gold and silver,
unconnected with their functions as money, and, on the other hand, a latent source of supply, to which
recourse is had principally in times of crisis and social disturbance.

Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the metallic circulation. Its first function arises out
of the conditions to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. We have seen how, along with
the continual fluctuations in the extent and rapidity of the circulation of commodities and in their prices,
the quantity of money current unceasingly ebbs and flows. This mass must, therefore, be capable of
expansion and contraction. At one time money must be attracted in order to act as circulating coin, at
another, circulating coin must be repelled in order to act again as more or less stagnant money. In order
that the mass of money, actually current, may constantly saturate the absorbing power of the circulation,
it is necessary that the quantity of gold and silver in a country be greater than the quantity required to
function as coin. This condition is fulfilled by money taking the form of hoards. These reserves serve as
conduits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the circulation, which in this way never
overflows its banks. f461



B. Means of Payment

In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto considered, we found a given value always
presented to us in a double shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the opposite pole. The owners
of commodities came therefore into contact as the respective representatives of what were already
equivalents. But with the development of circulation, conditions arise under which the alienation of
commodities becomes separated, by an interval of time, from the realisation of their prices. It will be
sufficient to indicate the most simple of these conditions. One sort of article requires a longer, another a
shorter time for its production. Again, the production of different commodities depends on different
seasons of the year. One sort of commodity may be born on its own market place, another has to make a
long journey to market. Commodity-owner No. 1, may therefore be ready to sell, before No. 2 is ready to
buy. When the same transactions are continually repeated between the same persons, the conditions of
sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions of production. On the other hand, the use of a given
commodity, of a house, for instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a definite period. Here, it is

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (22 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

only at the end of the term that the buyer has actually received the use-value of the commodity. He
therefore buys it before he pays for it. The vendor sells an existing commodity, the purchaser buys as the
mere representative of money, or rather of future money. The vendor becomes a creditor, the purchaser
becomes a debtor. Since the metamorphosis of commodities, or the development of their value-form,
appears here under a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh function; it becomes the means of payment.

The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the simple circulation. The change in the form of
that circulation stamps buyer and seller with this new die. At first, therefore, these new parts are just as
transient and alternating as those of seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors. But the
opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more capable of crystallisation. \41] The same characters
can, however, be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities. The class-struggles of the
ancient world took the form chiefly of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome ended in
the ruin of the plebeian debtors. They were displaced by slaves. In the middle ages the contest ended with
the ruin of the feudal debtors, who lost their political power together with the economic basis on which it
was established. Nevertheless, the money relation of debtor and creditor that existed at these two periods
reflected only the deeper-lying antagonism between the general economic conditions of existence of the
classes in question.

Let us return to the circulation of commodities. The appearance of the two equivalents, commodities and
money, at the two poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous. The money functions now,
first as a measure of value in the determination of the price of the commodity sold; the price fixed by the
contract measures the obligation of the debtor, or the sum of money that he has to pay at a fixed date.
Secondly, it serves as an ideal means of purchase. Although existing only in the promise of the buyer to
pay, it causes the commodity to change hands. It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means
of payment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer for that of the seller. The
circulating medium was transformed into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first phase,
because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the money, was withdrawn from circulation. The
means of payment enters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left it. The money is no longer
the means that brings about the process. It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the absolute form of
existence of exchange-value, or as the universal commodity. The seller turned his commodity into
money, in order thereby to satisfy some want, the hoarder did the same in order to keep his commodity in
its money-shape, and the debtor in order to be able to pay; if he do not pay, his goods will be sold by the
sheriff. The value-form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim of a sale, and that
owing to a social necessity springing out of the process of circulation itself.

The buyer converts money back into commodities before he has turned commodities into money: in other
words, he achieves the second metamorphosis of commodities before the first. The seller's commodity
circulates, and realises its price, but only in the shape of a legal claim upon money. It is converted into a
use-value before it has been converted into money. The completion of its first metamorphosis follows
only at a later period. K81

The obligations falling due within a given period, represent the sum of the prices of the commodities, the
sale of which gave rise to those obligations. The quantity of gold necessary to realise this sum, depends,
in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency of the means of payment. That quantity is conditioned by
two circumstances: first the relations between debtors and creditors form a sort of chain, in such a way
that A, when he receives money from his debtor B, straightway hands it over to C his creditor, and so on;
the second circumstance is the length of the intervals between the different due-days of the obligations.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (23 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

The continuous chain of payments, or retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially different from that
interlacing of the series of metamorphoses which we considered on a former page. By the currency of the
circulating medium, the connexion between buyers and sellers, is not merely expressed. This connexion
is originated by, and exists in, the circulation alone. Contrariwise, the movement of the means of
payment expresses a social relation that was in existence long before.

The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, and side by side, limits the extent to which
coin can be replaced by the rapidity of currency. On the other hand, this fact is a new lever in
economising the means of payment. In proportion as payments are concentrated at one spot, special
institutions and methods are developed for their liquidation. Such in the middle ages were the virements
at Lyons. The debts due to A from B, to B from C, to C from A, and so on, have only to be confronted
with each other, in order to annul each other to a certain extent like positive and negative quantities.
There thus remains only a single balance to pay. The greater the amount of the payments concentrated,
the less is this balance relatively to that amount, and the less is the mass of the means of payment in
circulation.

The function of money as the means of payment implies a contradiction without a terminus medius. In so
far as the payments balance one another, money functions only ideally as money of account, as a
measure of value. In so far as actual payments have to be made, money does not serve as a circulating
medium, as a mere transient agent in the interchange of products, but as the individual incarnation of
social labour, as the independent form of existence of exchange-value, as the universal commodity. This
contradiction comes to a head in those phases of industrial and commercial crises which are known as
monetary crises. f491 Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-lengthening chain of payments, and an
artificial system of settling them, has been fully developed. Whenever there is a general and extensive
disturbance of this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money becomes suddenly and immediately
transformed, from its merely ideal shape of money of account, into hard cash. Profane commodities can
no longer replace it. The use-value of commodities becomes valueless, and their value vanishes in the
presence of its own independent form. On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with the self-sufficiency
that springs from intoxicating prosperity, declares money to be a vain imagination. Commodities alone
are money. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a commodity! As the hart pants after fresh
water, so pants his soul after money, the only wealth. \5Q\ In a crisis, the antithesis between commodities
and their value-form, money, becomes heightened into an absolute contradiction. Hence, in such events,
the form under which money appears is of no importance. The money famine continues, whether
payments have to be made in gold or in credit money such as bank-notes. \5Y\

If we now consider the sum total of the money current during a given period, we shall find that, given the
rapidity of currency of the circulating medium and of the means of payment, it is equal to the sum of the
prices to be realised, plus the sum of the payments falling due, minus the payments that balance each
other, minus finally the number of circuits in which the same piece of coin serves in turn as means of
circulation and of payment. Hence, even when prices, rapidity of currency, and the extent of the economy
in payments, are given, the quantity of money current and the mass of commodities circulating during a
given period, such as a day, no longer correspond. Money that represents commodities long withdrawn
from circulation, continues to be current. Commodities circulate, whose equivalent in money will not
appear on the scene till some future day. Moreover, the debts contracted each day, and the payments
falling due on the same day, are quite incommensurable quantities. \51\

Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money as a means of payment. Certificates of the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (24 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

debts owing for the purchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring those debts to others.
On the other hand, to the same extent as the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money as a
means of payment. In that character it takes various forms peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at
home in the sphere of great commercial transactions. Gold and silver coin, on the other hand, are mostly
relegated to the sphere of retail trade. f531

When the production of commodities has sufficiently extended itself, money begins to serve as the means
of payment beyond the sphere of the circulation of commodities. It becomes the commodity that is the
universal subject-matter of all contracts. f541 Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed from
payments in kind into money payments. To what extent this transformation depends upon the general
conditions of production, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the Roman Empire twice failed
in its attempt to levy all contributions in money. The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural
population under Louis XIV., a misery so eloquently denounced by Boisguillebert, Marshal Vauban, and
others, was due not only to the weight of the taxes, but also to the conversion of taxes in kind into money
taxes. f551 In Asia, on the other hand, the fact that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents payable in
kind, depends on conditions of production that are reproduced with the regularity of natural phenomena.
And this mode of payment tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production. It is one of the
secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire. If the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans,
should lead to the substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will be all up with the exemplary
agriculture of that country. The narrow economic conditions under which that agriculture is carried on,
will be swept away.

In every country, certain days of the year become by habit recognised settling days for various large and
recurrent payments. These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel of reproduction, on
conditions closely connected with the seasons. They also regulate the dates for payments that have no
direct connexion with the circulation of commodities such as taxes, rents, and so on. The quantity of
money requisite to make the-payments, falling due on those dates all over the country, causes periodical,
though merely superficial, perturbations in the economy of the medium of payment. f561

From the law of the rapidity of currency of the means of payment, it follows that the quantity of the
means of payment required for all periodical payments, whatever their source, is in inverse \57]
proportion to the length of their periods. \5S]

The development of money into a medium of payment makes it necessary to accumulate money against
the dates fixed for the payment of the sums owing. While hoarding, as a distinct mode of acquiring
riches, vanishes with the progress of civil society, the formation of reserves of the means of payment
grows with that progress.



C. Universal Money

When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it strips off the local garbs which it there assumes, of
a standard of prices, of coin, of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and returns to its original form of
bullion. In the trade between the markets of the world, the value of commodities is expressed so as to be
universally recognised. Hence their independent value-form also, in these cases, confronts them under
the shape of universal money. It is only in the markets of the world that money acquires to the full extent



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (25 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

the character of the commodity whose bodily form is also the immediate social incarnation of human
labour in the abstract. Its real mode of existence in this sphere adequately corresponds to its ideal
concept.

Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one commodity which, by serving as a measure
of value, becomes money. In the markets of the world a double measure of value holds sway, gold and
silver. f591

Money of the world serves as the universal medium of payment, as the universal means of purchasing,
and as the universally recognised embodiment of all wealth. Its function as a means of payment in the
settling of international balances is its chief one. Hence the watchword of the mercantilists, balance of
trade. r601 Gold and silver serve as international means of purchasing chiefly and necessarily in those
periods when the customary equilibrium in the interchange of products between different nations is
suddenly disturbed. And lastly, it serves as the universally recognised embodiment of social wealth,
whenever the question is not of buying or paying, but of transferring wealth from one country to another,
and whenever this transference in the form of commodities is rendered impossible, either by special
conjunctures in the markets or by the purpose itself that is intended. f611

Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home circulation so, too, it requires one for
external circulation in the markets of the world. The functions of hoards, therefore, arise in part out of the
function of money, as the medium of the home circulation and home payments, and in part out of its
function of money of the world. f621 For this latter function, the genuine money-commodity, actual gold
and silver, is necessary. On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to distinguish them from their purely
local substitutes, calls gold and silver "money of the world."

The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one. On the one hand, it spreads itself from its
sources over all the markets of the world, in order to become absorbed, to various extents, into the
different national spheres of circulation, to fill the conduits of currency, to replace abraded gold and
silver coins, to supply the material of articles of luxury, and to petrify into hoards. f631 This first current
is started by the countries that exchange their labour, realised in commodities, for the labour embodied in
the precious metals by gold and silver-producing countries. On the other hand, there is a continual
flowing backwards and forwards of gold and silver between the different national spheres of circulation,
a current whose motion depends on the ceaseless fluctuations in the course of exchange. f641

Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is developed to a certain extent, limit the hoards
concentrated in the strong rooms of the banks to the minimum required for the proper performance of
their peculiar functions. f651 Whenever these hoards are strikingly above their average level, it is, with
some exceptions, an indication of stagnation in the circulation of commodities, of an interruption in the
even flow of their metamorphoses. f661



Footnotes

T 1 1 The question — Why does not money directly represent labour-time, so that a piece of paper may
represent, for instance, x hours' labour, is at bottom the same as the question why, given the production



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (26 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

of commodities, must products take the form of commodities? This is evident, since their taking the form
of commodities implies their differentiation into commodities and money. Or, why cannot private labour
— labour for the account of private individuals — be treated as its opposite, immediate social labour? I
have elsewhere examined thoroughly the Utopian idea of "labour-money" in a society founded on the
production of commodities (1. c, p. 61, seq.). On this point I will only say further, that Owen's
"labour-money," for instance, is no more "money" than a ticket for the theatre. Owen pre-supposes
directly associated labour, a form of production that is entirely in consistent with the production of
commodities. The certificate of labour is merely evidence of the part taken by the individual in the
common labour, and of his right to a certain portion of the common produce destined for consumption.
But it never enters into Owen's head to pre-suppose the production of commodities, and at the same time,
by juggling with money, to try to evade the necessary conditions of that production.

\2] Savages and half-civilised races use the tongue differently. Captain Parry says of the inhabitants on
the west coast of Baffin's Bay: "In this case (he refers to barter) they licked it (the thing represented to
them) twice to their tongues, after which they seemed to consider the bargain satisfactorily concluded."
In the same way, the Eastern Esquimaux licked the articles they received in exchange. If the tongue is
thus used in the North as the organ of appropriation, no wonder that, in the South, the stomach serves as
the organ of accumulated property, and that a Kaffir estimates the wealth of a man by the size of his
belly. That the Kaffirs know what they are about is shown by the following: at the same time that the
official British Health Report of 1864 disclosed the deficiency of fat-forming food among a large part of
the working-class, a certain Dr. Harvey (not, however, the celebrated discoverer of the circulation of the
blood), made a good thing by advertising recipes for reducing the superfluous fat of the bourgeoisie and
aristocracy.

[31 See Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &c." "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Gelda," p. 53, seq.

[4J "Wherever gold and silver have by law been made to perform the function of money or of a measure
of value side by side, it has always been tried, but in vain, to treat them as one and the same material. To
assume that there is an invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in which a given quantity
of labour-time is incorporated, is to assume in fact, that gold and silver are of one and the same material,
and that a given mass of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a given mass of gold.
From the reign of Edward III. to the time of George II., The history of money in England consists of one
long series of perturbations caused by the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between The values of gold
and silver, with the fluctuations in their real values. At one time gold was too high, at another, silver. The
metal that for the time being was estimated below its value, was withdrawn from circulation, mated and
exported. The ratio between the two metals was then again altered by law, but the new nominal ratio
soon came into conflict again with the real one. In our own times, the slight and transient fall in the value
of gold compared with silver, which was a consequence of The Indo-Chinese demand for silver,
produced on a far more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver, and its expulsion
from circulation by gold. During the years 1855, 1856 and 1857, the excess in France of gold-imports
over gold-exports amounted to £41,580,000, while the excess of silver-exports over silver-imports was
£14,704,000. In fact, in those countries in which both metals are legally measures of value, and therefore
both legal tender so that everyone has the option of paying in either metal, the metal That rise in value is
at a premium, and, like every other commodity, measures its price in the over-estimated metal which
alone serve in reality as The standard of value. The result of all experience and history with regard to this
equation is simply that, where two commodities perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (27 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

practice one alone maintains that position." (Karl Marx, 1. c, pp. 52, 53.)

[51 The peculiar circumstance, that while the ounce of gold serves in England as the unit of the standard
of money, the pound sterling does not form an aliquot part of it, has been explained as follows: "Our
coinage was originally adapted to the employment of silver only, hence, an ounce of silver can always be
divided into a certain adequate number of pieces of coin, but as gold was introduced at a later period into
a coinage adapted only to silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an aliquot number of pieces."
Maclaren, "A Sketch of the History of the Currency." London, 1858, p. 16.

[61 With English writers the confusion between measure of value and standard of price (standard of
value! is indescribable. Their functions, as well as their names, are constantly interchanged.

[T[ Moreover, it has not general historical validity.

[81 It is thus that the pound sterling in English denotes less than one-third of its original weight; the
pound Scot, before the union, only l-36th; the French livre, l-74th; the Spanish maravedi, less than
1- 1,000th; and the Portuguese rei a still smaller fraction.

[91 "Le monete le quali oggi sono ideal) sono le piu antiche d'ogni nazione, e tutte furono un tempo real),
e perche erano reali con esse si contava" (Galiani: Delia moneta, 1. c, p. 153.)

f 101 David Urquhart remarks in his "Familiar Words" on the monstrosity (!) that now-a-days a pound
(sterling), which is the unit of the English standard of money, is equal to about a quarter of an ounce of
gold. "This is falsifying a measure, not establishing a standard." He sees in this "false denomination" of
the weight of gold, as in everything else, the falsifying hand of civilisation.

fill When Anacharsis was asked for what purposes the Greeks used money, he replied, "For reckoning."
(Ashen. Deipn. 1. iv. 49 v. 2. ed. Schweighauser, 1802.)

f 121 "Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard of price, appears under the same
reckoning names as do the prices of commodities, and that therefore the sum of £3 17s. 10 l/2d. may
signify on the one hand an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value of a ton of iron, this
reckoning name of money has been called its mint-price. Hence there sprang up the extraordinary notion,
that the value of gold is estimated in its own material, and that, in contradistinction to all other
commodities, its price is fixed by the State. It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning
names to definite weights of gold, is the same thing as fixing the value of those weights." (Karl Marx, 1.
c.,p. 52.)

f 131 See "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes" in "Zur Kritik der Poll Oekon. &c," p. 53, seq. The
fantastic notions about raising or lowering the mint-price of money by transferring to greater or smaller
weights of gold or silver, the names already legally appropriated to fixed weights of those metals; such
notions, at least in those cases in which they aim, not at clumsy financial operations against creditors,
both public and private but at economic quack remedies, have been so exhaustively treated by Wm. Petty
in his "Quantulumcunque concerning money: To the Lord Marquis of Halifax, 1682," that even his
immediate followers, Sir Dudley North and John Locke, not to mention later ones, could only dilute him.
"If the wealth of a nation " he remarks, "could be decupled by a proclamation, it were strange that such
proclamations have not long since been made by our Governors." (1. c, p. 36.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (28 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

f 141 "Ou bien, il faut consentir a dire qu'une valeur d'un million en argent vaut plus qu'une valeur egale
en merchandises." (Le Troene, 1. c, p. 919), which amounts to saying "qu'une valeur vaut plus qu'une
valeur egale."

[151 Jerome had to wrestle hard, not only in his youth with the bodily flesh, as is shown by his fight in
the desert with the handsome women of his imagination, but also in his old age with the spiritual flesh. "I
thought," he says, "I was in the spirit before the Judge of the Universe." "Who art thou?" asked a voice.
"I am a Christian." "Thou liest," thundered back the great Judge, "thou art nought but a Ciceronian."

fl61 xxx — (F. Lassalle: vv Die Philosophic Herakleitos des Dunkeln." Berlin, 1858, Vol. I, p. 222.)
Lassalle in his note on this passage, p. 224, n. 3., erroneously makes gold a mere symbol of value.

f 171 Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in the Russian edition. — In his letter of November 28,
1878, to N. F. Danielson (Nikolai — on) Marx proposed that this sentence be corrected to read as
follows: "And, as a matter of fact, the value of each single yard is but the materialised form of a part of
the social labour expended on the whole number of yards." An analogous correction was made in a copy
of the second German edition of the first volume of "Capital" belonging to Marx; however, not in his
handwriting.

f 181 "Toute vente est achat." (Dr. Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les Travaux des Artisans."
Physiocrates ed. Daire I. Partie, Paris, 1846, p. 170), or as Quesnay in-his "Maximes generales" puts it,
"Vendre est acheter."

f 191 "Le prix d'une merchandise ne pouvant etre paye que par le prix d'une autre marchandise" (Mercier
de la Riviere: "L'Ordre naturel et essentiel de societes politiques." Physiocrates, ed. Daire II. Partie, p.
554.)

r201 "Pour avoir cet argent, il faut avoir vendu," 1. c, p. 543.

f211 As before remarked, the actual producer of gold or silver forms an exception. He exchanges his
product directly for another commodity, without having first sold it.

\22\ "Si l'argent represente, dans nos mains, les choses que nous pouvons desirer d'acheter, il y
represente aussi les choses que nous avons vendues pour cet argent." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1. c, p. 586.)

f231 "II y a done ... quatre termes et trots contractants, dont l'un intervient deux foist" (Le Trosne, 1. c, p.
909.)

\2A\ Self-evident as this may be, it is nevertheless for the most part unobserved by political economists,
and especially by the "Free-trader Vulgaris."

f251 See my observations on James Mill in "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 74-76. With regard to this subject, we
may notice two methods characteristic of apologetic economy. The first is the identification of the
circulation of commodities with the direct barter of products, by simple abstraction from their points of
difference; the second is, the attempt to explain away the contradictions of capitalist production, by
reducing the relations between the persons engaged in that mode of production, to the simple relations
arising out of the circulation of commodities. The production and circulation of commodities are
however, phenomena that occur to a greater or less extent in modes of production the most diverse. If we



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (29 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

are acquainted with nothing but the abstract categories of circulation, which are common to all these
modes of production, we cannot possibly know anything of the specific points of difference of those
modes, nor pronounce any judgment upon them. In no science is such a big fuss made with
commonplace truisms as in Political Economy. For instance, J. B. Say sets himself up as a judge of
crises, because, forsooth, he knows that a commodity is a product.

f261 Translator's note. — This word is here used in its original signification of the course or track
pursued by money as it changes from hand to hand, a course which essentially differs from circulation.

\21~\ Even when the commodity is sold over and over again, a phenomenon that at present has no
existence for us, it falls, when definitely sold for the last time, out of the sphere of circulation into that of
consumption, where it serves either as means of subsistence or means of production.

f281 "II (l'argent) n'a d'autre mouvement que celui qui lui est imprime par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1.
a, p. 885.)

f291 "Ce sont les productions qui le (l'argent) mettent en mouvement et le font circuler ... La celerite de
son mouvement (sc. de l'argent) supplee a sa quantite. Lorsqu'il en est besoin. il ne fait que glisser d'une
main dans l'autre sans s'arreter un instant." (Le Trosne, 1. c. pp. 915, 916.)

r301 "Money being ... the common measure of buying and selling, everybody who hath anything to sell,
and cannot procure chapmen for it, is presently apt to think, that want of money in the. kingdom, or
country, is the cause why his goods do not go off; and so, want of money is the common cry; which is a
great mistake... What do these people want, who cry out for money? ... The farmer complains ... he thinks
that were more money in the country; he should have a price for his goods. Then it seems money is not
his want, but a price for his corn and cattel, which he would sell, but cannot... Why cannot he get a price?
... (1) Either there is too much corn and cattel in the country, so that most who come to market have need
of selling, as he hash, and few of buying; or (2) There wants the usual vent abroad by transportation..., or
(3) The consumption fails, as when men, by reason of poverty, do not spend so much in their houses as
formerly they did; wherefore it is not the increase of specific money, which would at all advance the
farmer's goods, but the removal of any of these three causes, which do truly keep down the market... The
merchant and shopkeeper want money in the same manner, that is, they want a vent for the goods they
deal in, by reason that the markets fail"... [A nation] "never thrives better, than when riches are tost from
hand to hand." (Sir Dudley North: "Discourses upon Trade," Lond. 1691, pp. 11-15, passim.)
Herrenschwand's fanciful notions amount merely to this, that the antagonism, which has its origin in the
nature of commodities, and is reproduced in their circulation, can be removed by increasing the
circulating medium. But if, on the one hand, it is a popular delusion to ascribe stagnation in production
and circulation to insufficiency of the circulating medium, it by no means follows, on the other hand, that
an actual paucity of the medium in consequence, e.g., of bungling legislative interference with the
regulation of currency, may not give rise to such stagnation.

f3 11 "There is a certain measure and proportion of money requisite to drive the trade of a nation, more or
less than which would prejudice the same, lust as there is a certain proportion of farthings necessary in a
small retail trade, to change silver money, and to even such reckonings as cannot be adjusted with the
smallest silver pieces.... Now, as the proportion of the number of farthings requisite in commerce is to be
taken from the number of people, the frequency of their exchanges: as also, and principally, from the
value of the smallest silver pieces of money; so in like manner, the proportion of money [gold and silver



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (30 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

specie] requisite in our trade, is to be likewise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the
bigness of the payments." (William Petty, "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions." Lond. 1667, p. 17.)
The Theory of Hume was defended against the attacks of J. Steuart and others, by A. Young, in his
"Political Arithmetic," Lond; 1774, in which work there is a special chapter entitled "Prices depend on
quantity of money, at p. 112, sqq. I have stated in "Zur Kritik, &c," p. 149: "He (Adam Smith) passes
over without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in circulation, and treats money quite wrongly
as a mere commodity." This statement applies only in so far as Adam Smith, ex officio, treats of money.
Now and then, however, as in his criticism of the earlier systems of Political Economy, he takes the right
view. "The quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be
circulated by It.... The value of the goods annually bought and sold in any country requires a certain
quantity of money to circulate and distribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment
to no more. The channel of circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never
admits any more." ("Wealth of Nations." Bk. IV., ch. 1.) In like manner, ex officio, he opens his work
with an apotheosis on the division of labour. Afterwards, in the last book which treats of the sources of
public revenue, he occasionally repeats the denunciations of the division of labour made by his teacher,
A. Ferguson.

f321 "The prices of things will certainly rise in every nation, as the gold and silver increase amongst the
people, and consequently, where the gold and silver decrease in any nation, the prices of all things must
fall proportionately to such decrease of money." (Jacob Vanderlint: "Money Answers all Things." Lond.
1734, p. 5.) A careful comparison of thus book with Hume's "Essays," proves to my mind without doubt
that Hume was acquainted with and made use of Vanderlint's work, which is certainly an important one.
The opinion that prices are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, was also held by
Barbon and other much earlier writers. "No inconvenience," says Vanderlint, "can arise by an
unrestrained trade, but very great advantage; since, if the cash of the nation be decreased by it, which
prohibitions are designed to prevent, those nations that get the cash will certainly find everything
advance in price, as the cash increases amongst them. And ... our manufactures, and everything else, will
soon become so moderate as to turn the balance of trade in our favour, and thereby fetch the money back
again." (1. c. pp. 43, 44.)

f331 That the price of each single kind of commodity forms a pan of the sum of the prices of all the
commodities in circulation, is a self-evident proposition. But how use-values which are incommensurable
with regard to each other, are to be exchanged, en masse for the total sum of gold and silver in a country,
is quite incomprehensible. If we start from the notion that all commodities together form one single
commodity, of which each is but an aliquot part, we get the following beautiful result: The total
commodity = x cwt. of gold; commodity A = an aliquot part of the total commodity = the same liquot
part of x cwt. of gold. This is stated in all seriousness by Montesquieu: "Si Ton compare la masse de Tor
et de l'argent qui est dans le monde avec la somme des merchandises qui y vent il est cenain que chaque
denree ou merchandise, en paniculier, pourra etre comparee a une certaine portion de la masse entiere.
Supposons qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule denree ou marchandise dans le monde, ou qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule
qui s'achete, et qu'elle se divise comme l'argent: Cette panic de cette marchandise repondra a une partie
de la masee de l'argent; la moitie du total de l'une a la moitie du total de l'autre, &c... I'etablissement du
prix des choses depend tonjours fondamentalement de la raison du total des choses au total des signes."
(Montesquieu, 1. c. t. Ill, pp. 12, 13.) As to the further development of this theory by Ricardo and his
disciples, James Mill, Lord Overstone, and others, see "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 140-146, and p. 150, sqq.
John Stuart Mill, with his usual eclectic logic, understands how to hold at the same time the view of his



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (31 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

father, James Mill, and the opposite view. On a comparison of the text of his compendium, "Principles of
Poll Econ.," with his preface to the first edition, in which preface he announces himself as the Adam
Smith of his day — we do not know whether to admire more the simplicity of the man, or that of the
public, who took him, in good faith, for the Adam Smith he announced himself to be, although he bears
about as much resemblance to Adam Smith as say General Williams, of Kars, to the Duke of Wellington.
The original researches of Mr. J. S. Mill which are neither extensive nor profound, in the domain of
Political Economy, will be found mustered in rank and file in his little work, "Some Unsettled Questions
of Political Economy," which appeared in 1844. Locke asserts point blank the connexion between the
absence of value in gold and silver, and the determination of their values by quantity alone. "Mankind
having consented to put an imaginary value upon gold and silver ... the intrinsic value, regarded in these
metals, is nothing but the quantity." ("Some Considerations," &c, 1691, Works Ed. 1777, Vol. II., p. 15.)

f341 It lies of course, entirely beyond my purpose to take into consideration such details as the
seigniorage on minting. I will, however, cite for the benefit of the romantic sycophant, Adam Muller,
who admires the "generous liberality" with which the English Government coins gratuitously, the
following opinion of Sir Dudley North: "Silver and gold, like other commodities, have their ebbings and
flowings. Upon the arrival of quantities from Spain ... it is carried into the Tower, and coined. Not long
after there will come a demand for bullion to be exported again. If there is none, but all happens to be in
coin, what then? Melt it down again; there's no loss in it, for the coining costs the owner nothing. Thus
the nation has been abused, and made to pay for the twisting of straw for asses to eat. If the merchant
were made to pay the price of the coinage, he would not have sent his silver to the Tower without
consideration, and coined money would always keep a value above uncoined silver. " (North, 1. c, p. 18.)
North was himself one of the foremost merchants in the reign of Charles II.

f351 "If silver never exceed what is wanted for the smaller payments it cannot be collected in sufficient
quantities for the larger payments ... the use of gold in the main payments necessarily implies also Its use
in the retail trade: those who have gold coin offering them for small purchases, and receiving with the
commodity purchased a balance of silver in return; by which means the surplus of silver that would
otherwise encumber the retail dealer, is drawn off and dispersed into general circulation. But if there is as
much silver as will transact the small payments independent of gold, the retail trader must then receive
silver for small purchases ; and it must of necessity accumulate in his hands." (David Buchanan; "Inquiry
into the Taxation and Commercial Policy of Great Britain. " Edinburgh, 1844, pp. 248, 249.)

f361 The mandarin Wan-mao-in, the Chinese Chancellor of the Exchequer, took it into his head one day
to lay before the Son of Heaven a proposal that secretly aimed at converting the assignats of the empire
into convertible bank-notes. The assignats Committee, in its report of April, 1854, gives him a severe
snubbing. Whether he also received the traditional drubbing with bamboos is not stated. The concluding
part of the report is as follows: — "The Committee has carefully examined his proposal and finds that it
is entirely in favour of the merchants, and that no advantage will result to the crown." ("Arbeiten der
Kaiserlich Russischen Gesandtschaft zu Peking iiber China." Aus dem Russischen von Dr. K. Abel und
F. A. Mecklenburg. Erster Band. Berlin, 1858, p. 47 sq.) In his evidence before the Committee of the
House of Lords on the Bank Acts, a governor of the Bank of England says, with regard to the abrasion of
gold coins during currency: "Every year a fresh class of sovereigns becomes too light. The class which
one year passes with full weight, loses enough by wear and tear to draw the scales next year against it."
(House of Lords' Committee, 1848, n. 429.)

f371 The following passage from Fullarton shows the want of clearness on the pan of even the best

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (32 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:38]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

writers on money, in their comprehension of its various functions: "That, as far as concerns our domestic
exchanges, all the monetary functions which are usually performed by gold and silver coins, may be
performed as effectually by a circulation of inconvertible notes paying no value but that factitious and
conventional value they derive from the law is a fact which admits, I conceive, of no denial. Value of this
description may be made to answer all the purposes of intrinsic value, and supersede even the necessity
for a standard, provided only the quantity of issues be kept under due limitation." (Fullerton: "Regulation
of Currencies," London, 1845, p. 21.) Because the commodity that serves as money is capable of being
replaced in circulation by mere symbols of value, therefore its functions as a measure of value and a
standard of prices are declared to be superfluous !

\3S] From the fact that gold and silver, so far as they are coins, or exclusively serve as the medium of
circulation, become mere tokens of themselves, Nicholas Barbon deduces the right of Governments "to
raise money," that is, to give to the weight of silver that is called a shilling the name of a greater weight,
such as a crown; and so to pay creditors shillings, instead of crowns. "Money does wear and grow lighter
by often telling over... It is the denomination and currency of the money that men regard in bargaining,
and not the quantity of silver.. .'Tis the public authority upon the metal that makes it money." (N. Barbon,
1. c, pp. 29, 30, 25.)

f391 "Une richesse en argent n'est que ... richesse en productions, converties en argent." (Mercier de la
Riviere, 1. c.) "Une valeur en productions n'a fait que changer de forme." (Id., p. 486.)

KOI "Tis by this practice' they keep all their goods and manufactures at such low rates." (Vanderlint, 1.
c, pp. 95, 96.)

f411 "Money ... is a pledge." (John Bellers: "Essays about the Poor, Manufactures, Trade, Plantations,
and Immorality," Lond., 1699, p. 13.)

f421 A purchase, in a "categorical" sense, implies that gold and silver are already the converted form of
commodities, or the product of a sale.

f431 Henry III., most Christian king of France, robbed cloisters of their relics, and turned them into
money. It is well known what part the despoiling of the Delphic Temple, by the Phocians, played in the
history of Greece. Temples with the ancients served as the dwellings of the gods of commodities. They
were "sacred banks." With the Phoenicians, a trading people par excellence, money was the transmuted
shape of everything. It was, therefore, quite in order that the virgins, who, at the feast of the Goddess of
Love, gave themselves up to strangers, should offer to the goddess the piece of money they received.



[43al



"Gold, yellow, glittering, precious gold!

Thus much of this, will make black white, foul, fair;

Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant.

... What this, you gods? Why, this

Will lug your priests and servants from your sides;

Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads;

This yellow slave

Will knit and break religions; bless the accurs'd;

Make the hoar leprosy ador'd; place thieves,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (33 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

And give them title, knee and approbation;

With senators on the bench, this is it;

That makes the wappen'd widow wed again:

... Come damned earth,

Though common whore of mankind."

(Shakespeare: Timon of Athens.)

f43bl (Sophocles, Antigone.)

f441 "The desire of avarice to draw Pluto himself out of the bowels of the earth." (The Deipnosophistst,
VI, 23, Athenaeus)

f451 "Accrescere quanto piu si pud il numero de'venditori d'ogni merce, diminuere quanto piu si puo il
numero dei compratori, quest) sono i cardini sui quali si raggirano tutte le operazioni di economia
politica." (Verri, 1. c, p. 52.)

f461 "There is required for carrying on the trade of the nation a determinate sum of specifick money
which varies, and is sometimes more, sometimes less, as the circumstances we are in require.... This
ebbing and flowing of money supplies and accommodates itself, without any aid of Politicians.... The
buckets work alternately; when money is scarce, bullion is coined; when bullion is scarce, money is
melted." (Sir D. North, 1. c, Postscript, p. 3.) John Stuart Mill, who for a long time was an official of the
East India Company, confirms the fact that in India silver ornaments still continue to perform directly the
functions of a hoard. The silver ornaments are brought out and coined when there is a high rate of
interest, and go back again when the rate of interest falls. (1. S. Mill's Evidence "Reports on Bank Acts,"
1857, 2084.) According to a Parliamentary document of 1864 on the gold and silver import and export of
India, the import of gold and silver in 1863 exceeded the export by £19,367,764. During the 8 years
immediately preceding 1864, the excess of imports over exports of the precious metals amounted to
£109,652,917. During this century far more than £200,000,000 has been coined in India.

\41] The following shows the debtor and creditor relations existing between English traders at the

beginning of the 18th century. "Such a spirit of crudity reigns here in England among the men of trade,
that is not to be met with in any other society of men, nor in any other kingdom of the world." ("An
Essay on Credit and the Bankrupt Act," Lond.,

f481 It will be seen from the following quotation from my book which appeared in 1859, why I take no
notice in the text of an opposite form: "Contrariwise, in the process in M — C, the money can be
alienated as a real means of purchase, and in that way, the price of the commodity can be realised before
the use-value of the money is realised and the commodity actually delivered. This occurs constantly
under the e very-day form of prepayments. And it is under this form, that the English government
purchases opium from the ryots of India.... In these cases, however, the money always acts as a means of
purchase.... Of course capital also is advanced in the shape of money.... This point of view, however,
does not fall within the horizon of simple circulation." ("Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 119, 120.)

f491 The monetary crisis referred to in the text, being a phase of every crisis, must be clearly
distinguished from that particular form of crisis, which also is called a monetary crisis, but which may be
produced by itself as an independent phenomenon in such a way as to react only indirectly on industry
and commerce. The pivot of these crises is to be found in moneyed capital, and their sphere of direct

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (34 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

action is therefore the sphere of that capital, viz., banking, the stock exchange, and finance.

[501 "The sudden reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard cash heaps theoretical fright on
top of the practical panic; and the dealers by whose agency circulation is affected, shudder before the
impenetrable mystery in which their own economic relations are involved" (Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 126.)
"The poor stand still, because the rich have no money to employ them, though they have the same land
and hands to provide victuals and clothes, as ever they had; ...which is the true riches of a nation, and not
the money." John Bellers, Proposals for Raising a College of Industry, London, 1696, p3.

\5Y\ The following shows how such times are exploited by the "amis du commerce." "On one occasion
(1839) an old grasping banker (in the city) in his private room raised the lid of the desk he sat over, and
displayed to a friend rolls of bank-notes, saying with intense glee there were £600,000 of them, they were
held to make money tight, and would all be let out after three o'clock on the same day." ("The Theory of
Exchanges. The Bank Charter Act of 1844." Lond. 1864, p. 81). The Observer, a semi-official
government organ, contained the following paragraph on 24th April, 1864: "Some very curious rumours
are current of the means which have been resorted to in order to create a scarcity of banknotes....
Questionable as it would seem, to suppose that any trick of the kind would be adopted, the report has
been so universal that it really deserves mention."

f521 "The amount of purchases or contracts entered upon during the course of any given day, will not
affect the quantity of money afloat on that particular day, but, in the vast majority of cases, will resolve
themselves into multifarious drafts upon the quantity of money which may be afloat at subsequent dates
more or less distant.... The bills granted or credits opened, to-day, need have no resemblance whatever,
either in quantity, amount or duration, to those granted or entered upon to-morrow or next day, nay,
many of today's bills, and credits, when due, fall in with a mass of liabilities whose origins traverse a
range of antecedent dates altogether indefinite, bills at 12, 6, 3 months or 1 often aggregating together to
swell the common liabilities of one particular day...." ("The Currency Theory Reviewed; in a Letter to
the Scottish People." By a Banker in England. Edinburgh, 1845, pp. 29, 30 passim.)

f531 As an example of how little ready money is required in true commercial operations, I give below a
statement by one of the largest London houses of its yearly receipts and payments. Its transactions during
the year 1856, extending to many millions of pounds sterling, are here reduced to the scale of one
million.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (35 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

Receipts. Payments



Bankers' and Merchants'
Bills payable after Bills payable after



date,


L533, 596


date


L302, 674


Cheques on Bankers, &c,




Cheques on London




payable on demand


357, 715


Bankers


663, 672


Country Notes


9, 627






Bank of England Notes


68, 554


Bank of England Notes


22, 743


Gold


28, 089


Gold


9, 427


Silver and Copper


1, 486


Silver and Copper


1, 484


Post Office Orders


933







Total LI, 000, 000 Total LI, 000, 000



"Report from the Select Committee on the Bank Acts, July, 1858," p. lxxi.

f541 "The course of trade being thus turned, from exchanging of goods for goods, or delivering and
taking, to selling and paying, all the bargains ... are now stated upon the foot of a Price in money." ("An
Essay upon Publick Credit." 3rd Ed. Lond., 1710, p. 8.)

f551 "L'argent ... est devenu le bourreau de toutes choses." Finance is the "alambic, qui a fait evaporer
une quantite effroyable de biens et de denrees pour faire ce fatal precis." "L'argent declare la guerre a
tout le genre humain." (Boisguillebert: "Dissertation sur la nature des richesses, de l'argent et des
tribute." Edit. Daire. Economistes financiers. Paris, 1843, t. i., pp. 413, 419, 417.)

f561 "On Whitsuntide, 1824," says Mr. Craig before the Commons' Committee of 1826, "there was such
an immense demand for notes upon the banks of Edinburgh, that by 1 1 o'clock they had not a note left in
their custody. They sent round to all the different banks to borrow, but could not get them, and many of
the transactions were adjusted by slips of paper only; yet by three o'clock the whole of the notes were
returned into the banks from which they had issued! It was a mere transfer from hand to hand. "Although
the average effective circulation of bank-notes in Scotland is less than three millions sterling, yet on
certain pay days in the year, every single note in the possession of the bankers, amounting in the whole to
about £7,000,000, is called into activity. On these occasions the notes have a single and specific function
to perform, and so soon as they have performed it, they How back into the various banks from which
they issued. (See John Fullarton, "Regulation of Currencies." Lond. 1845, p. 86, note.) In explanation it
should be stated, that in Scotland, at the date of Fullarton's work, notes and not cheques were used to
withdraw deposits.

f571 Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in the Russian edition: Apparently a slip of the pen.
When writing /averse the author evidently meant direct.

f58J To the question, "If there were occasion to raise 40 millions p. a., whether the same 6 millions (gold)
... would suffice for such revolutions and circulations thereof, as trade requires," Petty replies in his usual
masterly manner, "I answer yes: for the expense being 40 millions, if the revolutions were in such short

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (36 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

circles, viz., weekly, as happens among poor artisans and labourers, who receive and pay every Saturday,
then 40/52 parts of 1 million of money would answer these ends, but if the circles be quarterly, according
to our custom of paying rent, and gathering taxes, then 10 millions were requisite. Wherefore, supposing
payments in general to be of a mixed circle between one week and 13, then add 10 millions to 40/52, the
half of which will be 5 1/2, so as if we have 5 1/2 millions we have enough." (William Petty: "Political
Anatomy of Ireland." 1672, Edit.: Lond. 1691, pp. 13, 14.)

f591 Hence the absurdity of every law prescribing that the banks of a country shall form reserves of that
precious metal alone which circulates at home. The "pleasant difficulties" thus self-created by the Bank
of England, are well known. On the subject of the great epochs in the history of the changes in the
relative value of gold and silver, see Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 136 sq. Sir Robert Peel, by his Bank Act of 1844,
sought to tide over the difficulty, by allowing the Bank of England to issue notes against silver bullion,
on condition that the reserve of silver should never exceed more than one-fourth of the reserve of gold.
The value of silver being for that purpose estimated at its price in the London market.

Added in the 4th German edition. — We find ourselves once more in a period of serious change in the
relative values of gold and silver. About 25 years ago the ratio expressing the relative value of gold and
silver was 15-1/2:1; now it is approximately 22:1, and silver is still constantly falling as against gold.
This is essentially the result of a revolution in the mode of production of both metals. Formerly gold was
obtained almost exclusively by washing it out from gold-bearing allovial deposits, products of the
weathering of auriferous rocks. Now this method has become inadequate and has been forced into the
background by the processing of the quartz lodes themselves, a way of extraction which formerly was
only of secondary importance, although well known to the ancients (Diodorus, 111, 12-14) (Diodor's v.
Sicilien "Historische Bibliothek," book III, 12-14. Stuttgart 1828, pp. 258-261). Moreover, not only were
new huge silver deposits discovered in North America, in the Western part of the Rocky Mountains, but
these and the Mexican silver mines were really opened up by the laying of railways, which made possible
the shipment of modern machinery and fuel and in consequence the mining of silver on a very large scale
at a low cost. However there is a great difference in the way the two metals occur in the quartz lodes. The
gold is mostly native, but disseminated throughout the quartz in minute quantities. The whole mass of the
vein must therefore be crushed and the gold either washed out or extracted by means of mercury. Often
1,000,000 grammes of quartz barely yield 1-3 and very seldom 30-60 grammes of gold. Silver is seldom
found native, however it occurs in special quartz that is separated from the lode with comparative ease
and contains mostly 40-90% silver; or it is contained, in smaller quantities, in copper, lead and other ores
which in themselves are worthwhile working. From this alone it is apparent that the labour expended on
the production of gold is rather in creasing while that expended on silver production has decidedly
decreased, which quite naturally explains the drop in the value of the latter. This fall in value would
express itself in a still greater fall in price if the price of silver were not pegged even to-day by artificial
means. But America's rich silver deposits have so far barely been tapped, and thus the prospects are that
the value of this metal will keep on dropping for rather a long time to come. A still greater contributing
factor here is the relative decrease in the requirement of silver for articles of general use and for luxuries,
that is its replacement by plated goods, aluminium, etc. One may thus gauge the utopianism of the
bimetallist idea that compulsory international quotation will raise silver again to the old value ratio of
1:15-1/2. It is more likely that silver will forfeit its money function more and more in the markets of the
world. — F E.]

r601 The opponents, themselves, of the mercantile system, a system which considered the settlement of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (37 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

surplus trade balances in gold and silver as the aim of international trade, entirely misconceived the
functions of money of the world. I have shown by the example of Ricardo in what way their false
conception of the laws that regulate the quantity of the circulating medium, is reflected in their equally
false conception of the international movement of the precious metals (1. c, pp. 150 sq.). His erroneous
dogma: "An unfavourable balance of trade never arises but from a redundant currency.... The exportation
of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance,"
already occurs in Barbon: "The Balance of Trade, if there be one, is not the cause of sending away the
money out of a nation; but that proceeds from the difference of the value of bullion in every country." (N.
Barbon; 1. c, pp. 59, 60.) MacCulloch in "The Literature of Political Economy, a classified catalogue,
Lond. 1845," praises Barbon for this anticipation, but prudently passes over the naive forms, in which
Barbon clothes the absurd supposition on which the "currency principle" is based. The absence of real
criticism and even of honesty, in that catalogue culminates in the sections devoted to the history of the
theory of money; the reason is that MacCulloch in this part of the work is flattering Lord Overstone
whom he calls "facile princeps argentanorum."

f611 For instance, in subsidies, money loans for carrying on wars or for enabling banks to resume cash
payments, &c, it is the money-form, and no other, of value that may be wanted.

f621 "I would desire, indeed, no more convincing evidence of the competency of the machinery of the
hoards in specie-paying countries to perform every necessary office of international adjustment, without
any sensible aid from the general circulation, than the facility with which France, when but just
recovering from the shock of a destructive foreign invasion, completed within the space of 27 months the
payment of her forced contribution of nearly 20 millions to the allied powers, and a considerable
proportion of the sum in specie, without any perceptible contraction or derangement of her domestic
currency, or even any alarming fluctuation of her exchanges." (Fullerton, 1. c, p. 141.) [Added in the 4th
German edition. — We have a still more striking example in the facility with which the same France was
able in 1871-73 to pay off within 30 months a forced contribution more than ten times as great, a
considerable part of it likewise in specie. — F.E.]

f631 "L'argent se partage entre les nations relativement au besoin qu'elles en ont ... etant toujours attire
par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 916.) "The mines which are continually giving gold and silver,
do give sufficient to supply such a needful balance to every nation." (J. Vanderlint, 1. c, p. 40.)

f641 "Exchanges rise and fall every week, and at some particular times in the year run high against a
nation, and at other times run as high on the contrary." (N. Barbon, 1. c, p. 39)

f651 These various functions are liable to come into dangerous conflict with one another whenever gold
and silver have also to serve as a fund for the conversion of bank-notes.

f661 "What money is more than of absolute necessity for a Home Trade, is dead stock ... and brings no
profit to that country it's kept in, but as it is transported in trade, as well as imported." (John Bellers,
"Essays", p. 13.) "What if we have too much coin? We may melt down the heaviest and turn it into the
splendour of plate, vessels or utensils of gold or silver, or send it out as a commodity, where the same is
wanted or desired; or let it out at interest, where interest is high." (W. Petty: "Quantulumcunque," p. 39.)
"Money is but the fat of the Body Politick, whereof too much cloth as often hinder its agility, as too little
makes it sick ... as fat lubricates the motion of the muscles, feeds in want of victuals, fills up the uneven
cavities, and beautifies the body; so cloth money in the state quicken its action, feeds from abroad in time



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (38 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Three

of dearth at home, evens accounts ... and beautifies the whole; altho more especially the particular
persons that have it in plenty." (W. Petty, "Political Anatomy of Ireland," p. 14.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Four: The General Formula for Capital
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch03.htm (39 of 39) [23/08/2000 16:15:39]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part II:

The Transformation of Money and Capital



CHAPTER FOUR:

THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL



The circulation of commodities is the starting-point of capital. The production of commodities, their
circulation, and that more developed form of their circulation called commerce, these form the historical
ground-work from which it rises. The modern history of capital dates from the creation in the 16th
century of a world-embracing commerce and a world-embracing market.

If we abstract from the material substance of the circulation of commodities, that is, from the exchange
of the various use-values, and consider only the economic forms produced by this process of circulation,
we find its final result to be money: this final product of the circulation of commodities is the first form
in which capital appears.

As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, invariably takes the form at first of money;
it appears as moneyed wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer. £1} But we have no need
to refer to the origin of capital in order to discover that the first form of appearance of capital is money.
We can see it daily under our very eyes. All new capital, to commence with, comes on the stage, that is,
on the market, whether of commodities, labour, or money, even in our days, in the shape of money that
by a definite process has to be transformed into capital.

The first distinction we notice between money that is money only, and money that is capital, is nothing
more than a difference in their form of circulation.

The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C-M-C, the transformation of commodities into
money, and the change of the money back again into commodities; or selling in order to buy. But
alongside of this form we find another specifically different form: M-C-M, the transformation of money
into commodities, and the change of commodities back again into money; or buying in order to sell.
Money that circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into, becomes capital, and is already
potentially capital.

Now let us examine the circuit M-C-M a little closer. It consists, like the other, of two antithetical phases.
In the first phase, M-C, or the purchase, the money is changed into a commodity. In the second phase,
C-M, or the sale, the commodity is changed back again into money. The combination of these two phases



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

constitutes the single movement whereby money is exchanged for a commodity, and the same
commodity is again exchanged for money; whereby a commodity is bought in order to be sold, or,
neglecting the distinction in form between buying and selling, whereby a commodity is bought with
money, and then money is bought with a commodity. [2] The result, in which the phases of the process
vanish, is the exchange of money for money, M-M. If I purchase 2,000 lbs. of cotton for £100, and resell
the 2,000 lbs. of cotton for £1 10, 1 have, in fact, exchanged £100 for £1 10, money for money.

Now it is evident that the circuit M-C-M would be absurd and without meaning if the intention were to
exchange by this means two equal sums of money, £100 for £100. The miser's plan would be far simpler
and surer; he sticks to his £100 instead of exposing it to the dangers of circulation. And yet, whether the
merchant who has paid £100 for his cotton sells it for £1 10, or lets it go for £100, or even £50, his money
has, at all events, gone through a characteristic and original movement, quite different in kind from that
which it goes through in the hands of the peasant who sells corn, and with the money thus set free buys
clothes. We have therefore to examine first the distinguishing characteristics of the forms of the circuits
M-C-M and C-M-C, and in doing this the real difference that underlies the mere difference of form will
reveal itself.

Let us see, in the first place, what the two forms have in common.

Both circuits are resolvable into the same two antithetical phases, C-M, a sale, and M-C, a purchase. In
each of these phases the same material elements - a commodity, and money, and the same
economic dramatis personae, a buyer and a seller - confront one another. Each circuit is the unity of the
same two antithetical phases, and in each case this unity is brought about by the intervention of three
contracting parties, of whom one only sells, another only buys, while the third both buys and sells.

What, however, first and foremost distinguishes the circuit C-M-C from the circuit M-C-M, is the
inverted order of succession of the two phases. The simple circulation of commodities begins with a sale
and ends with a purchase, while the circulation of money as capital begins with a purchase and ends with
a sale. In the one case both the starting-point and the goal are commodities, in the other they are money.
In the first form the movement is brought about by the intervention of money, in the second by that of a
commodity.

In the circulation C-M-C, the money is in the end converted into a commodity, that serves as a use-value;
it is spent once for all. In the inverted form, M-C-M, on the contrary, the buyer lays out money in order
that, as a seller, he may recover money. By the purchase of his commodity he throws money into
circulation, in order to withdraw it again by the sale of the same commodity. He lets the money go, but
only with the sly intention of getting it back again. The money, therefore, is not spent, it is merely
advanced. [3]

In the circuit C-M-C, the same piece of money changes its place twice. The seller gets it from the buyer
and pays it away to another seller. The complete circulation, which begins with the receipt, concludes
with the payment, of money for commodities. It is the very contrary in the circuit M-C-M. Here it is not
the piece of money that changes its place twice, but the commodity. The buyer takes it from the hands of
the seller and passes it into the hands of another buyer. Just as in the simple circulation of commodities
the double change of place of the same piece of money effects its passage from one hand into another, so
here the double change of place of the same commodity brings about the reflux of the money to its point
of departure.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

Such reflux is not dependent on the commodity being sold for more than was paid for it. This
circumstance influences only the amount of the money that comes back. The reflux itself takes place, so
soon as the purchased commodity is resold, in other words, so soon as the circuit M-C-M is completed.
We have here, therefore, a palpable difference between the circulation of money as capital, and its
circulation as mere money.

The circuit C-M-C comes completely to an end, so soon as the money brought in by the sale of one
commodity is abstracted again by the purchase of another.

If, nevertheless, there follows a reflux of money to its starting-point, this can only happen through a
renewal or repetition of the operation. If I sell a quarter of corn for £3, and with this £3 buy clothes, the
money, so far as I am concerned, is spent and done with. It belongs to the clothes merchant. If I now sell
a second quarter of corn, money indeed flows back to me, not however as a sequel to the first transaction,
but in consequence of its repetition. The money again leaves me, so soon as I complete this second
transaction by a fresh purchase. Therefore, in the circuit C-M-C, the expenditure of money has nothing to
do with its reflux. On the other hand, in M-C-M, the reflux of the money is conditioned by the very mode
of its expenditure. Without this reflux, the operation fails, or the process is interrupted and incomplete,
owing to the absence of its complementary and final phase, the sale.

The circuit C-M-C starts with one commodity, and finishes with another, which falls out of circulation
and into consumption. Consumption, the satisfaction of wants, in one word, use-value, is its end and aim.
The circuit M-C-M, on the contrary, commences with money and ends with money. Its leading motive,
and the goal that attracts it, is therefore mere exchange-value.

In the simple circulation of commodities, the two extremes of the circuit have the same economic form.
They are both commodities, and commodities of equal value. But they are also use-values differing in
their qualities, as, for example, corn and clothes. The exchange of products, of the different materials in
which the labour of society is embodied, forms here the basis of the movement. It is otherwise in the
circulation M-C-M, which at first sight appears purposeless, because tautological. Both extremes have
the same economic form. They are both money, and therefore are not qualitatively different use- values;
for money is but the converted form of commodities, in which their particular use- values vanish. To
exchange £100 for cotton, and then this same cotton again for £100, is merely a roundabout way of
exchanging money for money, the same for the same, and appears to be an operation just as purposeless
as it is absurd. [4] One sum of money is distinguishable from another only by its amount. The character
and tendency of the process M-C-M, is therefore not due to any qualitative difference between its
extremes, both being money, but solely to their quantitative difference. More money is withdrawn from
circulation at the finish than was thrown into it at the start. The cotton that was bought for £100 is
perhaps resold for £100 + £10 or £100. The exact form of this process is therefore M-C-M', where M' =
M + delta M = the original sum advanced, plus an increment. This increment or excess over the original
value I call "surplus- value". The value originally advanced, therefore, not only remains intact while in
circulation, but adds to itself a surplus-value or expands itself. It is this movement that converts it into
capital.

Of course, it is also possible, that in C-M-C, the two extremes C-C, say corn and clothes, may represent
different quantities of value. The farmer may sell his corn above its value, or may buy the clothes at less
than their value. He may, on the other hand, "be done" by the clothes merchant. Yet, in the form of
circulation now under consideration, such differences in value are purely accidental. The fact that the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

corn and the clothes are equivalents, does not deprive the process of all meaning, as it does in M-C-M.
The equivalence of their values is rather a necessary condition to its normal course.

The repetition or renewal of the act of selling in order to buy, is kept within bounds by the very object it
aims at, namely, consumption or the satisfaction of definite wants, an aim that lies altogether outside the
sphere of circulation. But when we buy in order to sell, we, on the contrary, begin and end with the same
thing, money, exchange- value; and thereby the movement becomes interminable. No doubt, M becomes
M + delta M, £100 become £1 10. But when viewed in their qualitative aspect alone, £1 10 are the same as
£100, namely money; and considered quantitatively, £1 10 is, like £100, a sum of definite and limited
value. If now, the £1 10 be spent as money, they cease to play their part. They are no longer capital.
Withdrawn from circulation, they become petrified into a hoard, and though they remained in that state
till doomsday, not a single farthing would accrue to them. If, then, the expansion of value is once aimed
at, there is just the same inducement to augment the value of the £1 10 as that of the £100; for both are
but limited expressions for exchange-value, and therefore both have the same vocation to approach, by
quantitative increase, as near as possible to absolute wealth. Momentarily, indeed, the value originally
advanced, the £100 is distinguishable from the surplus- value of £10 that is annexed to it during
circulation; but the distinction vanishes immediately. At the end of the process, we do not receive with
one hand the original £100, and with the other, the surplus- value of £10. We simply get a value of £1 10,
which is in exactly the same condition and fitness for commencing the expanding process, as the original
£100 was. Money ends the movement only to begin it again. [51 Therefore, the final result of every
separate circuit, in which a purchase and consequent sale are completed, forms of itself the starting-point
of a new circuit. The simple circulation of commodities - selling in order to buy - is a means of carrying
out a purpose unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropriation of use-values, the satisfaction of
wants. The circulation of money as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the expansion of value
takes place only within this constantly renewed movement. The circulation of capital has therefore no
limits. [61

As the conscious representative of this movement, the possessor of money becomes a capitalist. His
person, or rather his pocket, is the point from which the money starts and to which it returns. The
expansion of value, which is the objective basis or main-spring of the circulation M-C-M, becomes his
subjective aim, and it is only in so far as the appropriation of ever more and more wealth in the abstract
becomes the sole motive of his operations, that he functions as a capitalist, that is, as capital personified
and endowed with consciousness and a will. Use- values must therefore never be looked upon as the real
aim of the capitalist; [71 neither must the profit on any single transaction. The restless never-ending
process of profit-making alone is what he aims at. [81 This boundless greed after riches, this passionate
chase after exchange-value [91, is common to the capitalist and the miser; but while the miser is merely a
capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a rational miser. The never-ending augmentation of exchange-value,
which the miser strives after, by seeking to save f 101 his money from circulation, is attained by the more
acute capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circulation, fill

The independent form, i.e., the money-form, which the value of commodities assumes in the case of
simple circulation, serves only one purpose, namely, their exchange, and vanishes in the final result of
the movement. On the other hand, in the circulation M-C-M, both the money and the commodity
represent only different modes of existence of value itself, the money its general mode, and the
commodity its particular, or, so to say, disguised mode. |121 It is constantly changing from one form to
the other without thereby becoming lost, and thus assumes an automatically active character. If now we

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

take in turn each of the two different forms which self-expanding value successively assumes in the
course of its life, we then arrive at these two propositions: Capital is money: Capital is commodities. |131
In truth, however, value is here the active factor in a process, in which, while constantly assuming the
form in turn of money and commodities, it at the same time changes in magnitude, differentiates itself by
throwing off surplus-value from itself; the original value, in other words, expands spontaneously. For the
movement, in the course of which it adds surplus-value, is its own movement, its expansion, therefore, is
automatic expansion. Because it is value, it has acquired the occult quality of being able to add value to
itself. It brings forth living offspring, or, at the least, lays golden eggs.

Value, therefore, being the active factor in such a process, and assuming at one time the form of money,
at another that of commodities, but through all these changes preserving itself and expanding, it requires
some independent form, by means of which its identity may at any time be established. And this form it
possesses only in the shape of money. It is under the form of money that value begins and ends, and
begins again, every act of its own spontaneous generation. It began by being £100, it is now £110, and so
on. But the money itself is only one of the two forms of value. Unless it takes the form of some
commodity, it does not become capital. There is here no antagonism, as in the case of hoarding, between
the money and commodities. The capitalist knows that all commodities, however scurvy they may look,
or however badly they may smell, are in faith and in truth money, inwardly circumcised Jews, and what
is more, a wonderful means whereby out of money to make more money.

In simple circulation, C-M-C, the value of commodities attained at the most a form independent of their
use-values, i.e., the form of money; but that same value now in the circulation M-C-M, or the circulation
of capital, suddenly presents itself as an independent substance, endowed with a motion of its own,
passing through a life-process of its own, in which money and commodities are mere forms which
it assumes and casts off in turn. Nay, more: instead of simply representing the relations of commodities,
it enters now, so to say, into private relations with itself. It differentiates itself as original value from
itself as surplus- value; as the father differentiates himself from himself qua the son, yet both are one and
of one age: for only by the surplus-value of £10 does the £100 originally advanced become capital, and
so soon as this takes place, so soon as the son, and by the son, the father, is begotten, so soon does their
difference vanish, and they again become one, £1 10.

Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in process, and, as such, capital. It comes out of
circulation, enters into it again, preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, comes back out of it with
expanded bulk, and begins the same round ever afresh. f!41 M-M', money which begets money, such is
the description of Capital from the mouths of its first interpreters, the Mercantilists.

Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order to sell dearer, M-C-M', appears certainly to
be a form peculiar to one kind of capital alone, namely, merchants' capital. But industrial capital too is
money, that is changed into commodities, and by the sale of these commodities, is re-converted into
more money. The events that take place outside the sphere of circulation, in the interval between the
buying and selling, do not affect the form of this movement. Lastly, in the case of interest-bearing
capital, the circulation M-C-M' appears abridged. We have its result without the intermediate stage, in the
form M-M', "en style lapidaire" so to say, money that is worth more money, value that is greater than
itself.

M-C-M' is therefore in reality the general formula of capital as it appears prima facie within the sphere of
circulation.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four



Footnotes

T 1 1 The contrast between the power, based on the personal relations of dominion and servitude, that is
conferred by landed property, and the impersonal power that is given by money, is well expressed by the
two French proverbs, "Nulle terre sans seigneur," and "L'argent n'a pas de maitre."

[21 "Avec de l'argent on achete des marchandises et avec des marchandises on achete de l'argent."
(Mercier de la Riviere: "L'ordre naturel et essentiel des societes politiques," p. 543.)

[3] "When a thing is bought in order to be sold again, the sum employed is called money advanced; when
it is bought not to be sold, it may be said to be expended." — (James Steuart: "Works," &c. Edited by
Gen. Sir James Steuart, his son. Lond., 1805, V. I., p. 274.)

\4] "On n'echange pas de l'argent contre de l'argent," says Mercier de la Riviere to the Mercantilists (1. c,
p. 486.) In a work, which, ex professo treats of "trade" and "speculation," occurs the following: "All trade
consists in the exchange of things of different kinds; and the advantage" (to the merchant?) "arises out of
this difference. To exchange a pound of bread against a pound of bread ... would be attended with no
advantage; ... Hence trade is advantageously contrasted with gambling, which consists in a mere
exchange of money for money." (Th. Corbet, "An Inquiry into the Causes and Modes of the Wealth of
Individuals; or the Principles of Trade and Speculation Explained." London, 1841, p. 5.) Although
Corbet does not see that M-M, the exchange or money for money, is the characteristic form of
circulation, not only of merchants' capital but of all capital, yet at least he acknowledges that this form is
common to gambling and to one species of trade, viz., speculation: but then comes MacCulloch and
makes out, that to buy in order to sell, is to speculate, and thus the difference between Speculation and
Trade vanishes. "Every transaction in which an individual buys produce in order to sell it again, is, in
fact, a speculation." (MacCulloch: "A Dictionary Practical, &c, of Commerce." Lond., 1847, p. 1009.)
With much more naivete, Pinto, the Pindar of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, remarks, "Le commerce
est un jeu: (taken from Locke) et ce n'est pas avec des gueux qu'on peut gagner. Si Ton gagnait longtemps
en tout avec tous, il faudrait rendre de bon accord les plus grandes parties du profit pour recommencer le
jeu." (Pinto: "Traite de la Circulation et du Credit." Amsterdam, 1771. p. 231,)

[51 "Capital is divisible ... into the original capital and the profit, the increment to the capital ... although
in practice this profit is immediately turned into capital, and set in motion with the original." (F. Engels,
"Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie, in: Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbiicher, herausgegeben
von Arnold Ruge und Karl Marx." Paris, 1844, p. 99.)

[61 Aristotle opposes Oeconomic to Chrematistic. He starts from the former. So far as it is the art of
gaining a livelihood, it is limited to procuring those articles that are necessary to existence, and useful
either to a household or the state. "True wealth ([greek:] o alethinos ploutos) consists of such values in
use; for the quantity of possessions of this kind, capable of making life pleasant, is not unlimited. There
is, however, a second mode of acquiring things, to which we may by preference and with correctness
give the name of Chrematistic, and in this case there appear to be no limits to riches and possessions.
Trade ([greek:] e kapelike) is literally retail trade, and Aristotle takes this kind because in it values in use
predominate) does not in its nature belong to Chrematistic, for here the exchange has reference only to



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

what is necessary to themselves (the buyer or seller)." Therefore, as he goes on to show, the original form
of trade was barter, but with the extension of the latter, there arose the necessity for money. On the
discovery of money, barter of necessity developed into [greek: kapelike], into trading in commodities,
and this again, in opposition to its original tendency, grew into Chrematistic, into the art of making
money. Now Chrematistic is distinguishable from Oeconomic in this way, that "in the case of
Chrematistic circulation is the source of riches ([greek:] poietike chrematon ... dia chrematon diaboles).
And it appears to revolve about money, for money is the beginning and end of this kind of exchange
([greek:] to nomisma stoicheion tes allages estin). Therefore also riches, such as Chrematistic strives for,
are unlimited. Just as every art that is not a means to an end, but an end in itself, has no limit to its aims,
because it seeks constantly to approach nearer and nearer to that end, while those arts that pursue means
to an end, are not boundless, since the goal itself imposes a limit upon them, so with Chrematistic, there
are no bounds to its aims, these aims being absolute wealth. Oeconomic not Chrematistic has a limit ...
the object of the former is something different from money, of the latter the augmentation of money....
By confounding these two forms, which overlap each other, some people have been led to look upon the
preservation and increase of money ad infinitum as the end and aim of Oeconomic." (Aristoteles, "De
Rep." edit. Bekker, lib. 1. c. 8, 9. passim.)

[7] "Commodities (here used in the sense of use- values) are not the terminating object of the trading
capitalist, money is his terminating object." (Th. Chalmers, "On Pol. Econ. &c," 2nd Ed., Glasgow,
1832, pp. 165, 166.)

[8] "II mercante non conta quasi per niente il lucro fatto, ma mira sempre al future" (A. Genovesi,
Lezioni di Economia Civile (1765), Custodi's edit, of Italian Economists. Parte Moderna t. viii, p. 139.)

[9] "The inextinguishable passion for gain, the auri sacra fames, will always lead capitalists."
(MacCulloch: "The Principles of Polit. Econ." London, 1830, p. 179.) This view, of course, does not
prevent the same MacCulloch and others of his kidney, when in theoretical difficulties, such, for
example, as the question of over-production, from transforming the same capitalist into a moral citizen,
whose sole concern is for use- values, and who even develops an insatiable hunger for boots, hats, eggs,
calico, and other extremely familiar sorts of use-values.

[10] [greek: Sozein] is a characteristic Greek expression for hoarding. So in English to save has the same
two meanings: sauver and epargner.

[Ill "Questo infinito che le cose non hanno in progresso, hanno in giro." (Galiani.)

[121 Ce n'est pas la matiere qui fait le capital, mais la valeur de ces matieres. " (J. B. Say: "Traite d'Econ.
Polit." 3eme ed. Paris, 1817, t. II., p. 429.)

[131 "Currency (!) employed in producing articles... is capital." (Macleod: "The Theory and Practice of
Banking." London, 1855, v. 1, ch. i, p. 55.) "Capital is commodities." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol.
Econ."Lond., 1821, p. 74.)

[141 Capital: "portion fructifiante de la richesse accumulee... valeur permanents, multipliante. "
(Sismondi: "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Polit.," t. L, p. 88, 89.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Four

Transcribed by Martha Giminez and Hinrich Kuhls
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Five: Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:43]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part II:

The Transformation of Money in Capital



CHAPTER FIVE:

CONTRADICTIONS IN THE GENERAL FORMULA OF CAPITAL



The form which circulation takes when money becomes capital, is opposed to all the laws we have
hitherto investigated bearing on the nature of commodities, value and money, and even of circulation
itself. What distinguishes this form from that of the simple circulation of commodities, is the inverted
order of succession of the two antithetical processes, sale and purchase. How can this purely formal
distinction between these processes change their character as it were by magic?

But that is not all. This inversion has no existence for two out of the three persons who transact business
together. As capitalist, I buy commodities from A and sell them again to B, but as a simple owner of
commodities, I sell them to B and then purchase fresh ones from A. A and B see no difference between
the two sets of transactions. They are merely buyers or sellers. And I on each occasion meet them as a
mere owner of either money or commodities, as a buyer or a seller, and, what is more, in both sets of
transactions, I am opposed to A only as a buyer and to B only as a seller, to the one only as money, to the
other only as commodities, and to neither of them as capital or a capitalist, or as representative of
anything that is more than money or commodities, or that can produce any effect beyond what money
and commodities can. For me the purchase from A and the sale to B are part of a series. But the
connexion between the two acts exists for me alone. A does not trouble himself about my transaction
with B, nor does B about my business with A. And if I offered to explain to them the meritorious nature
of my action in inverting the order of succession, they would probably point out to me that I was
mistaken as to that order of succession, and that the whole transaction, instead of beginning with a
purchase and ending with a sale, began, on the contrary, with a sale and was concluded with a purchase.
In truth, my first act, the purchase, was from the standpoint of A, a sale, and my second act, the sale, was
from the standpoint of B, a purchase. Not content with that, A and B would declare that the whole series
was superfluous and nothing but Hokus Pokus; that for the future A would buy direct from B, and B sell
direct to A. Thus the whole transaction would be reduced to a single act forming an isolated,
non-complemented phase in the ordinary circulation of commodities, a mere sale from A's point of view,
and from B's, a mere purchase. The inversion, therefore, of the order of succession, does not take us
outside the sphere of the simple circulation of commodities, and we must rather look, whether there is in
this simple circulation anything permitting an expansion of the value that enters into circulation, and,
consequently, a creation of surplus-value.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (1 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

Let us take the process of circulation in a form under which it presents itself as a simple and direct
exchange of commodities. This is always the case when two owners of commodities buy from each
other, and on the settling day the amounts mutually owing are equal and cancel each other. The money in
this case is money of account and serves to express the value of the commodities by their prices, but is
not, itself, in the shape of hard cash, confronted with them. So far as regards use-values, it is clear that
both parties may gain some advantage. Both part with goods that, as use-values, are of no service to
them, and receive others that they can make use of. And there may also be a further gain. A, who sells
wine and buys corn, possibly produces more wine, with given labour-time, than farmer B could, and B
on the other hand, more corn than wine-grower A could. A, therefore, may get, for the same
exchange- value, more corn, and B more wine, than each would respectively get without any exchange by
producing his own corn and wine. With reference, therefore, to use- value, there is good ground for
saying that "exchange is a transaction by which both sides gain." JJJ It is otherwise with exchange- value.
"A man who has plenty of wine and no corn treats with a man who has plenty of corn and no wine; an
exchange takes place between them of corn to the value of 50, for wine of the same value.This act
produces no increase of exchange-value either for the one or the other; for each of them already
possessed, before the exchange, a value equal to that which he acquired by means of that operation." \2]
The result is not altered by introducing money, as a medium of circulation, between the commodities,
and making the sale and the purchase two distinct acts. [31 The value of a commodity is expressed in its
price before it goes into circulation, and is therefore a precedent condition of circulation, not its result.
141

Abstractedly considered, that is, apart from circumstances not immediately flowing from the laws of the
simple circulation of commodities, there is in an exchange nothing (if we except the replacing of one
use-value by another) but a metamorphosis, a mere change in the form of the commodity. The same
exchange- value, i.e., the same quantity of incorporated social labour, remains throughout in the hands of
the owner of the commodity, first in the shape of his own commodity, then in the form of the money for
which he exchanged it, and lastly, in the shape of the commodity he buys with that money. This change
of form does not imply a change in the magnitude of the value. But the change, which the value of the
commodity undergoes in this process, is limited to a change in its money-form. This form exists first as
the price of the commodity offered for sale, then as an actual sum of money, which, however, was
already expressed in the price, and lastly, as the price of an equivalent commodity. This change of form
no more implies, taken alone, a change in the quantity of value, than does the change of a £5 note into
sovereigns, half sovereigns and shillings. So far therefore as the circulation of commodities effects a
change in the form alone of their values, and is free from disturbing influences, it must be the exchange
of equivalents. Little as Vulgar-Economy knows about the nature of value, yet whenever it wishes to
consider the phenomena of circulation in their purity, it assumes that supply and demand are equal,
which amounts to this, that their effect is nil. If therefore, as regards the use- values exchanged, both
buyer and seller may possibly gain something, this is not the case as regards the exchange-values. Here
we must rather say, "Where equality exists there can be no gain." [51 It is true, commodities may be sold
at prices deviating from their values, but these deviations are to be considered as infractions of the laws
of the exchange of commodities [6[, which in its normal state is an exchange of equivalents,
consequently, no method for increasing value. [7[

Hence, we see that behind all attempts to represent the circulation of commodities as a source of
surplus-value, there lurks a quid pro quo, a mixing up of use-value and exchange-value. For instance,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (2 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

Condillac says: "It is not true that on an exchange of commodities we give value for value. On the
contrary, each of the two contracting parties in every case, gives a less for a greater value. ... If we really
exchanged equal values, neither party could make a profit. And yet, they both gain, or ought to gain.
Why? The value of a thing consists solely in its relation to our wants. What is more to the one is less to
the other, and vice versa. ... It is not to be assumed that we offer for sale articles required for our own
consumption. ... We wish to part with a useless thing, in order to get one that we need; we want to give
less for more. ... It was natural to think that, in an exchange, value was given for value, whenever each of
the articles exchanged was of equal value with the same quantity of gold. ... But there is another point to
be considered in our calculation. The question is, whether we both exchange something superfluous for
something necessary." [8] We see in this passage, how Condillac not only confuses use-value with
exchange- value, but in a really childish manner assumes, that in a society, in which the production of
commodities is well developed, each producer produces his own means of subsistence, and throws into
circulation only the excess over his own requirements. [91 Still, Condillac's argument is frequently used
by modem economists, more especially when the point is to show, that the exchange of commodities in
its developed form, commerce, is productive of surplus-value. For instance, "Commerce ... adds value to
products, for the same products in the hands of consumers, are worth more than in the hands of
producers, and it may strictly be considered an act of production." flOl But commodities are not paid for
twice over, once on account of their use-value, and again on account of their value. And though the
use-value of a commodity is more serviceable to the buyer than to the seller, its money-form is more
serviceable to the seller. Would he otherwise sell it? We might therefore just as well say that the buyer
performs "strictly an act of production," by converting stockings, for example, into money.

If commodities, or commodities and money, of equal exchange- value, and consequently equivalents, are
exchanged, it is plain that no one abstracts more value from, than he throws into, circulation. There is no
creation of surplus-value. And, in its normal form, the circulation of commodities demands the exchange
of equivalents. But in actual practice, the process does not retain its normal form. Let us, therefore,
assume an exchange of non-equivalents.

In any case the market for commodities is only frequented by owners of commodities, and the power
which these persons exercise over each other, is no other than the power of their commodities. The
material variety of these commodities is the material incentive to the act of exchange, and makes buyers
and sellers mutually dependent, because none of them possesses the object of his own wants, and each
holds in his hand the object of another's wants. Besides these material differences of their use-values,
there is only one other difference between commodities, namely, that between their bodily form and the
form into which they are converted by sale, the difference between commodities and money. And
consequently the owners of commodities are distinguishable only as sellers, those who own
commodities, and buyers, those who own money.

Suppose then, that by some inexplicable privilege, the seller is enabled to sell his commodities above
their value, what is worth 100 for 1 10, in which case the price is nominally raised 10%. The seller
therefore pockets a surplus- value of 10. But after he has sold he becomes a buyer. A third owner of
commodities comes to him now as seller, who in this capacity also enjoys the privilege of selling his
commodities 10% too dear. Our friend gained 10 as a seller only to lose it again as a buyer, fill The net
result is, that all owners of commodities sell their goods to one another at 10% above their value, which
comes precisely to the same as if they sold them at their true value. Such a general and nominal rise of
prices has the same effect as if the values had been expressed in weight of silver instead of in weight of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (3 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

gold. The nominal prices of commodities would rise, but the real relation between their values would
remain unchanged.

Let us make the opposite assumption, that the buyer has the privilege of purchasing commodities under
their value. In this case it is no longer necessary to bear in mind that he in his turn will become a seller.
He was so before he became buyer; he had already lost 10% in selling before he gained 10% as buyer.
[121 Everything is just as it was.

The creation of surplus-value, and therefore the conversion of money into capital, can consequently be
explained neither on the assumption that commodities are sold above their value, nor that they are bought
below their value, f 1 31

The problem is in no way simplified by introducing irrelevant matters after the manner of Col. Torrens:
"Effectual demand consists in the power and inclination (!), on the part of consumers, to give for
commodities, either by immediate or circuitous barter, some greater portion of ... capital than their
production costs." f 141 In relation to circulation, producers and consumers meet only as buyers and
sellers. To assert that the surplus-value acquired by the producer has its origin in the fact that consumers
pay for commodities more than their value, is only to say in other words: The owner of commodities
possesses, as a seller, the privilege of selling too dear. The seller has himself produced the commodities
or represents their producer, but the buyer has to no less extent produced the commodities represented by
his money, or represents their producer. The distinction between them is, that one buys and the other
sells. The fact that the owner of the commodities, under the designation of producer, sells them over their
value, and under the designation of consumer, pays too much for them, does not carry us a single step
further. [15]

To be consistent therefore, the upholders of the delusion that surplus-value has its origin in a nominal rise
of prices or in the privilege which the seller has of selling too dear, must assume the existence of a class
that only buys and does not sell, i.e., only consumes and does not produce. The existence of such a class
is inexplicable from the standpoint we have so far reached, viz., that of simple circulation. But let us
anticipate. The money with which such a class is constantly making purchases, must constantly flow into
their pockets, without any exchange, gratis, by might or right, from the pockets of the commodity-owners
themselves. To sell commodities above their value to such a class, is only to crib back again a part of the
money previously given to it. [161 The towns of Asia Minor thus paid a yearly money tribute to ancient
Rome. With this money Rome purchased from them commodities, and purchased them too dear. The
provincials cheated the Romans, and thus got back from their conquerors, in the course of trade, a portion
of the tribute. Yet, for all that, the conquered were the really cheated. Their goods were still paid for with
their own money. That is not the way to get rich or to create surplus-value.

Let us therefore keep within the bounds of exchange where sellers are also buyers, and buyers, sellers.
Our difficulty may perhaps have arisen from treating the actors as personifications instead of as
individuals.

A may be clever enough to get the advantage of B or C without their being able to retaliate. A sells wine
worth £40 to B, and obtains from him in exchange corn to the value of £50. A has converted his £40 into
£50, has made more money out of less, and has converted his commodities into capital. Let us examine
this a little more closely. Before the exchange we had £40 worth of wine in the hands of A, and £50
worth of corn in those of B, a total value of £90. After the exchange we have still the same total value of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (4 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

£90. The value in circulation has not increased by one iota, it is only distributed differently between A
and B. What is a loss of value to B is surplus-value to A; what is "minus" to one is "plus" to the other.
The same change would have taken place, if A, without the formality of an exchange, had directly stolen
the £10 from B. The sum of the values in circulation can clearly not be augmented by any change in their
distribution, any more than the quantity of the precious metals in a country by a Jew selling a Queen
Anne's farthing for a guinea. The capitalist class, as a whole, in any country, cannot over-reach
themselves. |171

Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered. If equivalents are exchanged, no surplus-value
results, and if non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus-value. |181 Circulation, or the exchange of
commodities, begets no value. |191

The reason is now therefore plain why, in analysing the standard form of capital, the form under which it
determines the economic organisation of modern society, we entirely left out of consideration its most
popular, and, so to say, antediluvian forms, merchants' capital and money-lenders' capital.

The circuit M-C-M, buying in order to sell dearer, is seen most clearly in genuine merchants' capital. But
the movement takes place entirely within the sphere of circulation. Since, however, it is impossible, by
circulation alone, to account for the conversion of money into capital, for the formation of surplus-value,
it would appear, that merchants' capital is an impossibility, so long as equivalents are exchanged; [201
that, therefore, it can only have its origin in the two-fold advantage gained, over both the selling and the
buying producers, by the merchant who parasitically shoves himself in between them. It is in this sense
that Franklin says, "war is robbery, commerce is generally cheating." f211 If the transformation of

merchants' money into capital is to be explained otherwise than by the producers being simply cheated, a
long series of intermediate steps would be necessary, which, at present, when the simple circulation of
commodities forms our only assumption, are entirely wanting.

What we have said with reference to merchants' capital, applies still more to money-lenders' capital. In
merchants' capital, the two extremes, the money that is thrown upon the market, and the augmented
money that is withdrawn from the market, are at least connected by a purchase and a sale, in other words
by the movement of the circulation. In money-lenders' capital the form M-C-M is reduced to the two
extremes without a mean, M-M , money exchanged for more money, a form that is incompatible with the
nature of money, and therefore remains inexplicable from the standpoint of the circulation of
commodities. Hence Aristotle: "since chrematistic is a double science, one part belonging to commerce,
the other to economic, the latter being necessary and praiseworthy, the former based on circulation and
with justice disapproved (for it is not based on Nature, but on mutual cheating), therefore the usurer is
most rightly hated, because money itself is the source of his gain, and is not used for the purposes for
which it was invented. For it originated for the exchange of commodities, but interest makes out of
money, more money. Hence its name ([greek: tokos] interest and offspring). For the begotten are like
those who beget them. But interest is money of money, so that of all modes of making a living, this is the
most contrary to Nature." f22]

In the course of our investigation, we shall find that both merchants' capital and interest-bearing capital
are derivative forms, and at the same time it will become clear, why these two forms appear in the course
of history before the modern standard form of capital.

We have shown that surplus-value cannot be created by circulation, and, therefore, that in its formation,



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (5 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

something must take place in the background, which is not apparent in the circulation itself. f231 But can
surplus-value possibly originate anywhere else than in circulation, which is the sum total of all the
mutual relations of commodity-owners, as far as they are determined by their commodities? Apart from
circulation, the commodity-owner is in relation only with his own commodity. So far as regards value,
that relation is limited to this, that the commodity contains a quantity of his own labour, that quantity
being measured by a definite social standard. This quantity is expressed by the value of the commodity,
and since the value is reckoned in money of account, this quantity is also expressed by the price, which
we will suppose to be £10. But his labour is not represented both by the value of the commodity, and by
a surplus over that value, not by a price of 10 that is also a price of 1 1, not by a value that is greater than
itself. The commodity owner can, by his labour, create value, but not self-expanding value. He can
increase the value of his commodity, by adding fresh labour, and therefore more value to the value in
hand, by making, for instance, leather into boots. The same material has now more value, because it
contains a greater quantity of labour. The boots have therefore more value than the leather, but the value
of the leather remains what it was; it has not expanded itself, has not, during the making of the boots,
annexed surplus-value. It is therefore impossible that outside the sphere of circulation, a producer of
commodities can, without coming into contact with other commodity-owners, expand value, and
consequently convert money or commodities into capital.

It is therefore impossible for capital to be produced by circulation, and it is equally impossible for it to
originate apart from circulation. It must have its origin both in circulation and yet not in circulation.

We have, therefore, got a double result.

The conversion of money into capital has to be explained on the basis of the laws that regulate the
exchange of commodities, in such a way that the starting-point is the exchange of equivalents. f24] Our
friend, Moneybags, who as yet is only an embryo capitalist, must buy his commodities at their value,
must sell them at their value, and yet at the end of the process must withdraw more value from
circulation than he threw into it at starting. His development into a full-grown capitalist must take place,
both within the sphere of circulation and without it. These are the conditions of the problem. Hie Rhodus,
hie salta!



Footnotes

T 1 1 "L'echange est une transaction admirable dans laquelle les deux contractants gagnent - toujours (!)"
(Destutt de Tracy: "Traite de la Volonte et de ses effets." Paris, 1826, p. 68.) This work appeared
afterwards as "Traite d'Econ. Polit."

[21 "Mercier de la Riviere," 1. c, p. 544.

[31 "Que l'une de ces deux valeurs soit argent, ou queues soient toutes deux marchandises usuelles, rien
de plus indifferent en soi." ("Mercier de la Riviere," 1. c, p. 543.)

[4J "Ce ne sont pas les contractants qui prononcent sur la valeur; elle est decidee avant la convention."
(Le Trosne, p. 906.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (6 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

\5] "Dove e egualita non e lucro." (Galiani, "Delia Moneta in Custodi, Parte Moderna," t. iv., p. 244.)

[6] "L'echange devient desavantageux pour l'une des parties, lorsque quelque chose etrangere vient
diminuer ou exagerer le prix; alors l'egalite est blessee, mais la lesion procede de cette cause et non de
l'echange." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 904.)

[71 "L'echange est de sa nature un contrat d'egalite qui se fait de valeur pour valeur egale. II n'est done
pas un moyen de s'enrichir, puisque Ton donne autant que Ton recoit." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 903.)

[81 Condillac: "Le Commerce et la Gouvernement" (1776). Edit. Daire et Molinari in the "Melanges
d'Econ. Polit." Paris, 1847, pp. 267, 291.

[9J Le Trosne, therefore, answers his friend Condillac with justice as follows: "Dans une ... societe
formee il n'y a pas de surabondant en aucun genre." At the same time, in a bantering way, he remarks: "If
both the persons who exchange receive more to an equal amount, and part with less to an equal amount,
they both get the same." It is because Condillac has not the remotest idea of the nature of exchange-value
that he has been chosen by Herr Professor Wilhelm Roscher as a proper person to answer for the
soundness of his own childish notions. See Roscher's "Die Grundlagen der Nationalokonomie, Dritte
Auflage," 1858.

[10] S. P. Newman: "Elements of Polit. Econ." Andover and New York, 1835, p. 175.

fill "By the augmentation of the nominal value of the produce... sellers not enriched... since what they
gain as sellers, they precisely expend in the quality of buyers." ("The Essential Principles of the Wealth
of Nations." &c, London, 1797, p. 66.)

fl21 "Si Ton est force de donner pour 18 livres une quantite de telle production qui en valait 24, lorsqu'on
employera ce meme argent a acheter, on aura egalement pour 18 1. ce que Ton payait 24." (Le Trosne, I.
c.,p. 897.)

f 131 "Chaque vendeur ne peut done parvenir a rencherir habituellement ses marchandises, qu'en se
soumettant aussi a payer habituellement plus cher les marchandises des autres vendeurs; et par la meme
raison, chaque consommateur ne peut payer habituellement moins cher ce qu 'il achete, qu'en se
soumettant aussi a une diminution semblance sur le prix des choses qu'il vend." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1.
c, p. 555.)

f 141 Torrens. "An Essay on the Production of Wealth." London, 1821, p. 349.

f 151 The idea of profits being paid by the consumers, is, assuredly, very absurd. Who are the
consumers?" (G. Ramsay: "An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth." Edinburgh, 1836, p. 183.)

f 161 "When a man is in want of a demand, does Mr. Malthus recommend him to pay some other person
to take off his goods?" is a question put by an angry disciple of Ricardo to Malthus, who, like his
disciple, Parson Chalmers, economically glorifies this class of simple buyers or consumers. (See "An
Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand and the Necessity of Consumption, lately
advocated by Mr. Malthus," &c. Lond., 1821, p. 55.)

f 171 Destutt de Tracy, although, or perhaps because, he was a member of the Institute, held the opposite



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (7 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

view. He says, industrial capitalists make profits because "they all sell for more than it has cost to
produce. And to whom do they sell? In the first instance to one another." (I. c, p. 239.)

f 181 "L'echange qui se fait de deux valeurs egales n'augmente ni ne diminue la masse des valeurs
subsistantes dans la societe. L'echange de deux valeurs inegales ... ne change rien non plus a la somme
des valeurs sociales, bien qu'il ajoute a la fortune de l'un ce qu'il ete de la fortune de I'autre." (J. B. Say, 1.
c, t. II, pp. 443, 444.) Say, not in the least troubled as to the consequences of this statement, borrows it,
almost word for word, from the Physiocrats. The following example will show how Monsieur Say turned
to account the writings of the Physiocrats, in his day quite forgotten, for the purpose of expanding the
"value" of his own. His most celebrated saying, "On n'achete des produits qu'avec des produits" (I. c, t.
II. p. 441.) runs as follows in the original physiocratic work: "Les productions ne se paient qu'avec des
productions." (Le Trosne, . c, p. 899.)

f 191 "Exchange confers no value at all upon products." (F. Wayland: "The Elements of Political
Economy." Boston, 1843, p. 169.)

f201 Under the rule of invariable equivalents commerce would be impossible. (G. Opdyke: "A Treatise
on Polit. Economy." New York, 1851, pp. 66-69.) "The difference between real value and
exchange- value is based upon this fact, namely, that the value of a thing is different from the so-called
equivalent given for it in trade, i.e., that this equivalent is no equivalent." (F. Engels, 1. c, p. 96).

f211 Benjamin Franklin: Works, Vol. II, edit. Sparks in "Positions to be examined concerning National
Wealth," p. 376.

[22J Aristotle, I. c, c. 10.

f231 "Profit, in the usual condition of the market, is not made by exchanging. Had it not existed before,
neither could it after that transaction." (Ramsay, 1. c, p. 184.)

f241 From the foregoing investigation, the reader will see that this statement only means that the
formation of capital must be possible even though the price and value of a commodity be the same; for
its formation cannot be attributed to any deviation of the one from the other. If prices actually differ from
values, we must, first of all, reduce the former to the latter, in other words, treat the difference as
accidental in order that the phenomena may be observed in their purity, and our observations not
interfered with by disturbing circumstances that have nothing to do with the process in question. We
know, moreover, that this reduction is no mere scientific process. The continual oscillations in prices,
their rising and falling, compensate each other, and reduce themselves to an average price, which is their
hidden regulator. It forms the guiding star of the merchant or the manufacturer in every undertaking that
requires time. He knows that when a long period of time is taken, commodities are sold neither over nor
under, but at their average price. If therefore he thought about the matter at all, he would formulate the
problem of the formation of capital as follows: How can we account for the origin of capital on the
supposition that prices are regulated by the average price, i. e., ultimately by the value of the
commodities? I say "ultimately," because average prices do not directly coincide with the values of
commodities, as Adam Smith, Ricardo, and others believe.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (8 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Five

Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Six: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch05.htm (9 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:15:48]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part II:

The Transformation of Money in Capital



CHAPTER SIX:

THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER



The change of value that occurs in the case of money intended to be converted into capital, cannot take
place in the money itself, since in its function of means of purchase and of payment, it does no more than
realise the price of the commodity it buys or pays for; and, as hard cash, it is value petrified, never
varying. JJJ Just as little can it originate in the second act of circulation, the re-sale of the commodity,
which does no more than transform the article from its bodily form back again into its money-form. The
change must, therefore, take place in the commodity bought by the first act, M-C, but not in its value, for
equivalents are exchanged, and the commodity is paid for at its full value. We are, therefore, forced to
the conclusion that the change originates in the use- value, as such, of the commodity, i.e., in its
consumption. In order to be able to extract value from the consumption of a commodity, our friend,
Moneybags, must be so lucky as to find, within the sphere of circulation, in the market, a commodity,
whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value, whose actual consumption,
therefore, is itself an embodiment of labour, and, consequently, a creation of value. The possessor of
money does find on the market such a special commodity in capacity for labour or labour-power.

By labour-power or capacity for labour is to be understood the aggregate of those mental and physical
capabilities existing in a human being, which he exercises whenever he produces a use-value of any
description.

But in order that our owner of money may be able to find labour-power offered for sale as a commodity,
various conditions must first be fulfilled. The exchange of commodities of itself implies no other
relations of dependence than those which, result from its own nature. On this assumption, labour-power
can appear upon the market as a commodity, only if, and so far as, its possessor, the individual whose
labour-power it is, offers it for sale, or sells it, as a commodity. In order that he may be able to do this, he
must have it at his disposal, must be the untrammelled owner of his capacity for labour, i.e., of his
person. [2\ He and the owner of money meet in the market, and deal with each other as on the basis of
equal rights, with this difference alone, that one is buyer, the other seller; both, therefore, equal in the
eyes of the law. The continuance of this relation demands that the owner of the labour-power should sell
it only for a definite period, for if he were to sell it rump and stump, once for all, he would be selling
himself, converting himself from a free man into a slave, from an owner of a commodity into a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

commodity. He must constantly look upon his labour-power as his own property, his own commodity,
and this he can only do by placing it at the disposal of the buyer temporarily, for a definite period of
time. By this means alone can he avoid renouncing his rights of ownership over it. \3]

The second essential condition to the owner of money finding labour-power in the market as a
commodity is this — that the labourer instead of being in the position to sell commodities in which his
labour is incorporated, must be obliged to offer for sale as a commodity that very labour-power, which
exists only in his living self.

In order that a man may be able to sell commodities other than labour-power, he must of course have the
means of production, as raw material, implements, &c. No boots can be made without leather. He
requires also the means of subsistence. Nobody — not even "a musician of the future" — can live upon
future products, or upon use-values in an unfinished state; and ever since the first moment of his
appearance on the world's stage, man always has been, and must still be a consumer, both before and
while he is producing. In a society where all products assume the form of commodities, these
commodities must be sold after they have been produced, it is only after their sale that they can serve in
satisfying the requirements of their producer. The time necessary for their sale is superadded to that
necessary for their production.

For the conversion of his money into capital, therefore, the owner of money must meet in the market with
the free labourer, free in the double sense, that as a free man he can dispose of his labour-power as his
own commodity, and that on the other hand he has no other commodity for sale, is short of everything
necessary for the realisation of his labour-power.

The question why this free labourer confronts him in the market, has no interest for the owner of money,
who regards the labour-market as a branch of the general market for commodities. And for the present it
interests us just as little. We cling to the fact theoretically, as he does practically. One thing, however, is
clear — Nature does not produce on the one side owners of money or commodities, and on the other men
possessing nothing but their own labour-power. This relation has no natural basis, neither is its social
basis one that is common to all historical periods. It is clearly the result of a past historical development,
the product of many economic revolutions, of the extinction of a whole series of older forms of social
production.

So, too, the economic categories, already discussed by us, bear the stamp of history. Definite historical
conditions are necessary that a product may become a commodity. It must not be produced as the
immediate means of subsistence of the producer himself. Had we gone further, and inquired under what
circumstances all, or even the majority of products take the form of commodities, we should have found
that this can only happen with production of a very specific kind, capitalist production. Such an inquiry,
however, would have been foreign to the analysis of commodities. Production and circulation of
commodities can take place, although the great mass of the objects produced are intended for the
immediate requirements of their producers, are not turned into commodities, and consequently social
production is not yet by a long way dominated in its length and breadth by exchange- value. The
appearance of products as commodities pre-supposes such a development of the social division of labour,
that the separation of use-value from exchange-value, a separation which first begins with barter, must
already have been completed. But such a degree of development is common to many forms of society,
which in other respects present the most varying historical features. On the other hand, if we consider
money, its existence implies a definite stage in the exchange of commodities. The particular functions of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

money which it performs, either as the mere equivalent of commodities, or as means of circulation, or
means of payment, as hoard or as universal money, point, according to the extent and relative
preponderance of the one function or the other, to very different stages in the process of social
production. Yet we know by experience that a circulation of commodities relatively primitive, suffices
for the production of all these forms. Otherwise with capital. The historical conditions of its existence are
by no means given with the mere circulation of money and commodities. It can spring into life, only
when the owner of the means of production and subsistence meets in the market with the free labourer
selling his labour-power. And this one historical condition comprises a world's history. Capital, therefore,
announces from its first appearance a new epoch in the process of social production. [41

We must now examine more closely this peculiar commodity, labour-power. Like all others it has a
value. [51 How is that value determined?

The value of labour-power is determined, as in the case of every other commodity, by the labour-time
necessary for the production, and consequently also the reproduction, of this special article. So far as it
has value, it represents no more than a definite quantity of the average labour of society incorporated in
it. Labour-power exists only as a capacity, or power of the living individual. Its production consequently
pre-supposes his existence. Given the individual, the production of labour-power consists in his
reproduction of himself or his maintenance. For his maintenance he requires a given quantity of the
means of subsistence. Therefore the labour-time requisite for the production of labour-power reduces
itself to that necessary for the production of those means of subsistence; in other words, the value of
labour-power is the value of the means of subsistence necessary for the maintenance of the labourer.
Labour-power, however, becomes a reality only by its exercise; it sets itself in action only by working.
But thereby a definite quantity of human muscle, nerve, brain, &c, is wasted, and these require to be
restored. This increased expenditure demands a larger income. [6[ If the owner of labour-power works
to-day, to-morrow he must again be able to repeat the same process in the same conditions as regards
health and strength. His means of subsistence must therefore be sufficient to maintain him in his normal
state as a labouring individual. His natural wants, such as food, clothing, fuel, and housing, vary
according to the climatic and other physical conditions of his country. On the other hand, the number and
extent of his so-called necessary wants, as also the modes of satisfying them, are themselves the product
of historical development, and depend therefore to a great extent on the degree of civilisation of a
country, more particularly on the conditions under which, and consequently on the habits and degree of
comfort in which, the class of free labourers has been formed. [71 In contradistinction therefore to the
case of other commodities, there enters into the determination of the value of labour-power a historical
and moral element. Nevertheless, in a given country, at a given period, the average quantity of the means
of subsistence necessary for the labourer is practically known.

The owner of labour-power is mortal. If then his appearance in the market is to be continuous, and the
continuous conversion of money into capital assumes this, the seller of labour-power must perpetuate
himself, "in the way that every living individual perpetuates himself, by procreation." [81 The
labour-power withdrawn from the market by wear and tear and death, must be continually replaced by, at
the very least, an equal amount of fresh labour-power. Hence the sum of the means of subsistence
necessary for the production of labour-power must include the means necessary for the labourer's
substitutes, i.e., his children, in order that this race of peculiar commodity-owners may perpetuate its
appearance in the market. \9]



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

In order to modify the human organism, so that it may acquire skill and handiness in a given branch of
industry, and become labour-power of a special kind, a special education or training is requisite, and this,
on its part, costs an equivalent in commodities of a greater or less amount. This amount varies according
to the more or less complicated character of the labour-power. The expenses of this education
(excessively small in the case of ordinary labour-power), enter pro tanto into the total value spent in its
production.

The value of labour-power resolves itself into the value of a definite quantity of the means of subsistence.
It therefore varies with the value of these means or with the quantity of labour requisite for their
production.

Some of the means of subsistence, such as food and fuel, are consumed daily, and a fresh supply must be
provided daily. Others such as clothes and furniture last for longer periods and require to be replaced
only at longer intervals. One article must be bought or paid for daily, another weekly, another quarterly,
and so on. But in whatever way the sum total of these outlays may be spread over the year, they must be
covered by the average income, taking one day with another. If the total of the commodities required
daily for the production of labour-power = A, and those required weekly = B, and those required
quarterly = C, and so on, the daily average of these commodities = 365 A + 52B + 4C + &c / 365.
Suppose that in this mass of commodities requisite for the average day there are embodied 6 hours of
social labour, then there is incorporated daily in labour-power half a day's average social labour, in other
words, half a day's labour is requisite for the daily production of labour-power. This quantity of labour
forms the value of a day's labour-power or the value of the labour-power daily reproduced. If half a day's
average social labour is incorporated in three shillings, then three shillings is the price corresponding to
the value of a day's labour-power. If its owner therefore offers it for sale at three shillings a day, its
selling price is equal to its value, and according to our supposition, our friend Moneybags, who is intent
upon converting his three shillings into capital, pays this value.

The minimum limit of the value of labour-power is determined by the value of the commodities, without
the daily supply of which the labourer cannot renew his vital energy, consequently by the value of those
means of subsistence that are physically indispensable. If the price of labour-power fall to this minimum,
it falls below its value, since under such circumstances it can be maintained and developed only in a
crippled state. But the value of every commodity is determined by the labour-time requisite to turn it out
so as to be of normal quality.

It is a very cheap sort of sentimentality which declares this method of determining the value of
labour-power, a method prescribed by the very nature of the case, to be a brutal method, and which wails
with Rossi that, "To comprehend capacity for labour (puissance de travail) at the same time that we make
abstraction from the means of subsistence of the labourers during the process of production, is to
comprehend a phantom (etre de raison). When we speak of labour, or capacity for labour, we speak at the
same time of the labourer and his means of subsistence, of labourer and wages." flQl When we speak of
capacity for labour, we do not speak of labour, any more than when we speak of capacity for digestion,
we speak of digestion. The latter process requires something more than a good stomach. When we speak
of capacity for labour, we do not abstract from the necessary means of subsistence. On the contrary, their
value is expressed in its value. If his capacity for labour remains unsold, the labourer derives no benefit
from it, but rather he will feel it to be a cruel nature-imposed necessity that this capacity has cost for its
production a definite amount of the means of subsistence and that it will continue to do so for its
reproduction. He will then agree with Sismondi: "that capacity for labour ... is nothing unless it is sold."

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

Oil

One consequence of the peculiar nature of labour-power as a commodity is, that its use-value does not,
on the conclusion of the contract between the buyer and seller, immediately pass into the hands of the
former. Its value, like that of every other commodity, is already fixed before it goes into circulation,
since a definite quantity of social labour has been spent upon it; but its use-value consists in the
subsequent exercise of its force. The alienation of labour-power and its actual appropriation by the buyer,
its employment as a use-value, are separated by an interval of time. But in those cases in which the
formal alienation by sale of the use-value of a commodity, is not simultaneous with its actual delivery to
the buyer, the money of the latter usually functions as means of payment. f!21 In every country in which
the capitalist mode of production reigns, it is the custom not to pay for labour-power before it has been
exercised for the period fixed by the contract, as for example, the end of each week. In all cases,
therefore, the use- value of the labour-power is advanced to the capitalist: the labourer allows the buyer to
consume it before he receives payment of the price; he everywhere gives credit to the capitalist. That this
credit is no mere fiction, is shown not only by the occasional loss of wages on the bankruptcy of the
capitalist, fl 31 but also by a series of more enduring consequences. |141 Nevertheless, whether money
serves as a means of purchase or as a means of payment, this makes no alteration in the nature of the
exchange of commodities. The price of the labour-power is fixed by the contract, although it is not
realised till later, like the rent of a house. The labour-power is sold, although it is only paid for at a later
period. It will, therefore, be useful, for a clear comprehension of the relation of the parties, to assume
provisionally, that the possessor of labour-power, on the occasion of each sale, immediately receives the
price stipulated to be paid for it.

We now know how the value paid by the purchaser to the possessor of this peculiar commodity,
labour-power, is determined. The use-value which the former gets in exchange, manifests itself only in
the actual usufruct, in the consumption of the labour-power. The money-owner buys everything
necessary for this purpose, such as raw material, in the market, and pays for it at its full value. The
consumption of labour-power is at one and the same time the production of commodities and of
surplus-value. The consumption of labour-power is completed, as in the case of every other commodity,
outside the limits of the market or of the sphere of circulation. Accompanied by Mr. Moneybags and by
the possessor of labour-power, we therefore take leave for a time of this noisy sphere, where everything
takes place on the surface and in view of all men, and follow them both into the hidden abode of
production, on whose threshold there stares us in the face "No admittance except on business." Here we
shall see, not only how capital produces, but how capital is produced. We shall at last force the secret of
profit making.

This sphere that we are deserting, within whose boundaries the sale and purchase of labour-power goes
on, is in fact a very Eden of the innate rights of man. There alone rule Freedom, Equality, Property and
Bentham. Freedom, because both buyer and seller of a commodity, say of labour-power, are constrained
only by their own free will. They contract as free agents, and the agreement they come to, is but the form
in which they give legal expression to their common will. Equality, because each enters into relation with
the other, as with a simple owner of commodities, and they exchange equivalent for equivalent. Property,
because each disposes only of what is his own. And Bentham, because each looks only to himself. The
only force that brings them together and puts them in relation with each other, is the selfishness, the gain
and the private interests of each. Each looks to himself only, and no one troubles himself about the rest,
and just because they do so, do they all, in accordance with the pre-established harmony of things, or



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

under the auspices of an all-shrewd providence, work together to their mutual advantage, for the common
weal and in the interest of all.

On leaving this sphere of simple circulation or of exchange of commodities, which furnishes the
"Free-trader Vulgaris" with his views and ideas, and with the standard by which he judges a society
based on capital and wages, we think we can perceive a change in the physiognomy of our dramatis
personae. He, who before was the money-owner, now strides in front as capitalist; the possessor of
labour-power follows as his labourer. The one with an air of importance, smirking, intent on business;
the other, timid and holding back, like one who is bringing his own hide to market and has nothing to
expect but — a hiding.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "In the form of money ... capital is productive of no profit." (Ricardo: '"Princ. of Pol. Econ.," p. 267.)

\2] In encyclopaedias of classical antiquities we find such nonsense as this — that in the ancient world
capital was fully developed, "except that the free labourer and a system of credit was wanting."
Mommsen also, in his "History of Rome," commits, in this respect, one blunder after another.

[3] Hence legislation in various countries fixes a maximum for labour-contracts. Wherever free labour is
the rule, the laws regulate the mode of terminating this contract. In some States, particularly in Mexico
(before the American Civil War, also in the territories taken from Mexico, and also, as a matter of fact, in
the Danubian provinces till the revolution effected by Kusa), slavery is hidden under the form of
peonage. By means of advances, repayable in labour, which are handed down from generation to
generation, not only the individual labourer, but his family, become, de facto, the property of other
persons and their families. Juarez abolished peonage. The so-called Emperor Maximilian re-established it
by a decree, which, in the House of Representatives at Washington, was aptly denounced as a decree for
the re-introduction of slavery into Mexico. "I may make over to another the use, for a limited time, of my
particular bodily and mental aptitudes and capabilities; because in consequence of this restriction, they
are impressed with a character of alienation with regard to me as a whole. But by the alienation of all my
labour-time and the whole of my work, I should be converting the substance itself, in other words, my
general activity and reality, my person, into the property of another." (Hegel, "Philosophic des Rechts."
Berlin, 1840, p. 104, § 67.)

[4J The capitalist epoch is therefore characterised by this, that labour-power takes in the eyes of the
labourer himself the form of a commodity which is his property; his labour consequently becomes
wage-labour. On the other hand, it is only from this moment that the produce of labour universally
becomes a commodity.

[5] "The value or worth of a man, is as of all other things his price — that is to say, so much as would be
given for the use of his power." (Th. Hobbes: "Leviathan" in Works, Ed. Molesworth. Lond. 1839-44, v.
iii. p. 76.)

\6\ Hence the Roman Villicus, as overlooker of the agricultural slaves, received "more meagre fare than
working slaves, because his work was lighter." (Th. Mommsen, Rom. Geschichte, 1856, p. 810.)

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

JT[ Compare W. Th. Thornton: "Over-population and its Remedy," Lond., 1846.

[81 Petty.

[91 "Its (labour's) natural price ... consists in such a quantity of necessaries and comforts of life, as, from
the nature of the climate, and the habits of the country, are necessary to support the labourer, and to
enable him to rear such a family as may preserve, in the market, an undiminished supply of labour." (R.
Torrens: "An Essay on the External Corn Trade." Lond. 1815, p. 62.) The word labour is here wrongly
used for labour-power.

[101 Rossi: "Cours d'Econ. Polit.," Bruxelles, 1842, p. 370.

rill Sismondi: "Nouv. Princ. etc.," 1. 1, p. 112.

fl21 "All labour is paid after it has ceased." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of
Demand," &c, p. 104.) Le credit commercial a du commencer au moment ou l'ouvrier, premier artisan
de la production, a pu, au moyen de ses economies, attendre le salaire de son travail jusqu'a la fin de la
semaine, de la quinzaine, du mois, du trimestre, &c." (Ch. Ganilh: "Des Systemes d'Econ. Polit." 2eme
edit. Paris, 1821, t. II, p. 150.)

f 131 "L'ouvrier prete son industrie," but adds Storch slyly: he "risks nothing" except "de perdre son
salaire ... l'ouvrier ne transmet rien de materiel." (Storch: "Cours d'Econ. Polit." Petersbourg, 1815, t. II. ,
p. 37.)

f 141 One example. In London there are two sorts of bakers, the "full priced," who sell bread at its full
value, and the "undersellers," who sell it under its value. The latter class comprises more than
three-fourths of the total number of bakers, (p. xxxii in the Report of H. S. Tremenheere, commissioner
to examine into "the grievances complained of by the journeymen bakers", &c, Lond. 1862.) The
undersellers, almost without exception, sell bread adulterated with alum, soap, pearl ashes, chalk,
Derbyshire stone-dust, and such like agreeable nourishing and wholesome ingredients. (See the above
cited Blue book, as also the report of "the committee of 1855 on the adulteration of bread," and Dr.
Hassall's "Adulterations Detected," 2nd Ed. Lond. 1861.) Sir John Gordon stated before the committee of
1855, that "in consequence of these adulterations, the poor man, who lives on two pounds of bread a day,
does not now get one fourth part of nourishing matter, let alone the deleterious effects on his health. "
Tremenheere states (1. c, p. xlviii), as the reason, why a very large part of the working-class, although
well aware of this adulteration, nevertheless accept the alum, stone-dust, &c, as part of their purchase:
that it is for them "a matter of necessity to take from their baker or from the chandler's shop, such bread
as they choose to supply." As they are not paid their wages before the end of the week, they in their turn
are unable "to pay for the bread consumed by their families, during the week, before the end of the
week", and Tremenheere adds on the evidence of witnesses, "it is notorious that bread composed of those
mixtures, is made expressly for sale in this manner." In many English and still more Scotch agricultural
districts, wages are paid fortnightly and even monthly; with such long intervals between the payments,
the agricultural labourer is obliged to buy on credit.... He must pay higher prices, and is in fact tied to the
shop which gives him credit. Thus at Horningham in Wilts, for example, where the wages are monthly,
the same flour that he could buy elsewhere at Is lOd per stone, costs him 2s 4d per stone. ("Sixth Report"
on "Public Health" by "The Medical Officer of the Privy Council, &c, 1864," p.264.) "The block printers
of Paisley and Kilmarnock enforced, by a strike, fortnightly, instead of monthly payment of wages."

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Six

("Reports of the Inspectors of Factories for 31st Oct., 1853," p. 34.) As a further pretty result of the credit
given by the workmen to the capitalist, we may refer to the method current in many English coal mines,
where the labourer is not paid till the end of the month, and in the meantime, receives sums on account
from the capitalist, often in goods for which the miner is obliged to pay more than the market price
(Truck-system). "It is a common practice with the coal masters to pay once a month, and advance cash to
their workmen at the end of each intermediate week. The cash is given in the shop" (i.e., the Tommy
shop which belongs to the master); "the men take it on one side and lay it out on the other." ("Children's
Employment Commission, III. Report," Lond. 1864, p. 38, n. 192.)



Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

Next: Chapter Seven: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus- Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:15:52]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute

Surplus-Value



CHAPTER SEVEN:

THE LABOUR-PROCESS AND THE PROCESS OF PRODUCING

SURPLUS-VALUE



Contents

Section 1 - The Labour-Process or the Production of Use-Values
Section 2 - The Production of Surplus-Value

SECTION 1.

THE LABOUR-PROCESS OR THE PRODUCTION OF USE-VALUES



The capitalist buys labour-power in order to use it; and labour-power in use is labour itself. The
purchaser of labour-power consumes it by setting the seller of it to work. By working, the latter becomes
actually, what before he only was potentially, labour-power in action, a labourer. In order that his labour
may re-appear in a commodity, he must, before all things, expend it on something useful, on something
capable of satisfying a want of some sort. Hence, what the capitalist sets the labourer to produce, is a
particular use-value, a specified article. The fact that the production of use-values, or goods, is carried on
under the control of a capitalist and on his behalf, does not alter the general character of that production.
We shall, therefore, in the first place, have to consider the labour-process independently of the particular
form it assumes under given social conditions.

Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man and Nature participate, and in which man of his
own accord starts, regulates, and controls the material re-actions between himself and Nature. He
opposes himself to Nature as one of her own forces, setting in motion arms and legs, head and hands, the
natural forces of his body, in order to appropriate Nature's productions in a form adapted to his own
wants. By thus acting on the external world and changing it, he at the same time changes his own nature.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (1 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

He develops his slumbering powers and compels them to act in obedience to his sway. We are not now
dealing with those primitive instinctive forms of labour that remind us of the mere animal. An
immeasurable interval of time separates the state of things in which a man brings his labour-power to
market for sale as a commodity, from that state in which human labour was still in its first instinctive
stage. We pre-suppose labour in a form that stamps it as exclusively human. A spider conducts
operations that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an architect in the construction
of her cells. But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is this, that the architect
raises his structure in imagination before he erects it in reality. At the end of every labour-process, we get
a result that already existed in the imagination of the labourer at its commencement. He not only effects a
change of form in the material on which he works, but he also realises a purpose of his own that gives the
law to his modus operandi, and to which he must subordinate his will. And this subordination is no mere
momentary act. Besides the exertion of the bodily organs, the process demands that, during the whole
operation, the workman's will be steadily in consonance with his purpose. This means close attention.
The less he is attracted by the nature of the work, and the mode in which it is carried on, and the less,
therefore, he enjoys it as something which gives play to his bodily and mental powers, the more close his
attention is forced to be.

The elementary factors of the labour-process are 1, the personal activity of man, i.e., work itself, 2, the
subject of that work, and 3, its instruments.

The soil (and this, economically speaking, includes water) in the virgin state in which it supplies £JJ man
with necessaries or the means of subsistence ready to hand, exists independently of him, and is the
universal subject of human labour. All those things which labour merely separates from immediate
connexion with their environment, are subjects of labour spontaneously provided by Nature. Such are
fish which we catch and take from their element, water, timber which we fell in the virgin forest, and
ores which we extract from their veins. If, on the other hand, the subject of labour has, so to say, been
filtered through previous labour, we call it raw material; such is ore already extracted and ready for
washing. All raw material is the subject of labour, but not every subject of labour is raw material: it can
only become so, after it has undergone some alteration by means of labour.

An instrument of labour is a thing, or a complex of things, which the labourer interposes between himself
and the subject of his labour, and which serves as the conductor of his activity. He makes use of
the mechanical, physical, and chemical properties of some substances in order to make other substances
subservient to his aims. [2J Leaving out of consideration such ready-made means of subsistence as fruits,
in gathering which a man's own limbs serve as the instruments of his labour, the first thing of which the
labourer possesses himself is not the subject of labour but its instrument. Thus Nature becomes one of the
organs of his activity, one that he annexes to his own bodily organs, adding stature to himself in spite of
the Bible. As the earth is his original larder, so too it is his original tool house. It supplies him, for
instance, with stones for throwing, grinding, pressing, cutting, &c. The earth itself is an instrument of
labour, but when used as such in agriculture implies a whole series of other instruments and a
comparatively high development of labour. £3J No sooner does labour undergo the least development,
than it requires specially prepared instruments. Thus in the oldest caves we find stone implements and
weapons. In the earliest period of human history domesticated animals, i.e., animals which have been
bred for the purpose, and have undergone modifications by means of labour, play the chief part as
instruments of labour along with specially prepared stones, wood, bones, and shells. [41 The use and
fabrication of instruments of labour, although existing in the germ among certain species of animals, is



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (2 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

specifically characteristic of the human labour-process, and Franklin therefore defines man as a
tool-making animal. Relics of bygone instruments of labour possess the same importance for the
investigation of extinct economic forms of society, as do fossil bones for the determination of extinct
species of animals. It is not the articles made, but how they are made, and by what instruments, that
enables us to distinguish different economic epochs. [5\ Instruments of labour not only supply a standard
of the degree of development to which human labour has attained, but they are also indicators of the
social conditions under which that labour is carried on. Among the instruments of labour, those of a
mechanical nature, which, taken as a whole, we may call the bone and muscles of production, offer much
more decided characteristics of a given epoch of production, than those which, like pipes, tubs, baskets,
jars, &c, serve only to hold the materials for labour, which latter class, we may in a general way, call the
vascular system of production. The latter first begins to play an important part in the chemical industries.

In a wider sense we may include among the instruments of labour, in addition to those things that are
used for directly transferring labour to its subject, and which therefore, in one way or another, serve as
conductors of activity, all such objects as are necessary for carrying on the labour-process. These do not
enter directly into the process, but without them it is either impossible for it to take place at all, or
possible only to a partial extent. Once more we find the earth to be a universal instrument of this sort, for
it furnishes a locus standi to the labourer and a field of employment for his activity. Among instruments
that are the result of previous labour and also belong to this class, we find workshops, canals, roads, and
so forth.

In the labour-process, therefore, man's activity, with the help of the instruments of labour, effects an
alteration, designed from the commencement, in the material worked upon. The process disappears in the
product, the latter is a use-value, Nature's material adapted by a change of form to the wants of man.
Labour has incorporated itself with its subject: the former is materialised, the latter transformed. That
which in the labourer appeared as movement, now appears in the product as a fixed quality without
motion. The blacksmith forges and the product is a forging.

If we examine the whole process from the point of view of its result, the product, it is plain that both the
instruments and the subject of labour, are means of production, [6] and that the labour itself is productive
labour. [7]

Though a use- value, in the form of a product, issues from the labour-process, yet other use-values,
products of previous labour, enter into it as means of production. The same-use-value is both the product
of a previous process, and a means of production in a later process. Products are therefore not only
results, but also essential conditions of labour.

With the exception of the extractive industries, in which the material for labour is provided immediately
by Nature, such as mining, hunting, fishing, and agriculture (so far as the latter is confined to breaking up
virgin soil), all branches of industry manipulate raw material, objects already filtered through labour,
already products of labour. Such is seed in agriculture. Animals and plants, which we are accustomed to
consider as products of Nature, are in their present form, not only products of, say last year's labour, but
the result of a gradual transformation, continued through many generations, under man's
superintendence, and by means of his labour. But in the great majority of cases, instruments of labour
show even to the most superficial observer, traces of the labour of past ages.

Raw material may either form the principal substance of a product, or it may enter into its formation only



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (3 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

as an accessory. An accessory may be consumed by the instruments of labour, as coal under a boiler, oil
by a wheel, hay by draft-horses, or it may be mixed with the raw material in order to produce some
modification thereof, as chlorine into unbleached linen, coal with iron, dye-stuff with wool, or again, it
may help to carry on the work itself, as in the case of the materials used for heating and lighting
workshops. The distinction between principal substance and accessory vanishes in the true chemical
industries, because there none of the raw material re-appears, in its original composition, in the substance
of the product. [8]

Every object possesses various properties, and is thus capable of being applied to different uses. One and
the same product may therefore serve as raw material in very different processes. Corn, for example, is a
raw material for millers, starch-manufacturers, distillers, and cattlebreeders. It also enters as raw material
into its own production in the shape of seed; coal, too, is at the same time the product of, and a means of
production in, coal-mining.

Again, a particular product may be used in one and the same process, both as an instrument of labour and
as raw material. Take, for instance, the fattening of cattle, where the animal is the raw material, and at the
same time an instrument for the production of manure.

A product, though ready for immediate consumption, may yet serve as raw material for a further product,
as grapes when they become the raw material for wine. On the other hand, labour may give us its product
in such a form, that we can use it only a's raw material, as is the case with cotton, thread, and yarn. Such
a raw material, though itself a product, may have to go through a whole series of different processes: in
each of these in turn, it serves, with constantly varying form, as raw material, until the last process of the
series leaves it a perfect product, ready for individual consumption, or for use as an instrument of labour.

Hence we see, that whether a use-value is to be regarded as raw material, as instrument of labour, or as
product, this is determined entirely by its function in the labour-process, by the position it there occupies:
as this varies, so does its character.

Whenever therefore a product enters as a means of production into a new labour-process, it thereby loses
its character of product, and becomes a mere factor in the process. A spinner treats spindles only as
implements for spinning, and flax only as the material that he spins. Of course it is impossible to spin
without material and spindles; and therefore the existence of these things as products, at the
commencement of the spinning operation, must be presumed: but in the process itself, the fact that they
are products of previous labour, is a matter of utter indifference; just as in the digestive process, it is of
no importance whatever, that bread is the produce of the previous labour of the farmer, the miller, and
the baker. On the contrary, it is generally by their imperfections as products, that the means of production
in any process assert themselves in their character of products. A blunt knife or weak thread forcibly
remind us of Mr. A., the cutler, or Mr. B., the spinner. In the finished product the labour by means of
which it has acquired its useful qualities is not palpable, has apparently vanished.

A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is useless. In addition, it falls a prey to the
destructive influence of natural forces. Iron rusts and wood rots. Yarn with which we neither weave nor
knit, is cotton wasted. Living labour must seize upon these things and rouse them from their death-sleep,
change them from mere possible use-values into real and effective ones. Bathed in the fire of labour,
appropriated as part and parcel of labour's organism, and, as it were, made alive for the performance of
their functions in the process, they are in truth consumed, but consumed with a purpose, as elementary
constituents of new use- values, of new products, ever ready as means of subsistence for individual

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (4 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

consumption, or as means of production for some new labour-process.

If then, on the one hand, finished products are not only results, but also necessary conditions, of the
labour-process, on the other hand, their assumption into that process, their contact with living labour, is
the sole means by which they can be made to retain their character of use-values, and be utilised.

Labour uses up its material factors, its subject and its instruments, consumes them, and is therefore a
process of consumption. Such productive consumption is distinguished from individual consumption by
this, that the latter uses up products, as means of subsistence for the living individual; the former, as
means whereby alone, labour, the labour-power of the living individual, is enabled to act. The product,
therefore, of individual consumption, is the consumer himself; the result of productive consumption, is a
product distinct from the consumer.

In so far then, as its instruments and subjects are themselves products, labour consumes products in order
to create products, or in other words, consumes one set of products by turning them into means of
production for another set. But, just as in the beginning, the only participators in the labour-process were
man and the earth, which latter exists independently of man, so even now we still employ in the process
many means of production, provided directly by Nature, that do not represent any combination of natural
substances with human labour.

The labour-process, resolved as above into its simple elementary factors, is human action with a view to
the production of use-values, appropriation of natural substances to human requirements; it is the
necessary condition for effecting exchange of matter between man and Nature; it is the everlasting
Nature-imposed condition of human existence, and therefore is independent of every social phase of that
existence, or rather, is common to every such phase. It was, therefore, not necessary to represent our
labourer in connexion with other labourers; man and his labour on one side, Nature and its materials on
the other, sufficed. As the taste of the porridge does not tell you who grew the oats, no more does this
simple process tell you of itself what are the social conditions under which it is taking place, whether
under the slave-owner's brutal lash, or the anxious eye of the capitalist, whether Cincinnatus carries it on
in tilling his modest farm or a savage in killing wild animals with stones. [9J

Let us now return to our would-be capitalist. We left him just after he had purchased, in the open market,
all the necessary factors of the labour-process- its objective factors, the means of production, as well as
its subjective factor, labour-power. With the keen eye of an expert, he has selected the means of
production and the kind of labour-power best adapted to his particular trade, be it spinning, bootmaking,
or any other kind. He then proceeds to consume the commodity, the labour-power that he has just bought,
by causing the labourer, the impersonation of that labour-power, to consume the means of production by
his labour. The general character of the labour-process is evidently not changed by the fact, that the
labourer works for the capitalist instead of for himself; moreover, the particular methods and operations
employed in bootmaking or spinning are not immediately changed by the intervention of the capitalist.
He must begin by taking the labour-power as he finds it in the market, and consequently be satisfied with
labour of such a kind as would be found in the period immediately preceding the rise of capitalists.
Changes in the methods of production by the subordination of labour to capital, can take place only at a
later period, and therefore will have to be treated of in a later chapter.

The labour-process, turned into the process by which the capitalist consumes labour-power, exhibits two
characteristic phenomena. First, the labourer works under the control of the capitalist to whom his labour
belongs; the capitalist taking good care that the work is done in a proper manner, and that the means of

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (5 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

production are used with intelligence, so that there is no unnecessary waste of raw material, and no wear
and tear of the implements beyond what is necessarily caused by the work.

Secondly, the product is the property of the capitalist and not that of the labourer, its immediate producer.
Suppose that a capitalist pays for a day's labour-power at its value; then the right to use that power for a
day belongs to him, just as much as the right to use any other commodity, such as a horse that he has
hired for the day. To the purchaser of a commodity belongs its use, and the seller of labour-power, by
giving his labour, does no more, in reality, than part with the use-value that he has sold. From the instant
he steps into the workshop, the use-value of his labour-power, and therefore also its use, which is labour,
belongs to the capitalist. By the purchase of labour-power, the capitalist incorporates labour, as a living
ferment, with the lifeless constituents of the product. From his point of view, the labour-process is
nothing more than the consumption of the commodity purchased, i. e., of labour-power; but this
consumption cannot be effected except by supplying the labour-power with the means of production. The
labour-process is a process between things that the capitalist has purchased, things that have become his
property. The product of this process belongs, therefore, to him, just as much as does the wine which is
the product of a process of fermentation completed in his cellar. flOl



SECTION 2.

THE PRODUCTION OF SURPLUS-VALUE



The product appropriated by the capitalist is a use-value, as yarn, for example, or boots. But, although
boots are, in one sense, the basis of all social progress, and our capitalist is a decided "progressist," yet he
does not manufacture boots for their own sake. Use-value is, by no means, the thing "qu'on aime pour
lui-meme" in the production of commodities. Use-values are only produced by capitalists, because, and
in so far as, they are the material substratum, the depositories of exchange- value. Our capitalist has two
objects in view: in the first place, he wants to produce a use-value that has a value in exchange, that is to
say, an article destined to be sold, a commodity; and secondly, he desires to produce a commodity whose
value shall be greater than the sum of the values of the commodities used in its production, that is, of the
means of production and the labour-power, that he purchased with his good money in the open market.
His aim is to produce not only a use- value, but a commodity also; not only use- value, but value; not only
value, but at the same time surplus-value.

It must be borne in mind, that we are now dealing with the production of commodities, and that, up to
this point, we have only considered one aspect of the process. Just as commodities are, at the same time,
use-values and values, so the process of producing them must be a labour-process, and at the same time,
a process of creating value. \\X\

Let us now examine production as a creation of value.

We know that the value of each commodity is determined by the quantity of labour expended on and
materialised in it, by the working-time necessary, under given social conditions, for its production. This

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (6 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

rule also holds good in the case of the product that accrued to our capitalist, as the result of the
labour-process carried on for him. Assuming thisproduct to be 10 lbs. of yarn, our first step is to calculate
the quantity of labour realised in it.

For spinning the yarn, raw material is required; suppose in this case 10 lbs. of cotton. We have no need at
present to investigate the value of this cotton, for our capitalist has, we will assume, bought it at its full
value, say of ten shillings. In this price the labour required for the production of the cotton is already
expressed in terms of the average labour of society. We will further assume that the wear and tear of the
spindle, which, for our present purpose, may represent all other instruments of labour employed, amounts
to the value of 2s. If, then, twenty-four hours' labour, or two working-days, are required to produce the
quantity of gold represented by twelve shillings, we have here, to begin with, two days' labour already
incorporated in the yarn.

We must not let ourselves be misled by the circumstance that the cotton has taken a new shape while the
substance of the spindle has to a certain extent been used up. By the general law of value, if the value of
40 lbs. of yarn = the value of 40 lbs. of cotton + the value of a whole spindle, i. e., if the same
working-time is required to produce the commodities on either side of this equation, then 10 lbs. of yarn
are an equivalent for 10 lbs. of cotton, together with one-fourth of a spindle. In the case we are
considering the same working-time is materialised in the 10 lbs. of yarn on the one hand, and in the 10
lbs. of cotton and the fraction of a spindle on the other. Therefore, whether value appears in cotton, in a
spindle, or in yarn, makes no difference in the amount of that value. The spindle and cotton, instead of
resting quietly side by side, join together in the process, their forms are altered, and they are turned into
yarn; but their value is no more affected by this fact than it would be if they had been simply exchanged
for their equivalent in yarn.

The labour required for the production of the cotton, the raw material of the yarn, is part of the labour
necessary to produce the yarn, and is therefore contained in the yarn. The same applies to the labour
embodied in the spindle, without whose wear and tear the cotton could not be spun.

Hence, in determining the value of the yarn, or the labour-time required for its production, all the special
processes carried on at various times and in different places, which were necessary, first to produce the
cotton and the wasted portion of the spindle, and then with the cotton and spindle to spin the yarn, may
together be looked on as different and successive phases of one and the same process. The whole of the
labour in the yarn is past labour; and it is a matter of no importance that the operations necessary for the
production of its constituent elements were carried on at times which, referred to the present, are more
remote than the final operation of spinning. If a definite quantity of labour, say thirty days, is requisite to
build a house, the total amount of labour incorporated in it is not altered by the fact that the work of the
last day is done twenty-nine days later than that of the first. Therefore the labour contained in the raw
material and the instruments of labour can be treated just as if it were labour expended in an earlier stage
of the spinning process, before the labour of actual spinning commenced.

The values of the means of production, i. e., the cotton and the spindle, which values are expressed in the
price of twelve shillings, are therefore constituent parts of the value of the yarn, or, in other words, of the
value of the product.

Two conditions must nevertheless be fulfilled. First, the cotton and spindle must concur in the production
of a use-value; they must in the present case become yarn. Value is independent of the particular
use-value by which it is borne, but it must be embodied in a use-value of some kind. Secondly, the time

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (7 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

occupied in the labour of production must not exceed the time really necessary under the given social
conditions of the case. Therefore, if no more than I lb. of cotton be requisite to spin 1 1 lbs. of yarn, care
must be taken that no more than this weight of cotton is consumed in the production of 1 1 lbs. of yarn;
and similarly with regard to the spindle. Though the capitalist have a hobby, and use a gold instead of a
steel spindle, yet the only labour that counts for anything in the value of the yarn is that which would be
required to produce a steel spindle, because no more is necessary under the given social conditions.

We now know what portion of the value of the yarn is owing to the cotton and the spindle. It amounts to
twelve shillings or the value of two days' work. The next point for our consideration is, what portion of
the value of the yarn is added to the cotton by the labour of the spinner.

We have now to consider this labour under a very different aspect from that which it had during the
labour-process; there, we viewed it solely as that particular kind of human activity which changes cotton
into yarn; there, the more the labour was suited to the work, the better the yarn, other circumstances
remaining the same. The labour of the spinner was then viewed as specifically different from other kinds
of productive labour, different on the one hand in its special aim, viz., spinning, different, on the other
hand, in the special character of its operations, in the special nature of its means of production and in the
special use-value of its product. For the operation of spinning, cotton and spindles are a necessity, but for
making rifled cannon they would be of no use whatever. Here, on the contrary, where we consider the
labour of the spinner only so far as it is value-creating, i.e., a source of value, his labour differs in no
respect from the labour of the man who bores cannon, or (what here more nearly concerns us), from the
labour of the cotton-planter and spindle-maker incorporated in the means of production. It is solely by
reason of this identity, that cotton planting, spindle making and spinning, are capable of forming the
component parts differing only quantitatively from each other, of one whole, namely, the value of the
yarn. Here, we have nothing more to do with the quality, the nature and the specific character of the
labour, but merely with its quantity. And this simply requires to be calculated. We proceed upon the
assumption that spinning is simple, unskilled labour, the average labour of a given state of society.
Hereafter we shall see that the contrary assumption would make no difference.

While the labourer is at work, his labour constantly undergoes a transformation: from being motion, it
becomes an object without motion; from being the labourer working, it becomes the thing produced. At
the end of one hour's spinning, that act is represented by a definite quantity of yarn; in other words, a
definite quantity of labour, namely that of one hour, has become embodied in the cotton. We say labour,
i.e., the expenditure of his vital force by the spinner, and not spinning labour, because the special work of
spinning counts here, only so far as it is the expenditure of labour-power in general, and not in so far as it
is the specific work of the spinner.

In the process we are now considering it is of extreme importance, that no more time be consumed in the
work of transforming the cotton into yarn than is necessary under the given social conditions. If under
normal, i.e., average social conditions of production, a pounds of cotton ought to be made into b pounds
of yarn by one hour's labour, then a day's labour does not count as 12 hours' labour unless 12 a pounds of
cotton have been made into 12 b pounds of yarn; for in the creation of value, the time that is socially
necessary alone counts.

Not only the labour, but also the raw material and the product now appear in quite a new light, very
different from that in which we viewed them in the labour-process pure and simple. The raw material
serves now merely as an absorbent of a definite quantity of labour. By this absorption it is in fact



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (8 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

changed into yarn, because it is spun, because labour-power in the form of spinning is added to it; but the
product, the yarn, is now nothing more than a measure of the labour absorbed by the cotton. If in one
hour 1 2/3 lbs. of cotton can be spun into 1 2/3 lbs. of yarn, then 10 lbs. of yarn indicate the absorption of
6 hours' labour. Definite quantities of product, these quantities being determined by experience, now
represent nothing but definite quantities of labour, definite masses of crystallised labour-time. They are
nothing more than the materialisation of so many hours or so many days of social labour.

We are here no more concerned about the facts, that the labour is the specific work of spinning, that its
subject is cotton and its product yarn, than we are about the fact that the subject itself is already a product
and therefore raw material. If the spinner, instead of spinning, were working in a coal mine, the subject
of his labour, the coal, would be supplied by Nature; nevertheless, a definite quantity of extracted coal, a
hundredweight for example, would represent a definite quantity of absorbed labour.

We assumed, on the occasion of its sale, that the value of a day's labour-power is three shillings, and that
six hours' labour is incorporated in that sum; and consequently that this amount of labour is requisite to
produce the necessaries of life daily required on an average by the labourer. If now our spinner by
working for one hour, can convert 1 2/3 lbs. of cotton into 1 2/3 lbs. of yarn, f!21 it follows that in six
hours he will convert 10 lbs. of cotton into 10 lbs. of yarn. Hence, during the spinning process, the cotton
absorbs six hours' labour. The same quantity of labour is also embodied in a piece of gold of the value of
three shillings. Consequently by the mere labour of spinning, a value of three shillings is added to the
cotton.

Let us now consider the total value of the product, the 10 lbs. of yarn. Two and a half days' labour has
been embodied in it, of which two days were contained in the cotton and in the substance of the spindle
worn away, and half a day was absorbed during the process of spinning. This two and a half days' labour
is also represented by a piece of gold of the value of fifteen shillings. Hence, fifteen shillings is an
adequate price for the 10 lbs. of yarn, or the price of one pound is eighteenpence.

Our capitalist stares in astonishment. The value of the product is exactly equal to the value of the capital
advanced. The value so advanced has not expanded, no surplus-value has been created, and consequently
money has not been converted into capital. The price of the yarn is fifteen shillings, and fifteen shillings
were spent in the open market upon the constituent elements of the product, or, what amounts to the same
thing, upon the factors of the labour-process; ten shillings were paid for the cotton, two shillings for the
substance of the spindle worn away, and three shillings for the labour-power. The swollen value of the
yarn is of no avail, for it is merely the sum of the values formerly existing in the cotton, the spindle, and
the labour-power: out of such a simple addition of existing values, no surplus-value can possibly arise.
f 131 These separate values are now all concentrated in one thing; but so they were also in the sum of
fifteen shillings, before it was split up into three parts, by the purchase of the commodities.

There is in reality nothing very strange in this result. The value of one pound of yarn being
eighteenpence, if our capitalist buys 10 lbs. of yarn in the market, he must pay fifteen shillings for them.
It is clear that, whether a man buys his house ready built, or gets it built for him, in neither case will the
mode of acquisition increase the amount of money laid out on the house.

Our capitalist, who is at home in his vulgar economy, exclaims: "Oh! but I advanced my money for the
express purpose of making more money. " The way to Hell is paved with good intentions, and he might
just as easily have intended to make money, without producing at all. f 141 He threatens all sorts of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (9 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

things. He won't be caught napping again. In future he will buy the commodities in the market, instead of
manufacturing them himself. But if all his brother capitalists were to do the same, where would he find
his commodities in the market? And his money he cannot eat. He tries persuasion. "Consider my
abstinence; I might have played ducks and drakes with the 15 shillings; but instead of that I consumed it
productively, and made yarn with it. " Very well, and by way of reward he is now in possession of good
yarn instead of a bad conscience; and as for playing the part of a miser, it would never do for him to
relapse into such bad ways as that; we have seen before to what results such asceticism leads. Besides,
where nothing is, the king has lost his rights; whatever may be the merit of his abstinence, there is
nothing wherewith specially to remunerate it, because the value of the product is merely the sum of the
values of the commodities that were thrown into the process of production. Let him therefore console'
himself with the reflection that virtue is its own reward, But no, he becomes importunate. He says: "The
yarn is of no use to me: I produced it for sale. " In that case let him sell it, or, still better, let him for the
future produce only things for satisfying his personal wants, a remedy that his physician MacCulloch has
already prescribed as infallible against an epidemic of over-production. He now gets obstinate. "Can the
labourer, " he asks, "merely with his arms and legs, produce commodities out of nothing? Did I not
supply him with the materials, by means of which, and in which alone, his labour could be embodied?
And as the greater part of society consists of such ne'er-do-wells, have I not rendered society
incalculable service by my instruments of production, my cotton and my spindle, and not only society, but
the labourer also, whom in addition I have provided with the necessaries of life? And am I to be allowed
nothing in return for all this service?" Well, but has not the labourer rendered him the equivalent service
of changing his cotton and spindle into yarn? Moreover, there is here no question of service. fl51 A
service is nothing more than the useful effect of a use-value, be it of a commodity, or be it of labour. f!61
But here we are dealing with exchange- value. The capitalist paid to the labourer a value of 3 shillings,
and the labourer gave him back an exact equivalent in the value of 3 shillings, added by him to the
cotton: he gave him value for value. Our friend, up to this time so purse-proud, suddenly assumes the
modest demeanour of his own workman, and exclaims: "Have I myself not worked? Have I not
performed the labour of superintendence and of overlooking the spinner? And does not this labour, too,
create value?" His overlooker and his manager try to hide their smiles. Meanwhile, after a hearty laugh,
he re-assumes his usual mien. Though he chanted to us the whole creed of the economists, in reality, he
says, he would not give a brass farthing for it. He leaves this and all such like subterfuges and juggling
tricks to the professors of Political Economy, who are paid for it. He himself is a practical man; and
though he does not always consider what he says outside his business, yet in his business he knows what
he is about.

Let us examine the matter more closely. The value of a day's labour-power amounts to 3 shillings,
because on our assumption half a day's labour is embodied in that quantity of labour-power, i.e., because
the means of subsistence that are daily required for the production of labour-power, cost half a day's
labour. But the past labour that is embodied in the labour-power, and the living labour that it can call into
action; the daily cost of maintaining it, and its daily expenditure in work, are two totally different things.
The former determines the exchange- value of the labour-power, the latter is its use- value. The fact that
half a day's labour is necessary to keep the labourer alive during 24 hours, does not in any way prevent
him from working a whole day. Therefore, the value of labour-power, and the value which that
labour-power creates in the labour-process, are two entirely different magnitudes; and this difference of
the two values was what the capitalist had in view, when he was purchasing the labour-power. The useful
qualities that labour-power possesses, and by virtue of which it makes yarn or boots, were to him nothing
more than a conditio sine qua non; for in order to create value, labour must be expended in a useful

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (10 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

manner. What really influenced him was the specific use-value which this commodity possesses of being
a source not only of value, but of more value than it has itself This is the special service that the
capitalist expects from labour-power, and in this transaction he acts in accordance with the "eternal laws"
of the exchange of commodities. The seller of labour-power, like the seller of any other commodity,
realises its exchange-value, and parts with its use-value. He cannot take the one without giving the other.
The use-value of labour-power, or in other words, labour, belongs just as little to its seller, as the
use-value of oil after it has been sold belongs to the dealer who has sold it. The owner of the money has
paid the value of a day's labour-power; his, therefore, is the use of it for a day; a day's labour belongs to
him. The circumstance, that on the one hand the daily sustenance of labour-power costs only half a day's
labour, while on the other hand the very same labour-power can work during a whole day, that
consequently the value which its use during one day creates, is double what he pays for that use, this
circumstance is, without doubt, a piece of good luck for the buyer, but by no means an injury to the
seller.

Our capitalist foresaw this state of things, and that was the cause of his laughter. The labourer therefore
finds, in the workshop, the means of production necessary for working, not only during six, but during
twelve hours. Just as during the six hours' process our 10 lbs. of cotton absorbed six hours' labour, and
became 10 lbs. of yarn, so now, 20 lbs. of cotton will absorb 12 hours' labour and be changed into 20 lbs.
of yarn. Let us now examine the product of this prolonged process. There is now materialised in this 20
lbs. of yarn the labour of five days, of which four days are due to the cotton and the lost steel of the
spindle, the remaining day having been absorbed by the cotton during the spinning process. Expressed in
gold, the labour of five days is thirty shillings. This is therefore the price of the 20 lbs. of yarn, giving, as
before, eighteenpence as the price of a pound. But the sum of the values of the commodities that entered
into the process amounts to 27 shillings. The value of the yarn is 30 shillings. Therefore the value of the
product is 1/9 greater than the value advanced for its production; 27 shillings have been transformed into
30 shillings; a surplus-value of 3 shillings has been created. The trick has at last succeeded; money has
been converted into capital.

Every condition of the problem is satisfied, while the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities,
have been in no way violated. Equivalent has been exchanged for equivalent. For the capitalist as buyer
paid for each commodity, for the cotton, the spindle and the labour-power, its full value. He then did
what is done by every purchaser of commodities; he consumed their use- value. The consumption of the
labour-power, which was also the process of producing commodities, resulted in 20 lbs. of yarn, having a
value of 30 shillings. The capitalist, formerly a buyer, now returns to market as a seller, of commodities.
He sells his yarn at eighteenpence a pound, which is its exact value. Yet for all that he withdraws 3
shillings more from circulation than he originally threw into it. This metamorphosis, this conversion of
money into capital, takes place both within the sphere of circulation and also outside it; within the
circulation, because conditioned by the purchase of the labour-power in the market; outside the
circulation, because what is done within it is only a stepping-stone to the production of surplus-value, a
process which is entirely confined to the sphere of production. Thus "tout est pour le mieux dans le
meflleur des mondes possibles."

By turning his money into commodities that serve as the material elements of a new product, and as
factors in the labour-process, by incorporating living labour with their dead substance, the capitalist at
the same time converts value, i.e., past, materialised, and dead labour into capital, into value big with
value, a live monster that is fruitful and multiplies.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (11 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

If we now compare the two processes of producing value and of creating surplus-value, we see that the
latter is nothing but the continuation of the former beyond a definite point. If on the one hand the process
be not carried beyond the point, where the value paid by the capitalist for the labour-power is replaced by
an exact equivalent, it is simply a process of producing value; if, on the other hand, it be continued
beyond that point, it becomes a process of creating surplus-value.

If we proceed further, and compare the process of producing value with the labour-process, pure and
simple, we find that the latter consists of the useful labour, the work, that produces use- values. Here we
contemplate the labour as producing a particular article; we view it under its qualitative aspect alone,
with regard to its end and aim. But viewed as a value-creating process, the same labour-process presents
itself under its quantitative aspect alone. Here it is a question merely of the time occupied by the labourer
in doing the work; of the period during which the labour-power is usefully expended. Here, the
commodities that take part in the process, do not count any longer as necessary adjuncts of labour-power
in the production of a definite, useful object. They count merely as depositories of so much absorbed or
materialised labour; that labour, whether previously embodied in the means of production, or
incorporated in them for the first time during the process by the action of labour-power, counts in either
case only according to its duration; it amounts to so many hours or days as the case may be.

Moreover, only so much of the time spent in the production of any article is counted, as, under the given
social conditions, is necessary. The consequences of this are various. In the first place, it becomes
necessary that the labour should be carried on under normal conditions. If a self-acting mule is the
implement in general use for spinning, it would be absurd to supply the spinner with a distaff and
spinning wheel. The cotton too must not be such rubbish as to cause extra waste in being worked, but
must be of suitable quality. Otherwise the spinner would be found to spend more time in producing a
pound of yarn than is socially necessary, in which case the excess of time would create neither value nor
money. But whether the material factors of the process are of normal quality or not, depends not upon the
labourer, but entirely upon the capitalist. Then again, the labour-power itself must be of average efficacy.
In the trade in which it is being employed, it must possess the average skill, handiness and quickness
prevalent in that trade, and our capitalist took good care to buy labour-power of such normal goodness.
This power must be applied with the average amount of exertion and with the usual degree of intensity;
and the capitalist is as careful to see that this is done, as that his workmen are not idle for a single
moment. He has bought, the use of the labour-power for a definite period, and he insists upon his rights.
He has no intention of being robbed. Lastly, and for this purpose our friend has a penal code of his own,
all wasteful consumption of raw material or instruments of labour is strictly forbidden, because what is
so wasted, represents labour superfluously expended, labour that does not count in the product or enter
into its value. |171

We now see, that the difference between labour, considered on the one hand as producing utilities, and
on the other hand, as creating value, a difference which we discovered by our analysis of a commodity,
resolves itself into a distinction between two aspects of the process of production.

The process of production, considered on the one hand as the unity of the labour-process and the process
of creating value, is production of commodities; considered on the other hand as the unity of the
labour-process and the process of producing surplus-value, it is the capitalist process of production, or
capitalist production of commodities.

We stated, on a previous page, that in the creation of surplus-value it does not in the least matter, whether



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (12 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

the labour appropriated by the capitalist be simple unskilled labour of average quality or more
complicated skilled labour. All labour of a higher or more complicated character than average labour is
expenditure of labour-power of a more costly kind, labour-power whose production has cost more time
and labour, and which therefore has a higher value, than unskilled or simple labour-power. This power
being higher- value, its consumption is labour of a higher class, labour that creates in equal times
proportionally higher values than unskilled labour does. Whatever difference in skill there may be
between the labour of a spinner and that of a jeweller, the portion of his labour by which the jeweller
merely replaces the value of his own labour-power, does not in any way differ in quality from the
additional portion by which he creates surplus-value. In the making of jewellery, just as in spinning, the
surplus-value results only from a quantitative excess of labour, from a lengthening-out of one and the
same labour-process, in the one case, of the process of making jewels, in the other of the process of
making yarn. fl81

But on the other hand, in every process of creating value, the reduction of skilled labour to average social
labour, e.g., one day of skilled to six days of unskilled labour, is unavoidable. |191 We therefore save
ourselves a superfluous operation, and simplify our analysis, by the assumption, that the labour of the
workman employed by the capitalist is unskilled average labour.



Footnotes

£11 "The earth's spontaneous productions being in small quantity, and quite independent of man, appear,
as it were, to be furnished by Nature, in the same way as a small sum is given to a young man, in order to
put him in a way of industry, and of making his fortune." (James Stueart: "Principles of Polit. Econ."
edit. Dublin, 1770, v. I, p. 1 16.)

\2] "Reason is just as cunning as she is powerful. Her cunning consists principally in her mediating
activity, which, by causing objects to act and re-act on each other in accordance with their own nature, in
this way, without any direct interference in the process, carries out reason's intentions." (Hegel:
"Enzyklopadie, Erster Theil, Die Logik," Berlin, 1840, p. 382.)

[31 In his otherwise miserable work ("Theorie de I'Econ. Polit." Paris, 1815), Ganilh enumerates in a
striking manner in opposition to the "Physiocrats" the long series of previous processes necessary before
agriculture properly so called can commence.

[41 Turgot in his "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses" (1766) brings well into
prominence the importance of domesticated animals to early civilisation.

[51 The least important commodities of all for the technological comparison of different epochs of
production are articles of luxury, in the strict meaning of the term. However little our written histories up
to this time notice the development of material production, which is the basis of all social life, and
therefore of all real history, yet prehistoric times have been classified in accordance with the results, not
of so-called historical, but of materialistic investigations. These periods have been divided, to correspond
with the materials from which their implements and weapons were made, viz., into the stone, the bronze,
and the iron ages.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (13 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:00]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

\6] It appears paradoxical to assert, that uncaught fish, for instance, are a means of production in the
fishing industry. But hitherto no one has discovered the art of catching fish in waters that contain none.

[71 This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour-process alone, what is productive
labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist process of production.

[81 Storch calls true raw materials "matieres," and accessory material "materiaux." Cherbuliez describes
accessories as "matieres instrumentales."

[91 By a wonderful feat of logical acumen, Colonel Torrens has discovered, in this stone of the savage
the origin of capital. "In the first stone which he [the savage] flings at the wild animal he pursues, in the
first stick that he seizes to strike down the fruit which hangs above his reach, we see the appropriation of
one article for the purpose of aiding in the acquisition of another, and thus discover the origin of capital."
(R. Torrens: "An Essay on the Production of Wealth," &c, pp. 70-71.)

f 101 "Products are appropriated before they are converted into capital; this conversion does not secure
them from such appropriation." (Cheibuliez: "Richesse on Pauvrete," edit. Paris, 1841, p. 54.) "The
Proletarian, by selling his labour for a definite quantity of the necessaries of life, renounces all claim to a
share in the product. The mode of appropriation of the products remains the same as before; it is in no
way altered by the bargain we have mentioned. The product belongs exclusively to the capitalist, who
supplied the raw material and the necessaries of life; and this is a rigorous consequence of the law of
appropriation, a law whose fundamental principle was the very opposite, namely, that every labourer has
an exclusive right to the ownership of what he produces." (1. c, p. 58.) "When the labourers receive
wages for their labour ... the capitalist is then the owner not of the capital only" (he means the means of
production) "but of the labour also. If what is paid as wages is included, as it commonly is, in the term
capital, it is absurd to talk of labour separately from capital. The word capital as thus employed includes
labour and capital both." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol. Econ.," &c, Ed. 1821, pp. 70, 71.)

fill As has been stated in a previous note, the English language has two different expressions for these
two different aspects of labour: in the Simple Labour-process, the process of producing Use-Values, it is
Work; in the process of creation of Value, it is Labour, taking the term in its strictly economic sense. —
F. E.

fl21 These figures are quite arbitrary.

f 131 This is the fundamental proposition on which is based the doctrine of the Physiocrats as to the
unproductiveness of all labour that is not agriculture: it is irrefutable for the orthodox economist. "Cette
facon d'imputer a une seule chose la valeur de plusieurs autres" (par exemple au lin la consommation du
tisserand), "d'appliquer, pour ainsi dire, couche sur couche, plusieurs valcurs sur une seule, fait que
celle-ci grossit d'autant.... Le terme d'addition peint tres-bien la maniere dont se forme le prix des
ouvrages de maind'oeuvre; ce prix n'est qu'un total de plusieurs valeurs consommees et additionnees
ensemble; or, additionner n'est pas multiplier." ("Mercier de la Riviere," 1. c, p. 599.)

f 141 Thus from 1844-47 he withdrew part of his capital from productive employment, in order to throw it
away in railway speculations; and so also, during the American Civil War, he closed his factory, and
turned his work-people into the streets, in order to gamble on the Liverpool cotton exchange.

f 151 "Extol thyself, put on finery and adorn thyself ... but whoever takes more or better than he gives,

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (14 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:01]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

that is usury, and is not service, but wrong done to his neighbour, as when one steals and robs. All is not
service and benefit to a neighbour that is called service and benefit. For an adulteress and adulterer do
one another great service and pleasure. A horseman does an incendiary a great service, by helping him to
rob on the highway, and pillage land and houses. The papists do ours a great service, in that they don't
drown, burn, murder all of them, or let them all rot in prison; but let some live, and only drive them out,
or take from them what they have. The devil himself does his servants inestimable service.... To sum up,
the world is full of great, excellent, and daily service and benefit." (Martin Luther: "An die Pfarrherrn
wider den Wucher zu predigen," Wittenberg, 1540.)

fl61 In "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oek.," p. 14, 1 make the following remark on this point — "It is not difficult
to understand what 'service' the category 'service' must render to a class of economists like J. B. Say and
F. Bastiat."

f 171 This is one of the circumstances that makes production by slave labour such a costly process. The
labourer here is, to use a striking expression of the ancients, distinguishable only as instrumentum vocale,
from an animal as instrumentum semi- vocale, and from an implement as instrumentum mutum. But he
himself takes care to let both beast and implement feel that he is none of them,'but is a man. He
convinces himself with immense satisfaction, that he is a different being, by treating the one
unmercifully and damaging the other con amore. Hence the principle, univerially applied in this method
of production, only to employ the rudest and heaviest implements and such as are difficult to damage
owing to their sheer clumsiness. In the slave-states bordering on the Gulf of Mexico, down to the date of
the civil war, ploughs constructed on old Chinese models, which turned up the soil like a hog or a mole,
instead of making furrows, were alone to be found. Conf. J. E. Cairnes. "The Slave Power," London,
1862, p. 46 sqq. In his "Sea Board Slave States," Olmsted tells us: "I am here shown tools that no man in
his senses, with us, would allow a labourer, for whom he was paying wages, to be encumbered with; and
the excessive weight and clumsiness of which, I would judge, would make work at least ten per cent
greater than with those ordinarily used with us. And I am assured that, in the careless and clumsy way
they must be used by the slaves, anything lighter or less rude could not be furnished them with good
economy, and that such tools as we constantly give our labourers and find our profit in giving them,
would not last out a day in a Virginia comficid-much lighter and more free from stones though it be than
ours. So, too, when I ask why mules are so universally substituted for horses on the farm, the first reason
given, and confessedly the most conclusive one, is that horses cannot bear the treatment that they always
must get from negroes; horses are always soon foundered or crippled by them, while mules will bear
cudgelling, or lose a meal or two now and then, and not be materially injured, and they do not take cold
or get sick, if neglected or overworked. But I do not need to go further than to the window of the room in
which I am writing, to see at almost any time, treatment of cattle that would ensure the immediate
discharge of the driver by almost any farmer owning them in the North."

f 181 The distinction between skilled and unskilled labour rests in part on pure illusion, or, to say the
least, on distinctions that have long since ceased to be real, and that survive only by virtue of a traditional
convention; in part on the helpless condition of some groups of the working-class, a condition that
prevents themfrom exacting equally with the rest the value of their labour-power. Accidental
circumstances here play so great a part, that these two forms of labour sometimes change places. Where,
for instance, the physique of the working-class has deteriorated, and is, relatively speaking, exhausted,
which in the case in all countries with a well developed capitalist production, the lower forms of labour,
which demand great expenditure of muscle, are in general considered as skilled, compared with much



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (15 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:01]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Seven

more delicate forms of labour; the latter sink down to the level of unskilled labour. Take as an example
the labour of a bricklayer, which in England occupies a much higher level than that of a damask-weaver.
Again, although the labour of a fustian cutter demands great bodily exertion, and is at the same time
unhealthy, yet it counts only as unskilled labour. And then, we must not forget, that the so-called skilled
labour does not occupy a large space in the field of national labour. Laing estimates that in England (and
Wales) the livelihood of 1 1,300,000 people depends on unskilled labour. If from the total population of
18,000,000 living at the time when he wrote, we deduct 1,000,000 for the "genteel population," and
1,500,000 for paupers, vagrants, criminals, prostitutes, &c, and 4,650,000 who compose the
middle-class, there remain the above mentioned 11,000,000. But in his middle-class he includes people
that live on the interest of small investments, officials, men of letters, artists, schoolmasters and the like,
and in order to swell the number he also includes in these 4,650,000 the better paid portioti of the factory
operatives! The bricklayers, too, figure amongst them. (S. Laing: "National Distress," &c, London,
1844). "The great class who have nothing to give for food but ordinary labour, are the great bulk of the
people." (James Mill, in art.: "Colony," Supplement to the Encyclop. Brit., 1831.)

f 191 "Where reference is made to labour as a measure of value, it necessarily implies labour of one
particular kind ... the proportion which the other kinds bear to it being easily ascertained." ("Outlines of
Pol. Econ.," Lond., 1832, pp. 22 and 23.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Eight: Constant Capital and Variable Capital
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch07.htm (16 of 16) [23/08/2000 16:16:01]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute

Surplus-Value



CHAPTER EIGHT:

CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL



The various factors of the labour-process play different parts in forming the value of the product.

The labourer adds fresh value to the subject of fiis labour by expending upon it a given amount of
additional labour, no matter what the specific character and utility of that labour may be. On the other
hand, the values of the means of production used up in the process are preserved, and present themselves
afresh as constituent parts of the value of the product; the values of the cotton and the spindle, for
instance, re-appear again in the value of the yarn. The value of the means of production is therefore
preserved, by being transferred to the product. This transfer takes place during the conversion of those
means into a product, or in other words, during the labour-process. It is brought about by labour; but
how?

The labourer does not perform two operations at once, one in order to add value to the cotton, the other in
order to preserve the value of the means of production, or, what amounts to the same thing, to transfer to
the yarn, to the product, the value of the cotton on which he works, and part of the value of the spindle
with which he works. But, by the very act of adding new value, he preserves their former values. Since,
however, the addition of new value to the subject of his labour, and the preservation of its former value,
are two entirely distinct results, produced simultaneously by the labourer, during one operation, it is plain
that this two-fold nature of the result can be explained only by the two-fold nature of his labour; at one
and the same time, it must in one character create value, and in another character preserve or transfer
value.

Now, in what manner does every labourer add new labour and consequently new value? Evidently, only
by labouring productively in a particular way; the spinner by spinning, the weaver by weaving, the smith
by forging. But, while thus incorporating labour generally, that is value, it is by the particular form alone
of the labour, by the spinning, the weaving and the forging respectively, that the means of production, the
cotton and spindle, the yarn and loom, and. the iron and anvil become constituent elements of the
product, of a new use-value. £1} Each use-value disappears, but only to re-appear under a new form in a



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (1 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

new use-value. Now, we saw, when we were considering the process of creating value, that, if a
use-value be effectively consumed in the production of a new use- value, the quantity of labour expended
in the production of the consumed article, forms a portion of the quantity of labour necessary to produce
the new use- value; this portion is therefore labour transferred from the means of production to the new
product. Hence, the labourer preserves the values of the consumed means of production, or transfers
them as portions of its value to the product, not by virtue of his additional labour, abstractedly
considered, but by virtue of the particular useful character of that labour, by virtue of its special
productive form. In so far then as labour is such specific productive activity, in so far as it is spinning,
weaving, or forging, it raises, by mere contact, the means, of production from the dead, makes them
living factors of the labour-process, and combines with them to form the new products.

If the special productive labour of the workman were not spinning, he could not convert the cotton into
yarn, and therefore could not transfer the values of the cotton and spindle to the yarn. Suppose the same
workman were to change his occupation to that of a joiner, he would still by a day's labour add value to
the material he works upon. Consequently, we see, first, that the addition of new value takes place not by
virtue of his labour being spinning in particular, or joinering in particular, but because it is labour in the
abstract, a portion of the total labour of society; and we see next, that the value added is of a given
definite amount, not because his labour has a special utility, but because it is exerted for a definite time.
On the one hand, then, it is by virtue of its general character, as being expenditure of human
labour-power in the abstract, that spinning adds new value to the values of the cotton and the spindle; and
on the other hand, it is by virtue of its special character, as being a concrete, useful process, that the same
labour of spinning both transfers the values of the means of production to the product, and preserves
them in the product. Hence at one and the same time there is produced a two-fold result.

By the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour, new value is added, and by the quality of this
added labour, the original values of the means of production are preserved in the product. This two-fold
effect, resulting from the two-fold character of labour, may be traced in various phenomena.

Let us assume, that some invention enables the spinner to spin as much cotton in 6 hours as he was able
to spin before in 36 hours. His labour is now six times as effective as it was, for the purposes of useful
production. The product of 6 hours' work has increased six-fold, from 6 lbs. to 36 lbs. But now the 36
lbs. of cotton absorb only the same amount of labour as formerly did the 6 lbs. One-sixth as much new
labour is absorbed by each pound of cotton, and consequently, the value added by the labour to each
pound is only one-sixth of what it formerly was. On the other hand, in the product, in the 36 lbs. of yarn,
the value transferred from the cotton is six times as great as before. By the 6 hours' spinning, the value of
the raw material preserved and transferred to the product is six times as great as before, although the new
value added by the labour of the spinner to each pound of the very same raw material is one-sixth what it
was formerly. This shows that the two properties of labour, by virtue of which it is enabled in one case to
preserve value, and in the other to create value, are essentially different. On the one hand, the longer the
time necessary to spin a given weight of cotton into yarn, the greater is the new value added to the
material; on the other hand, the greater the weight of the cotton spun in a given time, the greater is the
value preserved, by being transferred from it to the product.

Let us now assume, that the productiveness of the spinner's labour, instead of varying, remains constant,
that he therefore requires the same time as he formerly did, to convert one pound of cotton into yarn, but
that the exchange-value of the cotton varies, either by rising to six times its former value or falling to
one-sixth of that value. In both these cases, the spinner puts the same quantity of labour into a pound of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (2 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

cotton, and therefore adds as much value, as he did before the change in the value: he also produces a
given weight of yarn in the same time as he did before. Nevertheless, the value that he transfers from the
cotton to the yarn is either one-sixth of what it was before the variation, or, as the case may be, six times
as much as before. The same result occurs when the value of the instruments of labour rises or falls,
while their useful efficacy in the process remains unaltered.

Again, if the technical conditions of the spinning process remain unchanged, and no change of value
takes place in the means of production, the spinner continues to consume in equal working-times equal
quantities of raw material, and equal quantities of machinery of unvarying value. The value that he
preserves in the product is directly proportional to the new value that he adds to the product. In two
weeks he incorporates twice as much labour, and therefore twice as much value, as in one week, and
during the same time he consumes twice as much material, and wears out twice as much machinery, of
double the value in each case: he therefore preserves, in the product of two weeks, twice as much value
as in the product of one week. So long as the conditions of production remain the same, the more value
the labourer adds by fresh labour, the more value he transfers and preserves; but he does so merely
because this addition of new value takes place under conditions that have not varied and are independent
of his own labour. Of course, it may be said in one sense, that the labourer preserves old value always in
proportion to the quantity of new value that he adds. Whether the value of cotton rise from one shilling to
two shillings, or fall to sixpence, the workman invariably preserves in the product of one hour only one
half as much value as he preserves in two hours. In like manner, if the productiveness of his own labour
varies by rising or falling, he will in one hour spin either more or less cotton, as the case may be, than he
did before, and will consequently preserve in the product of one hour, more or less value of cotton; but,
all the same, he will preserve by two hours' labour twice as much value as he will by one.

Value exists only in articles of utility, in objects: we leave out of consideration its purely symbolical
representation by tokens. (Man himself, viewed as the impersonation of labour-power, is a natural object,
a thing, although a living conscious thing, and labour is the manifestation of this power residing in him.)
If therefore an article loses its utility, it also loses its value. The reason why means of production do not
lose their value, at the same time that they lose their use-value, is this: they lose in the labour-process the
original form of their use-value, only to assume in the product the form of a new use-value. But, however
important it may be to value, that it should have some object of utility to embody itself in, yet it is a
matter of complete indifference what particular object serves this purpose; this we saw when treating of
the metamorphosis of commodities. Hence it follows that in the labour-process the means of production
transfer their value to the product only so far as along with their use-value they lose also their
exchange- value. They give up to the product that value alone which they themselves lose as means of
production. But in this respect the material factors of the labour-process do not all behave alike.

The coal burnt under the boiler vanishes without leaving a trace; so, too, the tallow with which the axles
of wheels are greased. Dye stuffs and other auxiliary substances also vanish but re-appear as properties
of the product. Raw material forms the substance of the product, but only after it has changed its form.
Hence raw material and auxiliary substances lose the characteristic form with which they are clothed on
entering the labour-process. It is otherwise with the instruments of labour. Tools, machines, workshops,
and vessels, are of use in the labour-process, only so long as they retain their original shape, and are
ready each morning to renew the process with their shape unchanged. And just as during their lifetime,
that is to say, during the continued labour-process in which they serve, they retain their shape
independent of the product, so, too, they do after their death. The corpses of machines, tools, workshops,
&c, are always separate and distinct from the product they helped to turn out. If we now consider the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (3 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

case of any instrument of labour during the whole period of its service, from the day of its entry into the
workshop, till the day of its banishment into the lumber room, we find that during this period its
use-value has been completely consumed, and therefore its exchange-value completely transferred to the
product. For instance, if a spinning machine lasts for 10 years, it is plain that during that working period
its total value is gradually transferred to the product of the 10 years. The lifetime of an instrument of
labour, therefore, is spent in the repetition of a greater or less number of similar operations. Its life may
be compared with that of a human being. Every day brings a man 24 hours nearer to his grave: but how
many days he has still to travel on that road, no man can tell accurately by merely looking at him. This
difficulty, however, does not prevent life insurance offices from drawing, by means of the theory of
averages, very accurate, and at the same time very profitable conclusions. So it is with the instruments of
labour. It is known by experience how long on the average a machine of a particular kind will last.
Suppose its use-value in the labour-process to last only six days. Then, on the average, it loses each day
one-sixth of its use-value, and therefore parts with one-sixth of its value to the daily product. The wear
and tear of all instruments, their daily loss of use-value, and the corresponding quantity of value they part
with to the product, are accordingly calculated upon this basis.

It is thus strikingly clear, that means of production never transfer more value to the product than they
themselves lose during the labour-process by the destruction of their own use-value. If such an
instrument has no value to lose, if, in other words, it is not the product of human labour, it transfers no
value to the product. It helps to create use-value without contributing to the formation of exchange-value.
In this class are included all means of production supplied by Nature without human assistance, such as
land, wind, water, metals in situ, and timber in virgin forests.

Yet another interesting phenomenon here presents itself. Suppose a machine to be worth £1,000, and to
wear out in 1,000 days. Then one thousandth part of the value of the machine is daily transferred to
the day's product. At the same time, though with diminishing vitality, the machine as a whole continues
to take part in the labour-process. Thus it appears, that one factor of the labour-process, a means of
production, continually enters as a whole into that process, while it enters into the process of the
formation of value by fractions only. The difference between the two processes is here reflected in their
material factors, by the same instrument of production taking part as a whole in the labour-process, while
at the same time as an element in the formation of value, it enters only by fractions. [2]

On the other hand, a means of production may take part as a whole in the formation of value, while into
the labour-process it enters only bit by bit. Suppose that in spinning cotton, the waste for every 1 15 lbs.
used amounts to 15 lbs., which is converted, not into yarn, but into "devil's dust." Now, although this 15
lbs. of cotton never becomes a constituent element of the yarn, yet assuming this amount of waste to be
normal and inevitable under average conditions of spinning, its value is just as surely transferred to the
value of the yarn, as is the value of the 100 lbs. that form the substance of the yarn. The use-value of 15
lbs. of cotton must vanish into dust, before 100 lbs. of yarn can be made. The destruction of this cotton is
therefore a necessary condition in the production of the yarn. And because it is a necessary condition,
and for no other reason, the value of that cotton is transferred to the product. The same holds good for
every kind of refuse resulting from a labour-process, so tar at least as such refuse cannot be further
employed as a means in the production of new and independent use-values. Such an employment of
refuse may be seen in the large machine works at Manchester, where mountains of iron turnings are
carted away to the foundry in the evening, in order the next morning to re-appear in the workshops as
solid masses of iron.



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (4 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

We have seen that the means of production transfer value to the new product, so far only as during the
labour-process they lose value in the shape of their old use-value. The maximum loss of value that they
can suffer in the process, is plainly limited by the amount of the original value with which they came into
the process, or in other words, by the labour-time necessary for their production. Therefore, the means of
production can never add more value to the product than they themselves possess independently of the
process in which they assist. However useful a given kind of raw material, or a machine, or other means
of production may be, though it may cost £150, or, say, 500 days' labour, yet it cannot, under any
circumstances, add to the value of the product more than £150. Its value is determined not by the
labour-process into which it enters as a means of production, but by that out of which it has issued as a
product. In the labour-process it only serves as a mere use-value, a thing with useful properties, and
could not, therefore, transfer any value to the product, unless it possessed such value previously. \3]

While productive labour is changing the means of production into constituent elements of a new product,
their value undergoes a metempsychosis. It deserts the consumed body, to occupy the newly created one.
But this transmigration takes place, as it were, behind the back of the labourer. He is unable to add new
labour, to create new value, without at the same time preserving old values, and this, because the labour
he adds must be of a specific useful kind; and he cannot do work of a useful kind, without employing
products as the means of production of a new product, and thereby transferring their value to the new
product. The property therefore which labour-power in action, living labour, possesses of preserving
value, at the same time that it adds it, is a gift of Nature which costs the labourer nothing, but which is
very advantageous to the capitalist inasmuch as it preserves the existing value of his capital. [4] So long
as trade is good, the capitalist is too much absorbed in money-grubbing to take notice of this gratuitous
gift of labour. A violent interruption of the labour-process by a crisis, makes him sensitively aware of it.
[51

As regards the means of production, what is really consumed is their use-value, and the consumption of
this use-value by labour results in the product. There is no consumption of their value, [61 and it would
therefore be inaccurate to say that it is reproduced. It is rather preserved; not by reason of any operation it
undergoes itself in the process; but because the article in which it originally exists, vanishes, it is true, but
vanishes into some other article. Hence, in the value of the product, there is a reappearance of the value
of the means of production, but there is, strictly speaking, no reproduction of that value. That which is
produced is a new use- value in which the old exchange- value reappears. [7]

It is otherwise with the subjective factor of the labour-process, with labour-power in action. While the
labourer, by virtue of his labour being of a specialised kind that has a special object, preserves and
transfers to the product the value of the means of production, he at the same time, by the mere act of
working, creates each instant an additional or new value. Suppose the process of production to be
stopped just when the workman has produced an equivalent for the value of his own, labour-power,
when, for example, by six hours' labour, he has added a value of three shillings. This value is the surplus,
of the total value of the product, over the portion of its value that is due to the means of production. It is
the only original bit of value formed during this process, the only portion of the value of the product
created by this process. Of course, we do not forget that this new value only replaces the money
advanced by the capitalist in the purchase of the labour-power, and spent by the labourer on the
necessaries of life. With regard to the money spent, the new value is merely a reproduction; but,
nevertheless, it is an actual, and not, as in the case of the value of the means of production, only an
apparent, reproduction. The substitution of one value for another, is here effected by the creation of new



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (5 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

value.

We know, however, from what has gone before, that the labour-process may continue beyond the time
necessary to reproduce and incorporate in the product a mere equivalent for the value of the
labour-power. Instead of the six hours that are sufficient for the latter purpose, the process may continue
for twelve hours. The action of labour-power, therefore, not only reproduces its own value, but produces
value over and above it. This surplus-value is the difference between the value of the product and the
value of the elements consumed in the formation of that product, in other words, of the means of
production and the labour-power.

By our explanation of the different parts played by the various factors of the labour-process in the
formation of the product's value, we have, in fact, disclosed the characters of the different functions
allotted to the different elements of capital in the process of expanding its own value. The surplus of the
total value of the product, over the sum of the values of its constituent factors, is the surplus of the
expanded capital over the capital originally advanced. The means of production on the one hand,
labour-power on the other, are merely the different modes of existence which the value of the original
capital assumed when from being money it was transformed into the various factors of the
labour-process. That part of capital then, which is represented by the means of production, by the raw
material, auxiliary material and the instruments of labour does not, in the process of production, undergo
any quantitative alteration of value. I therefore call it the constant part of capital, or, more shortly,
constant capital.

On the other hand, that part of capital, represented by labour-power, does, in the process of production,
undergo an alteration of value. It both reproduces the equivalent of its own value, and also produces an
excess, a surplus-value, which may itself vary, may be more or less according to circumstances. This part
of capital is continually being transformed from a constant into a variable magnitude. I therefore call it
the variable part of capital, or, shortly, variable capital. The same elements of capital which, from the
point of view of the labour-process, present themselves respectively as the objective and subjective
factors, as means of production and labour-power, present themselves, from the point of view of the
process of creating surplus-value, as constant and variable capital.

The definition of constant capital given above by no means excludes the possibility of a change of value
in its elements. Suppose the price of cotton to be one day sixpence a pound, and the next day, in
consequence of a failure of the cotton crop, a shilling a pound. Each pound of the cotton bought at
sixpence, and worked up after the rise in value, transfers to the product a value of one shilling; and the
cotton already spun before the rise, and perhaps circulating in the market as yarn, likewise transfers to
the product twice its, original value. It is plain, however, that these changes of value are independent of
the increment or surplus-value added to the value of the cotton by the spinning itself. If the old cotton
had never been spun, it could, after the rise, be resold at a shilling a pound instead of at sixpence.
Further, the fewer the processes the cotton has gone through, the more certain is this result. We therefore
find that speculators make it a rule when such sudden changes in value occur, to speculate in that
material on which the least possible quantity of labour has been spent: to speculate, therefore, in yarn
rather than in cloth, in cotton itself, rather than in yarn. The change of value in the case we have been
considering, originates, not in the process in which the cotton plays the part of a means of production,
and in which it therefore functions as constant capital, but in the process in which the cotton itself is
produced. The value of a commodity, it. is true, is determined by the quantity of labour contained in it,
but this quantity is itself limited by social conditions. If the time socially necessary for the production of



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (6 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

any commodity alters — and a given weight of cotton represents, after a bad harvest, more labour than
after a good one — all previously existing commodities of the same class are affected, because they are,
as it were, only individuals of the species, £81 and their value at any given time is measured by the labour
socially necessary, i.e., by the labour necessary for their production under the then existing social
conditions.

As the value of the raw material may change, so, too, may that of the instruments of labour, of the
machinery, &c, employed in the process; and consequently that portion of the value of the product
transferred to it from them, may also change. If in consequence of a new invention, machinery of a
particular kind can be produced by a diminished expenditure of labour, the old machinery becomes
depreciated more or less, and consequently transfers so much less value to the product. But here again,
the change in value originates outside the process in which the machine is acting as a means of
production. Once engaged in this process, the machine cannot transfer more value than it possesses apart
from the process.

Just as a change in the value of the means of production, even after they have commenced to take a part
in the labour-process, does not alter their character as constant capital, so, too, a change in the proportion
of constant to variable capital does not affect the respective functions of these two kinds of capital. The
technical conditions of the labour-process may be revolutionised to such an extent, that where formerly
ten men using ten implements of small value worked up a relatively small quantity of raw material, one
man may now, with the aid of one expensive machine, work up one hundred times as much raw material.
In the latter case we have an enormous increase in the constant capital, that is represented by the total
value of the means of production used, and at the same time a great reduction in the variable capital,
invested in labour-power. Such a revolution, however, alters only the quantitative relation between the
constant and the variable capital, or the proportions in which the total capital is split up into its constant
and variable constituents; it has not in the least degree affected the essential difference between the two.



Footnotes

T 1 1 "Labour gives a new creation for one extinguished." ("An Essay on the Polit. Econ. of Nations,"
London, 1821, p. 13.)

[2} The subject of repairs of the implements of labour does not concern us here. A machine that is
undergoing repair, no longer plays the part of an instrument, but that of a subject of labour. Work is no
longer done with it, but upon it. It is quite permissible for our purpose to assume, that the labour
expended on the repairs of instruments is included in the labour necessary for their original production.
But in the text we deal with that wear and tear, which no doctor can cure, and which little by little brings
about death, with "that kind of wear which cannot be repaired from time to time, and which, in the case
of a knife, would ultimately reduce it to a state in which the cutler would say of it, it is not worth a new
blade." We have shewn in the text, that a machine takes part in every labour-process as an integral
machine, but that into the simultaneous process of creating value it enters only bit by. bit. How great then
is the confusion of ideas exhibited in the following extract! "Mr. Ricardo says a portion of the labour of
the engineer in making [stocking] machines" is contained for example in the value of a pair of stockings.
"Yet the total labour, that produced each single pair of stockings ... includes the whole labour of the



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (7 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

engineer, not a portion; for one machine makes many pairs, and none of those pairs could have been done
without any part of the machine." ("Obs. on Certain Verbal Disputes in Pol. Econ., Particularly Relating
to Value," p. 54.1 The author, an uncommonly self-satisfied wiseacre, is right in his confusion and
therefore in his contention, to this extent only, that neither Ricardo nor any other economist, before or
since him, has accurately distinguished the two aspects of labour, and still less, therefore, the part played
by it under each of these aspects in the formation of value.

[31 From this we may judge of the absurdity of J. B. Say, who pretends to account for surplus-value
(Interest, Profit, Rent), by the "services productifs" which the means of production, soil, instruments, and
raw material, render in the labour-process by means of their use-values. Mr. Wm. Roscher who seldom
loses an occasion of registering, in black and white, ingenious apologetic fancies, records the following
specimen: - "J. B. Say (Traite, t. 1, ch. 4) very truly remarks: the value produced by an oil mill, after
deduction of all costs, is something new, something quite different from the labour by which the oil mill
itself was erected." (1. c, p. 82, note.) Very true, Mr. Professor! the oil produced by the oil mill is indeed
something very different from the labour expended in constructing the mill! By value, Mr. Roscher
understands such stuff as "oil," because oil has value, notwithstanding that "Nature" produces petroleum,
though relatively "in small quantities," a fact to which he seems to refer in his further observation: "It
(Nature) produces scarcely any exchange- value." Mr. Roscher's "Nature" and the exchange-value it
produces are rather like the foolish virgin who admitted indeed that she had had a child, but "it was such
a little one." This "savant serieux" in continuation remarks: "Ricardo's school is in the habit of including
capital as accumulated labour under the head of labour. This is unskilful work, because, indeed, the
owner of capital, after all, does something more than the merely creating and preserving of the same:
namely, the abstention from the enjoyment of it, for which he demands, e.g., interest." (1. c.) How very
"skilful" is this "anatomico-physiological method" of Political Economy, which, "indeed," converts a
mere desire "after air' into a source of value.

[4J "Of all the instruments of the farmers' trade, the labour of man ... is that on which he is most to rely
for the repayment of his capital. The other two ... the working stock of the cattle and the ... carts, ploughs,
spades, and so forth, without a given portion of the first, are nothing at all." (Edmund Burke: "Thoughts
and Details on Scarcity, originally presented to the Right Hon. W. Pitt, in the month of November 1795,"
Edit. London, 1800, p. 10.)

[51 In The Times of 26th November, 1862, a manufacturer, whose mill employed 800 hands, and
consumed, on the average, 150 bales of East Indian, or 130 bales of American cotton, complains, in
doleful manner, of the standing expenses of his factory when not working. He estimates them at £6,000 a
year. Among them are a number of items that do not concern us here, such as rent, rates, and taxes,
insurance, salaries of the manager, book-keeper, engineer, and others. Then he reckons £150 for coal
used to heat the mill occasionally, and run the engine now and then. Besides this, he includes the wages
of the people employed at odd times to keep the machinery in working order. Lastly, he puts down
£1,200 for depreciation of machinery, because "the weather and the natural principle of decay do not
suspend their operations because the steam-engine ceases to revolve." He says, emphatically, he does not
estimate his depreciation at more than the small sum of £1,200, because his machinery is already nearly
worn out.

[61 "Productive consumption ... where the consumption of a commodity is a part of the process of
production. ... In these instances there is no consumption of value." (S. P. Newman, 1. c, p. 296.)



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (8 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Eight

[71 In an American compendium that has gone through, perhaps, 20 editions, this passage occurs: "It
matters not in what form capital re-appears;" then after a lengthy enumeration of all the possible
ingredients of production whose value re-appears in the product, the passage concludes thus: "The
various kinds of food, clothing, and shelter, necessary for the existence and comfort of the human being,
are also changed. They are consumed from time to time, and their value re-appears in that new vigour
imparted to his body and mind, forming fresh capital, to be employed again in the work of production."
(F. Wayland, 1. c, pp. 31, 32.) Without noticing any other oddities, it suffices to observe, that what
re-appears in the fresh vigour, is not the bread's price, but its bloodforming substances. What, on the
other hand, re-appears in the value of that vigour, is not the means of subsistence, but their value. The
same necessaries of life, at half the price, would form just as much muscle and bone, just as much vigour,
but not vigour of the same value. This confusion of "value" and "vigour" coupled with our author's
Pharisaical indefiniteness, mark an attempt, futile for all that, to thrash out an explanation of
surplus-value from a mere re-appearance of pre-existing values.

[81 "Toutes les productions d'un meme — genre ne forment proprement qu'une masse, dont le prix se
determine en general et sans egard aux circonstances particulieres." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 893.)



Transcribed by Zodiac

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Nine: The Rate of Surplus-Value
Capital Volume One- Index



http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch08.htm (9 of 9) [23/08/2000 16:16:05]



Capital Vol. I — Chapter Nine

Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



Part

The Production of Absolute

Surplus-Value



CHAPTER NINE:

THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE



Contents

Section 1 - The Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power

Section 2 - The Representation of the Components of the Value of the Product by Corresponding

Proportional Parts of the Product itself

Section 3 - Senior's "Last Hour"

Section 4 - Surplus-Produce



SECTION 1.

THE DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER



The surplus-value generated in the process of production by C, the capital advanced, or in other words,
the self-expansion of the value of the capital C, presents itself for our consideration, in the first place, as
a surplus, as the amount by which the value of the product exceeds the value of its constituent elements.

The capital C is made up of two components, one, the sum of money c laid out upon the means of
production, and the other, the sum of money v expended upon the labour-power; c represents the portion
that has become constant capital, and v the portion that has become variable capital. At first then, C = c +
v: for example, if £500 is the capital advanced, its components may be such that the £500 = £410 const. +
£90 var. When the process of production is finished, we get a commodity whose value = (c + v) + s,
where s is the surplus- value; or taking our former figures, the value of this commodity may be (£410
const. + £90 var.) + £90 surpl. The original capital has now changed from C to C, from £500 to £590.
The difference is s or a surplusvalue of £90, Since the value of the constituent elements of the product is
equal to the value of the advanced capital, it is mere tautology to say, that the excess of the value of the

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch09.htm (1 of 14) [23/08/2000 16:16:13]


